NEWPORT, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-06, passed 10-9-2025; and
State legislation current through North Carolina Legislative Service,
2025 Regular Session Laws, Pamphlet No. 2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
of the
TOWN OF
NEWPORT, NORTH CAROLINA
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
__________________________
Dennis Barber
Mayor
__________________________
David Heath
Charles Shinn
Mark Eadie
James McCoy
Danny Fornes
Town Council
__________________________
Taylor and Taylor
Town Attorney
__________________________
Maryellen Brown
Town Clerk
CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   Printed herein is the Charter of the Town of Newport, Private Laws of 1927,
Ch. 225, as it was adopted by the legislature and as amended. Style and
capitalization have not been made uniform. Obviously misspelled words have been
corrected without notation. Amendments have been included and are indicated by
a history note immediately following the amended section.
   In an ordinance passed November 5, 1996, in accordance with the provisions
of G.S. §§ 160A-102 and 160A-101(9)(b), the Charter of the town was amended as
follows. All references to “Board of Commissioners” and “Commissioners” were
changed to “Council” and “Town Council”. All references to “Commissioner” and
“Commissioners” were changed to “Council member” and “Council members”. New
Sections 48, 49, 50 and 51 were added and the present Sections 48 and 49 were
renumbered as Sections 52 and 53 respectively.
CHAPTER 225
   AN ACT TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE THE ACTS INCORPORATING THE TOWN OF NEWPORT.
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:
   SECTION 1.
   That the town of New Port in the county of Carteret be and the same is
hereby incorporated under the name and style of Newport, and that S. D.
Edwards, H. D. Garner, C. M. Hill and E. D. Mann, the present commissioners of
said town, and their successors in office, shall be and are hereby declared a
body politic and corporate, with succession during the corporate existence of
said town, shall be styled “the commissioners of the town of Newport,” and
shall have power to sue and be sued, and plead and interplead, and have and use
a common seal, and acquire real and personal estate in the amount of twenty
thousand dollars. That L. C. Carroll, the present mayor of said town, and the
commissioners aforesaid, shall continue in office as such and perform all the
duties pertaining to their office of mayor and commissioners of said town until
their successors shall be elected and qualified as hereinafter provided.
   SECTION 2.
   That the corporate limits of said town shall be as Corporate limits follows:
Beginning at the mouth of Laurel Swamp branch, running with said branch to Deep
Creek Swamp; thence with said swamp to Elisha Morton’s line; thence with said
line to School House Branch; thence with said branch to Newport River; thence
with said river to the beginning.
   The corporate limits of the Town of Newport, in Carteret County, are hereby
extended to include and embrace the following described areas:
   BEGINNING at a point in the center of the Atlantic & North Carolina Railroad
track where the same is intersected by the North line of the town limits of
Newport; runs thence South 58 degrees West, along the present line of the town
limits, 1870 feet to a point in the old J. L. Bell line; thence North 4 degrees
27 minutes East, (North 0 degrees 20 minutes West true meridian), along the old
J. L. Bell line, 1963.16 feet to a point in the old W. S. Bell line, it being
also the North line of the W. J. B. Shull tract; thence North 54 degrees East
to the center of the Atlantic & North Carolina Railroad track; and thence South
29 degrees 04 minutes East, true meridian, along the center of the Atlantic &
North Carolina Railroad track to the point of BEGINNING.
   BEGINNING at a point in the East line of the right-of-way of United States
Highway 70 where the same is intersected by the North line of the town limits
of Newport; runs thence North 1 degree West, along the East line of the right-
of-way of United States Highway 70, 332 feet to a point, the corner of the
Newport Missionary Baptist Church lot; thence South 79 degrees 27 minutes East,
along the North line of the Newport Missionary Baptist Church lot, 188 feet to
a point; thence South 0 degrees 30 minutes East, along the East line of the
Newport Missionary Baptist Church lot, 240 feet to the North line of McCain
Avenue; thence North 89 degrees 25 minutes East, along the North line of McCain
Avenue, 288 feet to a point; and South 74 degrees 55 minutes East, continuing
along the North line of McCain Avenue, 370 feet to the west line of Church
Street, thence South 14 degrees 40 minutes West, along the West line of Church
Street, 60 feet to the town line ditch, the present town line; thence North 74
degrees 55 minutes West, along the present town line, 351 feet; and thence
South 89 degrees 25 minutes West, continuing along the present town line, 473
feet to the East line of United States Highway 70, the point of BEGINNING.
(Private Laws of 1959, ch. 455, § 1)
   SECTION 3.
   That the officers of said town shall consist of the mayor and five Council
members, to be elected by the qualified voters of said town for a term of four
years, as is now provided by law for municipal elections. Beginning with the
regular municipal election to be held in 1971, the municipal elections in the
Town of Newport shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions
of Article 3, Chapter 160, of the General Statutes, relating to municipal
elections.
(Private Laws of 1969, ch. 495, § 1) (Ord. passed 12-5-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal elections, see G.S. §§ 163-279 et seq.
   SECTION 4.
   Said election of mayor and Council members shall be held at the city hall in
said town and no person shall be entitled to vote at said election or at any
election held in said town for municipal purposes, unless he or she shall be an
elector of the State of North Carolina and shall have resided ninety days next
preceding the day of election within the said corporation.
Statutory reference:
   Municipal elections, G.S. §§ 163-279 et seq.
   SECTION 5. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 6. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 7. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 8. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 9. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 10. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 11. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 12. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 13. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   Sections 5 through 13 on elections have been editorially deleted at the
direction of the town attorney as superseded by G.S. §§ 160A-59 and 163-279 et
seq.
   SECTION 14.
   That a majority of said Council members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
   SECTION 15.
   That the mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the Council
members; he shall also have power to call meetings when he shall deem it
necessary, and may vote only in case of a tie. In the absence or sickness of
the mayor, the Council members of said town shall elect one of their own number
to act as mayor pro tempore, who shall, while acting as such, have all the
authority and powers conveyed by this charter on the mayor of said town.
   SECTION 16.
   If for any cause there should be a vacancy in the office of mayor or Council
members of said town, the Town Council thereof shall be and are hereby
empowered to fill said vacancy or vacancies; and their appointee or appointees
shall hold office until the next regular election herein provided for.
   SECTION 17.
   That said Council members shall at the first meeting after their election
select some one as town clerk and treasurer, who shall hold office for two
years or until his successor shall be elected and qualified. He shall act as
secretary to the Town Council and as treasurer of said town, and before
entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office shall give good and
sufficient bond, with sureties to be approved by the Town Council of said town,
in the sum of twenty-five hundred dollars, payable to the State of North
Carolina, and conditioned upon his faithfully accounting for and paying over
all moneys that may come into his hands as treasurer of said town and for the
faithful discharge of his duties as secretary of said Town Council. The Council
members of said town shall require of the town clerk and treasurer a monthly
statement and exhibit of receipts and disbursements, and if he shall fail for
thirty days after having been required to make such exhibit to render the same,
it shall be and is hereby declared a breach of his official bond, and the
Council members are authorized and empowered to declare the office vacant and
to appoint his successor. All suits entered on the official bond of any of the
officers of said town shall be in the name of the State of North Carolina to
the use of the Town Council of the town of Newport against the said official
and his sureties. That if treasurer’s bond is given in a surety company, the
premium for the same shall be paid by the town.
   SECTION 18.
   The said Council members shall at the first meeting after their election
select some one to act as chief of police or tax collector of said town, who
shall hold his office for two years or until his successor is elected and
qualified. He shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his
office, enter into bond in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars, with good and
sufficient sureties to be approved by the Town Council, payable to the State of
North Carolina, and conditioned upon his faithfully executing and returning to
the proper authority all process that may come into his hands as said chief of
police or tax collector, upon his faithfully accounting for and paying over to
the proper authority all money that may come into his hands from any source as
said chief of police or tax collector, upon his faithfully collecting and
paying over all taxes levied by the Council members of said town, and in all
other respects executing to the best of his ability and honestly and faithfully
all the duties imposed upon him by this charter or by the Town Council of said
town. The said mayor and Council members shall have power to appoint, and shall
fix the compensation for the same, for all necessary policemen needed for said
town from time to time. If so ordered by the Town Council, the taxes and moneys
due said town may be collected by the city clerk, or other officer of said
town.
   SECTION 19.
   The Council members of said town shall have power to make such by-laws and
adopt such regulations or ordinances for the government of said town as a
majority of them may deem necessary to promote the interest and insure the good
order and government of said town, for the improvement of the streets, and the
preservation of the health in the same, and to make all such other police
regulations as the interest, comfort and convenience of the citizens of said
town may require.
   SECTION 20.
   The Council members of said town may pass laws for abating and preventing
nuisances of any kind therein.
   SECTION 21. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney as included in G.S. §§ 160A-175 and 14-4.
   SECTION 22. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney as included in G.S. §§ 160A-175 and 14-4.
   SECTION 23. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney as included in G.S. §§ 160A-175 and 14-4.
   SECTION 24. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney.
   SECTION 25. [Reserved.]
(Private Laws of 1951, ch. 620, § 1; Private Laws of 1969, ch. 303, §§ 1, 1A)
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney.
   SECTION 26. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney as obsolete.
   SECTION 27.
   Said Council members of Newport shall have power to construct and repair the
sidewalks or any of the streets of said town. And they shall further have
power, and they are hereby authorized to establish for said town of Newport a
harbor line, and construct and maintain such public docks and wharves as they
may deem advisable, and charge for the use thereof such compensation as may be
reasonable and just; to control and regulate the use of such docks and wharves
by vessels in said port under such rules, regulations and ordinances as they
may adopt, subject to the Constitution and laws of the United States; and they
are hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such ordinances as will carry into
effect this section; and if they shall deem necessary they are authorized to
appoint a board consisting of three citizens of said town, who shall be known
as harbor commissioners.
   SECTION 28.
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney as obsolete.
   SECTION 29. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney as obsolete.
   SECTION 30.
   The Council members of said town may take such measures as they may deem
requisite, or pass such ordinances or regulations as they may think necessary,
to prevent the entrance into or spreading within the limits of said town of any
contagious or infectious disease or diseases, and may take any action necessary
in their opinion to preserve the public health of said town.
   SECTION 31. [Reserved]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted as directed by the town attorney
as superceded by the authority to tax in G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq. and the
procedure for collection in G.S. §§ 105-1 et seq.
   SECTION 32. [Reserved.]
(Private Laws of 1949, ch. 115)
   SECTION 33. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted as directed by the town attorney
as superceded by the authority to tax in G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq. and procedure
for collection in G.S. §§ 105-1 et seq.
   SECTION 34. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted as directed by the town attorney
as superceded by the authority to tax in G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq. and the
procedure for collection in G.S. §§ 105-1 et seq.
   SECTION 35.
   All persons owning any property within said town liable to taxation for town
purposes shall return the same to the town clerk as provided in section thirty-
four of this charter, and all property therein liable to such taxation owned by
minors, lunatics or persons non compos mentis shall be returned as herein
provided by their guardian or guardians, if they shall have any such.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 36.
   All property liable to taxation for town purposes in said town and held by
executors, administrators or trustees, shall be returned by them in that
capacity, and the individual property of all such guardians, executors,
administrators, or trustees shall be first distrained or attached by the chief
of police or tax collector of said town is hereby authorized at any time after
the taxes may be due the said town on said property as aforesaid to distrain
any personal property of such guardians, executors, administrators or trustees
to be found in said town.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 37.
   The town clerk and treasurer of said town shall make out a full and complete
list of all taxable property in said town so returned to him and of the taxable
polls in said town, and if any person or persons in said town liable to
taxation shall fail to make return to the clerk as herein provided for thirty
days after the first Monday in May in each year, the town clerk shall make
return of the taxable property of such person or persons, and his age, if he is
liable to poll tax, and such person or persons so failing to make return of
their property and poll shall be liable to double property and poll tax to be
collected as other property and poll taxes. The town clerk of the said town
shall complete the tax list and place it or a certified copy thereof in the
hands of the chief of police or tax collector of said town on the third Monday
in August of each year. Such tax list, or a copy thereof, certified by the town
clerk, when placed in the hands of the chief of police or tax collector shall
have the force and effect of an execution.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 38.
   The lien of the town taxes shall attach to all real property subject to
taxation on and after the third Monday in August of each year, and shall
continue until such taxes, together with any penalty that shall accrue thereon,
shall be paid. All personal property liable and sold to taxation of taxpayers
within the town shall be liable to be seized and sold, after ten days notice at
the city hall and four other public places in said town, in satisfaction of
taxes, by the chief of police or tax collector after said taxes shall have
become due and payable.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 39.
   Whenever the taxes due said town shall be due and unpaid, the chief of
police or tax collector of said town shall immediately proceed to collect them
as follows: First, if the party charged, or his agent, have personal property
in said town equal in value to the taxes charged against him, the chief of
police or tax collector shall seize and sell the same under the same rules as
sheriffs are required to sell personal property under execution, and his fees
for such levy or sale shall be one dollar; second, if the party charged has not
personal property to be found in said town of sufficient value to satisfy his
taxes, the chief of police or tax collector of said town shall levy upon any
lands of the delinquent to be found within the town. The levy shall contain an
accurate description of the lands with the name of the owner or owners, the
amount of taxes due by the delinquent, and a list thereof shall be by the chief
of police or tax collector returned to the town clerk and treasurer, who shall
enter the same in a book to be kept for that purpose, charging therefor the sum
of fifty cents for each levy; third, the chief of police or tax collector shall
notify the delinquent of such levy, and of the day and place of sale, by
service of a notice stating these particulars, on him personally if he be a
resident of said town. If the delinquent does not reside in said town, but his
residence is known or can by reasonable diligence be ascertained, the notice
shall be mailed, postpaid, to such delinquent. If the residence of the
delinquent cannot with reasonable diligence be ascertained, the chief of police
or tax collector shall post a notice substantially as above described at the
courthouse door and four other places in said town, at least thirty days before
the sale of the land, and this last mentioned notice shall be posted in all
cases of sales of land for taxes in said town; and fourth, the sale shall be
made at the city hall in said town, and shall be conducted in all respects as
are sales under execution. If the delinquent resides out of said town, and his
address be known to the chief of police or tax collector, the chief of police
or tax collector shall, within one month after the sale, mail to him notice of
the sale, and date thereof, of the name and address of the purchaser, of the
sums bid and of the amount of the taxes and costs to be paid by such delinquent
as a condition of its redemption.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 40.
   The whole tract or lot of land belonging to a delinquent person or company
shall be set up for sale at the same time and shall be struck off to him who
will pay the amount of taxes with all the expenses for the smallest part of the
land, at all such sales the mayor may become a bidder and purchase the whole
lot or tract of land for the taxes due and expenses for the use of the town in
case no one will offer to pay the taxes and costs for a less quantity.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 41.
   The delinquent may claim possession of the property for twelve months after
sale, and within that time redeem it by paying the purchaser the amount paid by
him and twenty-five per centum in addition thereto; at the time of said payment
to the purchaser, he shall give to the delinquent a receipt therefor. If he
shall refuse or cannot be found in said town, the delinquent may pay the same
to the town clerk and treasurer and he shall give him a receipt therefor and
such payment shall be equivalent to payment to the purchaser. After such
payment to the purchaser or town clerk, all rights under the purchase shall
cease.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 42.
   At the time of such purchase of real estate for taxes, the chief of police
or tax collector on receipt of the amount bid, by whom and for what purpose,
and describing the land sold, stating further the owner of said lands and the
amount of taxes due.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 43.
   If the delinquent, his agent or attorney, shall fail to redeem, as provided
in section forty-one hereof, for twelve months, at the expiration of that time
the purchaser may present his receipt referred to in section forty-two hereof,
and the chief of police or tax collector of said town shall execute a deed in
fee to the purchaser, and if the purchaser is dead, to his heirs-at-law or
assigns, for the land for which said purchaser agreed to pay the amount called
for in the receipt, and for said service the chief of police or tax collector
shall be allowed one dollar, to be paid by the purchaser. The deed from the
chief of police or tax collector to the purchaser shall be registered in the
register’s office of Carteret County within six months from the time of the
execution and delivery thereof, and when so registered shall convey to the
grantee all the estate in the land for which the purchaser bid which the
delinquent, his agent or attorney, had at the time of sale for taxes.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 43-a. [Reserved.]
Editor’s note:
   This section has been editorially deleted at the direction of the town
attorney.
   SECTION 44.
   All real estate bid in by the mayor of said town for the use of the town at
sales made by the chief of police or tax collector for taxes may be redeemed by
the payment on the part of the delinquent, his agent or attorney, of the amount
bid and twenty-five per centum additional to the town clerk or treasurer within
twelve months.
   SECTION 45.
   In addition to the tax on property the Council members shall have power to
levy and collect such special or license taxes as now or may hereafter be
permitted by general law or not prohibited by the act to raise revenue.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq.
   Taxes authorized and procedure for collection, etc., see G.S. §§ 105-1 et
seq.
   SECTION 46.
   That the Council members of the town of Newport shall have control and
supervision of all the shade trees on any of the streets or sidewalks of said
town and shall have power and authority to make rules and regulations regarding
the same.
   SECTION 47.
   That all ordinances adopted by the Town Council of said town shall take
effect at the time and upon the conditions indicated therein.
(Private Laws of 1961, ch. 870, § 1)
   SECTION 48.
   The Board of Commissioners (now Council) of the Town hereby amends its form
of government to the Council-Manager form, changes its governing body to the
title “Council”, and authorizes the appointment by the Council of a Town
Manager to be the administrative head of the Town government.
   SECTION 49.
   The office of Town Manager is hereby created in accordance with the
provisions of Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes of
North Carolina to have those powers and duties provided by Section 160A-148 and
any other duties required or authorized by the Council.
(Amended by Ord. passed 11-5-1996)
   SECTION 50.
   (a)   The Town Manager shall be appointed with regard to merit only and need
not be a resident of the Town when appointed, provided, however, that at the
earliest possible date after taking office, the Town Manager shall become a
resident of the Town. During the time they shall hold office, the Mayor and any
Council member shall not be eligible to be Town Manager.
   (b)   The Town Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and
shall receive such compensation as the Council by ordinance may determine.
(Amended by Ord. passed 11-5-1996)
   SECTION 51.
   Council members shall deal with administrative matters and with officers and
employees through the Town Manager and will not bypass the line of authority.
(Amended by Ord. passed 11-5-1996)
   SECTION 52.
   All laws or clauses of laws in conflict with the provisions of this act are
hereby repealed.
   SECTION 53.
   That this act shall be in force from and after its ratification.
Ratified this the 7th day of March, A.D. 1927.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
These tables shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any
amendments thereto.
Private Laws Chapter Section Section this Charter
Private Laws Chapter Section Section this Charter
1927         225             1—49
1949         115             32
1951         620     1       25
1959         455     1       2
1961         870     1       47
1969         303     1, 1A   25
             495     1       3
 
 
Ord. Date Passed Section this Charter
    11-5-1996   48—53
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   TOWN BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Catchlines of sections
   
10.20   References to chapters or sections
   
10.21   References and editor’s notes
   
10.22   Supplementation of code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Newport shall be
designated as the Code of Newport, North Carolina and may be so cited.
(1991 Code, § 1-1)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Newport, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The Mayor and Council, or governing body, of the Town of
Newport, North Carolina.
      COUNTY. The County of Carteret, North Carolina.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this town.
      OFFICIALS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made
to officials, boards, commissions, committees and the like by title only, they
shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the Town of Newport, North
Carolina”.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STATUTE REFERENCES. Whenever reference is made to G.S., it shall be
construed to refer to the latest edition or supplement of the General Statutes
of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      TOWN. The Town of Newport, in the County of Carteret, North Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. One designated by the Council.
(1991 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
(1991 Code, § 1-7)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or public way in
the town;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
town; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
(1991 Code, § 1-8)
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
(1991 Code, § 1-9)
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, Town of Newport, North Carolina, is hereby amended as
follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Town of Newport, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, chapters, subchapters or divisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, chapter, subchapter number,
as the case may be.
(1991 Code, § 1-10)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this code
are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate
the source of matter contained in the section. Example:
(1991 Code, § 1-6)
   (B)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: 
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (C)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: 
(G.S. § 160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (D)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(1991 Code, §       ).” The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.19 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1991 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.20 REFERENCES TO CHAPTERS OR SECTIONS.
   All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of
this code unless otherwise specified.
(1991 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.21 REFERENCES AND EDITOR’S NOTES.
   The references and editor’s notes appearing throughout the code are not
intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user
of the code.
(1991 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.22 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by
the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   (1)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning
the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may
make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances
included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them
into a unified code.
      (2)   For example, the codifier may:
         (a)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate divisions;
         (b)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning
to “this chapter”,
“this subchapter”, “this division” and the like, as the case may be, or to
“sections ____________ to __________” (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
         (c)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code, but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(1991 Code, § 1-11)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of
this code or any other town ordinance shall subject the offender to the
remedies provided in this section, except where the General Statutes of the
state provide specific civil remedies for violation of provisions of this code
adopted pursuant to such statutes. Such remedies available to the town for
enforcement of this code shall be in addition to the remedies stated in this
section, provided that no criminal penalties shall be applicable unless stated
in this section to be applicable to specific chapters or provisions of this
code.
   (B)   Violations of any provision of the following chapters and sections of
this code shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by G.S. § 14-4:
      (1)   
Chapter 110: Alcohol, §§
110.01 and
110.02; and
      (2)   
Chapter 74, Schedule II, Speed Limits.
   (C)   (1)   Violations of the following provisions of this code shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the issuance of a citation for
such violation, as provided in this section. The civil penalty, if not paid to
the Town Clerk within ten days of the issuance of a citation, may be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt. Unless otherwise provided
by a specific provision of this code, such civil penalties shall be in the
amount of $50 for each violation, and each day any single violation continues
shall be a separate violation, except that for violations of parking ordinances
of this code, the civil penalty provisions and procedures therein shall apply.
Penalties not paid within ten days of issuance of citation shall incur a
delinquency charge of $25 to be paid with the original penalty.
      (2)   The provisions of this code which shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty are all chapters and sections of the code except:
         (a)   
Chapter 110: Alcohol, §§
111.01 and
111.02;
         (b)   
Chapter 73, Schedule II, Speed Limits; and
         (c)   
Chapter 153, Appendix A, Zoning Ordinance.
   (D)   In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this
section, any provision of this code or any other town ordinance may be enforced
by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. In this case, the General Court of Justice shall have
jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a
defense to the application of the town for equitable relief that there is an
adequate remedy at law.
   (E)   In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this
section, any provision of this code or any other town ordinance that makes
unlawful a condition existing upon, or use made of, real property may be
enforced by injunction and/or order of abatement, and the General Court of
Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue the orders. When a violation of such a
provision occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the General
Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or order of
abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon, or
cease the unlawful use of, the property. The action shall be governed in all
respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules
of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 55 in particular.
   (F)   (1)   In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgement in the case.
      (2)   An order of abatement may direct that:
         (a)   Buildings or other structures on the property be closed,
demolished or removed;
         (b)   Fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from
buildings on the property;
         (c)   Grass and weeds be cut;
         (d)   Improvements or repairs be made; or
         (e)   Any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the
property into compliance with this code or other ordinance.
      (3)   If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or
with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the Court, he or she may
be cited for contempt, and the town may execute the order of abatement. The
town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of
abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien. The defendant
may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the
proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be
given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount
approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard, and the bond shall be
conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance with the terms of the order of
abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of
abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction
therewith.
   (G)   The provisions of this code and any other town ordinances may be
enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed
by this section, except that any provision, the violation of which incurs a
civil penalty, shall not be enforced by criminal penalties.
   (H)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day’s continuing
violation of any provision of this code or any other town ordinance shall be a
separate and distinct offense and multiple occurrences within a single day
shall constitute separate offenses.
   (I)   Any ordinances adopted by the Town Council, the violation of which
shall incur a penalty, shall specify whether the enforcement shall be pursuant
to the civil penalty or criminal penalty provisions of this section.
   (J)   Upon determination of a violation of any section of this code, the
penalty for which is a civil penalty, the town shall cause a warning citation
to be issued to the violator, setting out the nature of the violation, the
section violated, the date of violation, and the order to immediately cease the
violation or, if the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an
order of abatement would be appropriate in a civil proceeding, stating a
reasonable period in which the violation must be abated. The warning citation
shall specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty.
   (K)   If the violator fails to respond to a citation within ten days of its
issuance and pay the penalty prescribed therein, the town may institute a civil
action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of the State General
Court of Justice for the collection of the penalty.
   (L)   Unless otherwise provided by a section of the code adopted by Council
subsequent to this ordinance, all penalties except those in division (B) above,
all penalties published herein shall be replaced by the provisions of this
section.
   (M)   All ordinances or portions thereof in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
(Ord. passed 2-3-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
CHAPTER 11: TOWN BOUNDARIES
Section
   
11.01   Establishing the extraterritorial boundaries of the town
§ 11.01 ESTABLISHING THE EXTRATERRITORIAL BOUNDARIES OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   The Town Council ratifies its action taken on December 3, 1974, and
extends its Zoning, Subdivision and Building Code jurisdiction to all of the
area within one mile of the present municipal limits and adopts a zoning map
for the extraterritorial area which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
All Building, Fire and Housing Codes and subdivision regulations, land use
ordinances and the Zoning Ordinance shall be fully applicable to the
extraterritorial area.
(1991 Code, § 2-1)
   (B)   (1)   The town hereby amends the boundaries of the extraterritorial
jurisdiction to include all areas delineated as extraterritorial jurisdiction
in accordance with the attached map entitled “Town of Newport, Carteret County,
North Carolina, Zoning Jurisdiction Map”, dated April 21, 1998, the original of
which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
      (2)   A written description delineating the boundary of the
extraterritorial jurisdiction as represented on the attached map using the
alphabet to identify points and changes in direction of the boundary map:
         Beginning at point (A) being the centerline of Highway 70, near the
Carteret, Craven County Line, thence east 760' along the northern property line
of Samuel J. Shipman property to point (B) thence southerly 1300' along the
east property line of M.E. Douthit and CA Gould Hers property to point (C);
thence east 1344' along the north property line of D.E. Ahlers, J.W. Hill, D.R.
Oursler and Balargian to point (D); thence 1175' northeast along Balargian
property to point (E); thence south 1941' along the east property line of
Balargian to point (F); thence 782' east along R.C. Lewis property line to
point (G); thence north 1613' along R.C. Lewis and C. Gray property line to
point (H); thence east 1465' along the C. Gray property line to point (I);
thence northerly 590' along the Gray property line to point (J); thence east
950' along the Gray property line to point (K); thence south 900' along the
gray property to point (L); thence east 1000' along Awalt property line to
point (M); thence south 870' along the Awalt property line to point (N); thence
southeasterly 5335' along Andrea A. Lebeau and Champion International Inc.
property line to point (O); thence southeasterly 3292' across Federal property
to point (P) the northeast corner of Jesse W. Garner property; thence
southeasterly 2343' across Federal property to point (Q) the northwest corner
of Weyerhaeuser, Co. property; thence southeasterly 5900' to point (R) in the
Weyerhaeuser property; thence southerly 6200' to the centerline of SR 1154
(Mill Creek Rd.). And the Mill Creek Bridge; thence south approximately 13000'
along the centerline of Black Creek to point (T) its intersection with the
Newport River; thence west approximately 2700' along the centerline of the
Newport river to point (U) the beginning of hull swamp; thence southwest
approximately 12000' along the centerline of the hull swamp creek to point (V)
at the south corner of Earl M. Hinson property; thence northwesterly 667' along
the east R/W of HWY 70 to point (W); thence south to cross HWY 70 and along the
southern property line of Eugene Smelik to point (X); thence northwest along
the west property line of Smelik and Saba Bou property to point (Y); thence
west 2057' along the south property line of Rufus Collins and Wildwood
Associates property to point (Z); thence south 1263' along Wildwood Associates
property line to point (AA) at the Hull Swamp creek; thence westward
approximately 4700' along the centerline of Hull Swamp creek to point (BB) the
northwest corner of William Tyer property and the southwest corner of Tommy
Rogers property; thence north 1100' along the east property line of Tommy
Rogers and Lucy Sweeting property to point (CC) the northeast corner of the
Sweeting property; thence westward 4200' to point (DD) the northeast corner of
W.G. Rich, and the northeast corner of M. Alaxanian property thence north 2780'
to point (EE) the northeast corner of Milton Henderson property; thence west
3100' to point (FF) the northwest corner of J.B. Midgette property; thence
south 2400' to point (GG) the southwest corner of the James B. Midgette
property; thence west 2400' to point (HH) the southeast corner of William Wood
property thence northward approximately 2600' along the east boundary of the
Wood property and Walter Westbrook to point (II) the northeast corner of
Westbrook property; west 997' to point (JJ) the northwest corner of Theodore
Cooper property; thence south 277' to point (KK) the northeast corner of Andrew
Sandor property; thence west 3300' to point (LL) the northwest corner of
Richard Barton property; thence north 2700' to point (MM) the north corner of
Larry Styron property; thence southwest 2900' along the Styron property to
point (NN) a south point in the Styron property; thence northward 500' along
the east property line of Styron to point (OO) the southeast corner of Stephen
Eubanks property; northward 2600' along the east property line of Eubanks to
point (PP) the northeast corner of Eubanks property; thence westward 3300' to
point (QQ) the northeast corner of P.A. Hester property; thence northerly 770'
to point (RR) the northwest corner of Hester property; thence southerly 2400'
along the west boundary of Hester property to point (SS) the northeast corner
of R.A. Bragan property; thence northerly along the north property of Bragan
and C. A. Markey property to point (TT) the northwest corner of Mackey
property; thence westerly 1100' along the west property line of Mackey property
and along the road to point (UU) the intersection of SR 1124 (The 9 Mile Road);
thence north 9000' along SR 1124 to point (VV) the centerline of the bridge and
Newport River; thence eastward 1600' along the center of the river to point
(WW) the northwest corner of R. Garner property; thence south 3200' along the
west property line of the Garner and W.R. Roberts property to point (XX) the
southwest corner of the Roberts property line; thence east 6400' to point (YY)
the southeast corner of Signa S. Roberts property; thence north 5000' to point
(ZZ) the northeast corner of W.W. Roberts property and the Newport River;
thence westward 1200' along the centerline of the Newport River to point (AAA)
the southwest corner of Jack K Garner property; thence north 3000' along the
west property line of Jack K. Garner property to point (BBB) the centerline of
SR 1124 (the 9 foot Rd.); thence west 700' along the centerline of SR 1124 to
point (CCC) the southeast corner of Richard S. Garner property; thence north
2400' along the east property line of Richard S. Garner to point (DDD) the
northeast corner of the Garner property; thence west 1700' to point (EEE) the
northwest corner of Robert A. Tyndall property; thence northward 3700' to point
(FFF) the northwest corner of Richard W. See property; thence east 1000' to
point (GGG) the northeast corner of the Richard See property; thence east 2800'
to point (HHH) the northeast corner of Robert M. Russell property; thence north
5000' to point (III) the northwest corner of Joseph C. Hill property; thence
northeast 3500' to point (A) the beginning.
(Res. passed 12-3-1974; Ord. passed 4-21-1998)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
32.   TOWN POLICIES
      
33.   EMPLOYEES
CHAPTER 30: TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning Board
   
30.01   Created
   
30.02   Composition and vacancies
   
30.03   Organization; rules; meetings; records
   
30.04   Removal of members
   
30.05   Compensation
   
30.06   Studies
   
30.07   Plans
   
30.08   Appointment as Zoning Commission
   
30.09   Subdivision regulation
Cross-reference:
   Planning Board, see
Chapter 153, App. A, §§ 1-15 through 1-15.5
PLANNING BOARD
§ 30.01 CREATED.
   A Planning Board for the town is hereby created under the authority of the
G.S. §§ 160A-361 et seq.
(1991 Code, § 2-41) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.02 COMPOSITION AND VACANCIES.
   The Planning Board will be composed generally of eight members. Four of the
eight members must reside inside the corporate limits of the town. To meet the
requirements of G.S. § 160A-362, four more members must reside in the ETJ to
provide the necessary proportional representation. Only those persons who have
demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the town, independent
judgment, interest in planning and zoning, the availability to prepare for and
attend meetings, will be considered qualified for appointment to the Board. It
is the intent of the Council that members shall, by reasons of diversity in
their individual occupations, constitute a Board which is broadly
representative of the community.
(1991 Code, § 2-42) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.03 ORGANIZATION; RULES; MEETINGS; RECORDS.
   Within 30 days after an appointment, the Planning Board shall meet and elect
a Chairperson and create and fill such offices as it may determine. The term of
the Chairperson and other officers shall be one year, with eligibility for
reelection. It shall adopt rules for transaction for business and shall keep a
record of members’ attendance and resolutions, discussions, findings and
recommendations, which record shall be a public record. The Planning Board
shall hold at least one meeting monthly. All of the meetings shall be open to
the public.
(1991 Code, § 2-43) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.04 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Planning Board may, after a public hearing, be removed by the
Town Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
Failure of any member to attend three successive regular meetings of the
Planning Board, unless such absence is excused for cause by the Planning Board
at the meeting at which the member is absent, shall cause the member’s seat on
the Planning Board to become vacant.
(1991 Code, § 2-44) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.05 COMPENSATION.
   All members of the Planning Board shall receive such compensation as shall
be determined by the Town Council. Until amended, each member of the Planning
Board shall receive as compensation the sum of $10 for each meeting of the
Planning Board attended.
(1991 Code, § 2-45) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.06 STUDIES.
   The Planning Board has the authority to make comprehensive studies of
present conditions and the probable future development of the town and its
environs. Such studies may include, but not be limited to, land use surveys,
population studies, economic base studies and school, park and recreation
studies, traffic and parking studies and urban renewal studies.
(1991 Code, § 2-47) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.07 PLANS.
   The Planning Board shall formulate and maintain a comprehensive plan of the
town and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the town which would promote, in accordance with
present and future needs, the safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity,
and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and economy in the process of
development, convenience of traffic, safety from fire and other dangers,
adequate light and air, healthful and convenient distribution of population,
provision of adequate open spaces; good civic design and arrangement; wise and
efficient expenditures of public funds; adequate provision for public
utilities; and for other matters pertaining to the public requirements. The
comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of parts which may include, but
not be limited to, a land use plan, a major thoroughfare plan, a utilities
plan, a plan for economic development, a recreation plan, a school plan and a
community facilities plan.
(1991 Code, § 2-48) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
§ 30.08 APPOINTMENT AS ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Planning Board is hereby designated as the Zoning Commission for the
town and shall prepare a zoning ordinance to govern the use of buildings and
premises, which ordinance shall be submitted to the Town Council for its
consideration and possible adoption. After the adoption of a zoning ordinance
by the Town Council, no change, alteration or amendment or such ordinance shall
be made until such change, alteration or amendment shall have been submitted to
the Planning Board for its recommendation. A vote of not less than three-fifths
of the entire membership of the Town Council will be required to overrule an
unfavorable recommendation by the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within 40 days after submission shall constitute approval of the
proposed change, alteration or amendment.
(1991 Code, § 2-49) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
Cross-reference:
   Zoning, see
Chapter 153, Appendix A
§ 30.09 SUBDIVISION REGULATION.
   The Planning Board shall prepare subdivision regulations governing the
subdivision of land within the town and its extraterritorial area to be
submitted to the Town Council for its consideration and possible adoption.
(1991 Code, § 2-50) (Ord. passed 7-5-1966)
Cross-reference:
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 154, Appendix B
CHAPTER 31: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Reserve Police Officer Division
   
31.01   Established
   
31.02   Appointment and removals
   
31.03   Qualifications
   
31.04   Duties and responsibilities
   
31.05   Reimbursement of expenses
RESERVE POLICE OFFICER DIVISION
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established within the Town Police Department, a division to
be known as Reserve Police Officer Division. The Reserve Police Officer
Division shall be a volunteer force within the Town Police Department, composed
of no more six officers. The number may be increased upon a request from the
Chief of Police and approval of the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 2-4-2003)
§ 31.02 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVALS.
   The Reserve Police Officer Division shall be under the direct control of the
Chief of Police, acting under the general supervision of the Town Manager. The
appointments and removals of officers of the Reserve Police Officer Division
shall be as recommended by the Chief of Police to the Town Manager for
approval/disapproval.
(Ord. passed 2-4-2003)
§ 31.03 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The reserve police officer shall be eligible to be sworn in as a law
enforcement officer according to the State Criminal Justice Standards Division.
   (B)   The reserve police officer shall possess the same basic qualifications
as a full-time police officer with the Town Police Department.
(Ord. passed 2-4-2003)
§ 31.04 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The duties of the Reserve Police Officer Division shall be to assist the
full-time police officers within the Town Police Department with the primary
functions, objectives and operations of the Department and shall be entitled to
all powers of arrest, privileges and immunities afforded by law to full-time
officers. The Chief of Police shall assign specific duties to the reserve
officers. The Reserve Police Officer Division shall adhere to the Code of
Ethics established within the Town Police Department and shall be subject to
same standard operating procedures established within the Town Police
Department. The reserve police officer shall volunteer a minimum of 12 hours a
month; however, the Chief of Police at his or her discretion may excuse a
reserve officer from the hourly monthly requirement for reasons he or she may
deem appropriate.
(Ord. passed 2-4-2003)
§ 31.05 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES.
   The Reserve Police Officer Division shall be a volunteer program and the
reserve officers receive no compensation for their services; however, the Chief
of Police and Town Manager may establish procedures whereby the reserve police
officer may be compensated/reimbursed for his or her services or necessary
expenses incurred during the performance of his or her duties when deemed
appropriate.
(Ord. passed 2-4-2003)
CHAPTER 32: TOWN POLICIES
Section
State of Emergency; Curfew
   
32.01   State of emergency; curfew
Banning Smoking and Smokeless Tobacco Products in Municipal Buildings and
Vehicles
   
32.15   Prohibition
   
32.16   Definitions
   
32.17   Exemptions
   
32.18   Violation of policy
Town Rotation Wrecker Policy
   
32.30   Purpose
   
32.31   Definitions
   
32.32   Town rotation wrecker policy
STATE OF EMERGENCY; CURFEW
§ 32.01 STATE OF EMERGENCY; CURFEW.
   (A)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times
of great public crisis, disaster, grave civil disturbance or similar public
emergency, for any reason, public safety officials are unable to maintain
public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare
or property, or whenever the occurrence of any such condition is imminent.
   (B)   In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the
lives, safety, health or welfare of the people within the town, or threatening
damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor of the town is authorized and
empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence
of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the
lives, safety, health, welfare and property of people within the town, to place
into effect any and all restrictions herein authorized, including the
limitation to define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the
jurisdiction of the town.
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation the
application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically
designated or described within the corporate limits of the city and to specific
hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such
restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters, emergency medical
personnel and other public employees; doctors, nurses and employees of
hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military personnel, whether
state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation
companies and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting and television
broadcasting entities, including those operated for profit; and such other
classes of people as may be essential to the preservation of public order and
immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the
people within the city.
   (D)   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or
any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Town Council.
   (E)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor by
proclamation may prohibit or restrict any or all of the following:
      (1)   Travel or presence upon any public street or any other public- or
city-owned property;
      (2)   Any demonstration, parade, march or vigil, or participation
therein, on any public street or upon any public- or city-owned property;
      (3)   The operation of any office or business establishment or any other
places to or from which people may travel or at which people may congregate;
      (4)   The purchase, sale or transportation of beer, wine and alcoholic
beverages of any kind, or their possession or consumption off one’s own
premises;
      (5)   The possession, transportation, storage or use off one’s own
premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind,
or the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;
      (6)   The possession, transportation, storage or use off one’s own
premises of gasoline, kerosene or any other explosive, dangerous or flammable
fluids or substances, or the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition
thereof; and
      (7)   Such other activities or conditions, the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives during the state of
emergency, upon statement of the reasons for such necessity in the
proclamation.
   (F)   Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any
particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency
by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.
   (G)   The Town Council may be called into session within 72 hours after a
state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Mayor.
   (H)   The prohibitions of division (E) above shall automatically apply upon
imposition of any curfew under this section, unless specifically exempted.
(Ord. passed 9-1-1998)
BANNING SMOKING AND SMOKELESS TOBACCO PRODUCTS
IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES
§ 32.15 PROHIBITION.
   The use of tobacco products in municipal buildings and vehicles is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 7-1-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 32.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any building or facility or portion of a building or facility now
or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the
town.
   USE OF A TOBACCO PRODUCT. The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a
lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other combustible tobacco product, or the
ingestion or use of any other tobacco product including without limitation,
smokeless tobacco, snuff and chewing tobacco.
   VEHICLE. Any vehicle now or hereafter owned, leased or under the control of
the town.
(Ord. passed 7-1-2008)
§ 32.17 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Fire station truck bay areas;
   (B)   Public works wash bay area or any outside area of the public works
facility and grounds;
   (C)   Water and Sewer Department’s designated outside areas;
   (D)   Any outside area of the Town Police Department as approved by the
Chief of Police; and
   (E)   Any area designated by the Town Manager as an area where tobacco
products can be used or consumed.
(Ord. passed 7-1-2008)
§ 32.18 VIOLATION OF POLICY.
   Violation of this policy by town employees will result in disciplinary
action.
(Ord. passed 7-1-2008)
TOWN ROTATION WRECKER POLICY
§ 32.30 PURPOSE.
   In order to perform its traffic safety functions, the Town Police Department
is routinely required to use wrecker services to tow disabled, seized, wrecked
and abandoned motor vehicles. The purpose of this policy is to regulate on-call
wrecker service providers who have been approved for inclusion on the rotation
wrecker list so that the public, and qualified wrecker services, are treated in
a uniform, fair and reasonable manner.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 32.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person or business entity owning a wrecker service and applying
for inclusion on the rotation wrecker list.
   CAR CARRIER or ROLLBACK. A vehicle designed to tow or carry vehicles damage-
free. The truck chassis shall have a minimum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
of 14,500 pounds. The truck shall include: two lift cylinders with a minimum
two and one-half-inch bore; individual power winch pulling capacity of not less
than 8,000 pounds; a length of wire rope (cable) on a winch drum with a working
load limit (WLL) that meets or exceeds the pulling capacity of the power winch
utilized; and four tie-down hook safety chains. The carrier bed shall be a
minimum of 16 feet in length and a minimum of 84 inches in width inside side
rails. A cab protector, constructed of aluminum or steel, must extend a minimum
of ten inches above the height of the bed. A ROLLBACK is not considered a small
or large wrecker.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. Chief of the Newport Police Department.
   DEBRIS. Includes any parts of a vehicle or material that may be strewn upon
the surface of the roadway or highway right-of-way as a result of an incident/
collision, and which may reasonably be cleared or removed. For this definition,
DEBRIS shall also include any mud, soil, antifreeze, transmission, brake or
other liquids/fluids that have been deposited onto the surface of the roadway
as a result of a vehicle collision. DEBRIS does not include cargo from property
hauling vehicles or hazardous materials that are required to be handled by
hazardous materials teams.
   DEPARTMENT. The Newport, North Carolina, Police Department.
   OFFICER. All sworn personnel of the Town Police Department who are charged
with law enforcement duties.
   ROTATION WRECKER LIST (sometimes also ROTATION LIST). A list of wrecker
services which have applied and been approved by the Chief of Police to be
placed on the rotation list for the purpose of towing vehicles at the direction
of law enforcement or other emergency organizations. The Town Police Department
shall utilize rotation wrecker list services in those instances in which the
owner or person in control of a vehicle is unable or not permitted to determine
the disposition or custody of the vehicle, or otherwise has no preference as to
what wrecker service tows the vehicle.
   STORAGE FACILITY. An off-street storage facility, located within 30 minutes
of the Police Department, secured by a minimum six foot-high chain-link fence
(or a fence of similar strength), a wall or building, or other barrier or fence
of sufficient height or design to reasonably secure towed vehicles from
unauthorized access or removal and to deter trespassing or vandalism, and where
all entrances and exits are secure from public access. It is recommended, but
not required, that STORAGE FACILITIES be properly lighted. Such facility shall
include a parking area that shall be of sufficient size to accommodate all
vehicles towed by the wrecker service for the Department.
   WRECKER or TOW TRUCK. A truck chassis having:
      (1)   A minimum gross vehicle weight rating (minimum gross vehicle weight
rating, or GVWR, consists of the unloaded/curb weight of the vehicle plus the
maximum carrying capacity recommended by the vehicle’s manufacturer) of 10,000
pounds, and a maximum GVWR that does not exceed 26,000 pounds;
      (2)   A boom assembly having a minimum lifting power of 8,000 pounds as
rated by the manufacturer;
      (3)   An 8,000 pound-rated winch with a length of cable on a winch drum
with a working load limit that meets or exceeds the pulling capacity of the
power winch utilized;
      (4)   A belt-type tow plate or tow sling assembly;
      (5)   A wheel life with a retracted lifting capacity of no less than
3,500 pounds;
      (6)   Dual rear wheels; and
      (7)   Any additional safety equipment specified by this policy.
   WRECKER SERVICE. A person or entity engaged in the business of, or offering
the services of, or owning a wrecker service or towing service whereby motor
vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by
the use of a motor vehicle manufactured and designed for the primary purpose of
removing and towing motor vehicles. A ROTATION WRECKER SERVICE is one on the
rotation wrecker list.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 32.32 TOWN ROTATION WRECKER POLICY.
   (A)   Upon request or demand, unless impounded or subject to an order not to
do so, the wrecker service shall return personal property stored in, with or
from a vehicle, whether or not the towing, repair or storage fee on the vehicle
has been or will be paid. Personal property, for purposes of this division (A),
includes any goods, purses, wallets, cash, identification, credit and debit
cards, licenses, photographs, checks, deposit slips, bank records and any other
property having any value whatsoever other than items directly related to the
functioning of the vehicle itself.
   (B)   After financial obligations have been agreed upon between the wrecker
service and the owner(s), or appropriate party, of the disabled vehicle(s), the
wrecker service shall tow such vehicle(s) to any destination requested by the
vehicle owner, or other person with apparent authority.
   (C)   Unless the vehicle is being preserved by the Department as evidence,
the wrecker service shall allow insurance adjusters access to and allow
inspection of the vehicle at any time during normal business hours.
   (D)   The placement of a wrecker service on the rotation list does not
guarantee a particular number or quantity of calls, or an equivalent number of
calls to every wrecker service on the rotation wrecker list. If a wrecker
service responds to a call, said wrecker service shall be placed at the bottom
of the rotation list unless the wrecker service, through no fault of its own,
is not used or is not entitled to receive compensation for the call. In that
event, such wrecker service shall be placed back at the top of the rotation
list. Each wrecker service agrees to charge reasonable towing fees and storage
fees commensurate with fees charged to other customers, and on or before July 1
of each year, each service will furnish the Chief of Police with a schedule of
all fees. The Chief of Police has the right to disapprove any fees that in his
or her judgment are excessive based upon the prevailing fees in the community.
The placement of a wrecker service on the rotation list does not entitle any
wrecker service to compensation as a consequence of a failure to call the
wrecker service in accordance with the list or as a consequence of the removal
of the wrecker service from the rotation list.
   (E)   A rotation wrecker service, upon accepting a call for service from the
Department, must use its own wrecker. Wrecker companies shall not refer a call
to another wrecker company or substitute for each other.
   (F)   If a rotation wrecker service moves its business location or has a
change of address, the owner of the wrecker service must notify the Chief of
Police of the new address or location. Notification shall be made in writing no
later than ten days prior to the projected move. The wrecker service shall not
be entitled to receive rotation calls prior to inspection of the new facility.
   (G)   A wrecker service may dispatch either a wrecker or a car carrier
rollback in response to a rotation wrecker call, except where the wrecker
service is advised that a particular type of recovery vehicle is needed due to
existing circumstances.
   (H)   A rotation wrecker service driver or employee shall not respond to a
Department-initiated call for wrecker service with the odor of alcohol on his
or her breath, or while under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any impairing
substance.
   (I)   Storage fees shall not begin to accrue until the next calendar day
following the towing of a vehicle.
   (J)   The operator of a vehicle, if present and not incapacitated, shall
have the right to select a wrecker service of his or her choice; provided,
however, that the requested wrecker service is located within a reasonable
distance of the incident site. Town Police Department personnel at the scene
shall determine the reasonableness of the distance from the incident site, and
its decision shall be final. If the operator of a vehicle to be towed is not
present, is incapacitated, or has no preference for a specific wrecker service,
Department personnel shall determine the wrecker service per the wrecker
rotation list. When emergency circumstances prevail, the Department officer may
request wrecker services from the entity service closest to the scene. A
Department officer may also request wrecker services from an entity operating
large cranes or other heavy recovery equipment when the same is necessary to
remove traffic obstacles such as large trucks or heavy equipment. The
determination regarding whether an emergency exists, or whether a specialized
recovery service is required, shall be in the sole discretion of the Department
on-duty supervisor.
   (K)   In no event shall any officer, in the performance of his or her
duties, recommend any wrecker service, motor club or automobile membership
service to the owner or driver of a wrecked or disabled vehicle; nor shall any
officer, in the performance of his or her duties, recommend the services of a
particular wrecker service, motor club or automobile membership service.
Officers shall, whenever possible and practicable, dispatch the wrecker service
requested by the motorist requiring such services.
   (L)   An officer who notices a violation of the provisions of this policy
shall notify the Chief of Police in writing as soon as practicable. The Chief
shall notify, in writing, said wrecker service about the violation(s) and of
any planned corrective actions. A wrecker service that is dissatisfied with the
rotation system, or with the requirements of this policy, shall file a written
statement to the Chief of Police. If the Chief cannot satisfy such complaint, a
statement shall be filed with the Town Manager whose decisions will be final.
   (M)   By submitting an application and accepting placement on the rotation
wrecker list, each wrecker service agrees to forever hold harmless and to fully
indemnify the town and its personnel, agents, officials and Town Council
members, in both their official and individual capacities, from any and all
judgments, liens, claims, assessments, demands, attorney fees, actions and
causes of action of any sort arising out of any damage or injury sustained by
any person, property or entity by reason of any negligent or willful act or
omission of the wrecker service or its officers, employees, agents or
contractors in connection with rendering services.
   (N)   Wrecker services on the rotation wrecker list shall not employ any
person who is also employed by the town. The town will not approve an
application for the rotation wrecker list for any wrecker service that employs
a full- or part-time employee of the town. For the purpose of this policy,
full-time employees are those employed to work 40 hours or more per week. Part-
time employees are all other employees receiving any compensation from the
town. Part-time employees who do not work for compensation for more than 20
hours a week on average during the preceding six calendar months may be
employed by a wrecker service on the wrecker rotation list.
   (O)   Upon ten days’ notice, the Chief of Police may remove any wrecker
service from the rotation wrecker list for any reason. However, such
termination shall not affect the responsibilities of the parties relating to
vehicles that have been towed as of the termination date. Any wrecker service
so removed from the rotation wrecker list may file with the Chief of Police a
written appeal stating the reason therefor. This appeal must be filed within
ten days of the date when removed from the rotation wrecker list. Appeals will
be heard by the Town Manager within 14 days of the date that the appeal is
filed with the Chief of Police. The decision of the Town Manager shall be
final.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
CHAPTER 33: EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Personnel Policies
Code of Ethics
   
33.15   Declaration of policy
   
33.16   Definitions
   
33.17   Standards of conduct; scope
   
33.18   Disclosure of interest in legislative action
   
33.19   Investigations instigated by Town Council; Town Manager; any other
person
   
33.20   Sanctions by Town Manager; Town Council; rights of accused at hearings
   
33.21   Advisory opinions
   
33.22   Ethics Education Program
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 PERSONNEL POLICIES.
   The Personnel Policies of the town are contained in a separate manual. A
copy of that manual shall be maintained in the office of the Town Manager/Town
Clerk and shall be available for public inspection during regular business
hours.
CODE OF ETHICS
§ 33.15 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of
the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain;
and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government.
   (B)   In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for town officials is
hereby adopted. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish guidelines for
ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts
and actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the town.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS ENTITY. Any business, proprietorship, firm, LLC, partnership,
person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation which is organized for financial gain or for profit.
   GIFT. A thing of value presented to a person who does not present, transfer,
convey or pay fair value in consideration therefor. Remuneration by the town
for services rendered to the town and reimbursement to a town official by the
town for travel, meals or other expenses are not GIFTS.
   IMMEDIATE HOUSEHOLD. The town official, his or her spouse and all dependent
children of the town official.
   INTEREST.
      (1)   Direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing in a town
official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the
subject of an official act or action by or with the town.
      (2)   For the purpose of this subchapter a town official shall be deemed
to have an INTEREST in the affairs of:
         (a)   Any person in his or her immediate household, as such term is
defined in this section;
         (b)   Any business entity in which the town official is an officer,
member or director;
         (c)   Any business entity in which in excess of 5% of the stock of, or
legal or beneficial ownership of, is controlled or owned directly or indirectly
by the town official; or
         (d)   Any nonprofit organization on which the Mayor or any member of
the Town Council currently serves as an officer, director or board member.
   OFFICIAL ACT OR ACTIONS. Any legislative, administrative, appointive or
discretionary act of any town official.
   TOWN OFFICIAL. The Mayor, members of the Town Council, the Town Manager, the
Finance Officer/Assistant Town Manager, the Town Clerk and the Tax Collector.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.17 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT; SCOPE.
   All town officials as defined in this subchapter shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct.
   (A)   Interest in contract or agreement. No town official, as above defined,
shall have or hereafter acquire an interest in any contract or agreement with
the town other than an employment agreement with the town.
   (B)   Use of official position. No town official shall use his or her
official position or the town’s facilities for his or her private gain, nor
shall he or she appear before or represent any private person, group or
interest before any department, agency, commission or board of the town except
in matters of purely civic or public concern. The provisions of this division
(B) are not intended to prohibit speaking before neighborhood groups, nonprofit
organizations or political organizations or gatherings.
   (C)   Use and disclosure of information. No town official shall use or
disclose confidential information gained in the course of or by reason of his
or her official position to advance or promote his or her interest nor the
interest of a member of his or her household or of any other person or business
entity.
   (D)   Incompatible service. No town official shall engage in, or accept,
private employment or render service for private interests, when such
employment or service would be incompatible with the proper discharge of
official duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in
the performance of official duties.
   (E)   Gifts. No town official shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift,
or accept or receive any monetary gift in any amount nor any other gift having
a value of $25 or more, whether in the form of services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the gift was
intended to influence him or her, or could reasonably be expected to influence
him or her in the performance of his or her official duties or was intended as
a reward for any official action on his or her part. A town official may
solicit money for a recognized charity, educational institution or eleemosynary
organization. Legitimate political campaign contributions or solicitations
shall not be considered as gifts or solicitations under the provisions of this
division (E).
   (F)   Special treatment. No town official shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is
available to every other citizen. It is the obligation of every elected
official to ensure that every citizen receives a fair and impartial hearing on
any matter coming before the Town Council.
   (G)   Town employees and equipment. No town official shall solicit, seek or
demand any gift, favor or service from any employee of the town nor the use of
any town equipment, machinery, building or property. Use of town property or
buildings, but not machinery or equipment, may be obtained on the same basis
that any non-town official could obtain such use.
   (H)   Obedience to applicable laws. All Town Council members shall obey all
applicable laws regarding official actions taken as a member of the Council.
   (I)   Performance of duties. All town officials shall faithfully perform the
duties of their office.
   (J)   Open and public manner. Except as provided by law authorizing closed
sessions, the members of the Town Council shall conduct the affairs of the
Council in an open and public manner and shall comply with all applicable laws
governing public records.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.18 DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST IN LEGISLATIVE ACTION.
   (A)   The Mayor or any member of the Town Council who has an interest in any
official act or action before the Council shall publicly disclose on the record
of the Council the nature and extent of such interest, and shall withdraw from
any consideration of the matter if excused by the Council pursuant to law.
   (B)   In addition to complying with the requirements of division (A) above,
in all transactions involving an interest in real property (whether for
acquisition, lease or sale) in which the Mayor or any member of the Town
Council has an interest therein, he or she shall inform the Town Manager and
Town Attorney of such interest. Any real property transaction authorized by the
Town Council shall be handled exclusively through the office of the Town
Manager who shall garner all of the material facts and disclose such facts on
the official record when the matter comes before the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.19 INVESTIGATIONS INSTIGATED BY TOWN COUNCIL; TOWN MANAGER; ANY OTHER
PERSON.
   (A)   The Town Council may direct the Town Attorney to investigate any
apparent violation of this subchapter, as it applies to the Mayor, any member
of the Town Council or Town Manager, and to report the findings of his or her
investigation to the Town Council.
   (B)   The Town Manager may direct the Town Attorney to investigate any
apparent violation of this subchapter as it applies to the Clerk or Tax
Collector, and to report the findings of his or her investigation to the Town
Manager.
   (C)   Any person who believes that a violation of this subchapter has
occurred may file a complaint in writing with the Town Council when the Mayor,
a member of the Town Council or Town Manager is the subject of the complaint,
or with the Town Manager when the Clerk, Tax Collector or a department head is
the subject of the complaint, who may thereafter proceed as provided in
divisions (A) and (B) above.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.20 SANCTIONS BY TOWN MANAGER; TOWN COUNCIL; RIGHTS OF ACCUSED AT HEARINGS.
   (A)   If the Town Manager, after the receipt of an investigation by the Town
Attorney conducted under the provision of §
33.19(B), has cause to believe a violation of this subchapter has occurred, he
or she shall schedule a hearing on the matter. The town official who is charged
with the violation shall have the right to present evidence, cross-examine
witnesses, including the complainant or complainants, and be represented by
counsel at the hearing. If, after such hearing and a review of all of the
evidence, the Town Manager finds that a violation of this subchapter has
occurred, he or she shall take whatever lawful disciplinary action he or she
deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, reprimand, suspension,
demotion or termination of service. No further hearing or proceedings under the
personnel ordinance shall be required.
   (B)   If the Town Council, after receipt of an investigation by the Town
Attorney conducted under the provisions of division (A) above, has cause to
believe a violation has occurred, the Town Council shall schedule a hearing on
this matter. The person who is charged with the violation shall have the right
to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses, including the complainant or
complainants, and be represented by counsel at the hearing. If, upon conclusion
of the hearing, at least four members of the Council vote to find a violation
has occurred, the Council may adopt a resolution of censure which shall be
placed as a matter of record in the minutes of an official Council meeting. If
the person charged is a member of the Town Council, a vote of three members of
the Council shall be required to find a violation and adopt a resolution of
censure.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.21 ADVISORY OPINIONS.
   When any town official has a doubt as to the applicability of any provision
of this subchapter to a particular situation, or as to the definition of terms
used in this subchapter, he or she may apply to the Town Attorney for an
advisory opinion. The town official shall have the opportunity to present his
or her interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicability of
provisions of this subchapter before such advisory opinion is made. Action in
accordance with this advisory opinion shall be prima facie proof that the
official has not violated the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
§ 33.22 ETHICS EDUCATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Town Council members upon first election or appointment to the Council
and upon reelection or reappointment shall, within 12 months of election or
appointment, reelection or reappointment, attend an ethics education session of
not less than two 60-minute hour duration. Such sessions shall cover laws and
principals that govern conflicts of interest and ethical standards of conduct
at local government levels.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall maintain a record verifying receipt of the
required ethics education by each Council member.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2009)
TITLE V: PUBLIC UTILITIES
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WATER AND SEWER
      
52.   WATER AND SEWER RATES
      
53.   WATER CONSERVATION
      
54.   REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Collection frequency
   
50.03   Collection of large, cumbersome items
   
50.04   Containers generally
   
50.05   Placement of containers for collection
   
50.06   Placement of racks or enclosures
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GARBAGE. Includes all animal, fish, fruit and vegetable waste.
      NONHOUSEHOLD TRASH. Includes brush and tree trimmings from routine yard
cleanup if such trimmings are cut to lengths of not more than four feet, and,
provided further that branches, limbs, pieces of wood, and parts of trees do
not exceed four inches in diameter.
      TRASH. Includes all waste tin cans, wood, metal, glassware, plastic,
crockery, waste paper, cardboard boxes or wooden boxes not more than four feet
in height and two feet square, and rags and other scrap or discarded cloth.
   (B)   The terms TRASH and NONHOUSEHOLD TRASH do not include building
materials, building material scraps or other refuse generated from the building
or alteration or destruction of any structure, or brush or tree trimmings
resulting from initial or subsequent lot clearing activities; nor do these
terms include limbs exceeding four inches in diameter or more than four feet in
length. Limbs must be bundled with heavy twine in bundles of not more than four
feet in length and one foot in diameter. Not more than ten bundles will be
picked up without charge. All leaves, straw and small trimmings will be bagged
in heavyweight bags.
(1991 Code, § 13-1) (Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
§ 50.02 COLLECTION FREQUENCY.
   All garbage, trash and nonhousehold trash shall be disposed of through
regular pickups by the town contractor on a weekly basis, excluding legal
holidays.
(1991 Code, § 13-2) (Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
§ 50.03 COLLECTION OF LARGE, CUMBERSOME ITEMS.
   The contractor is not obligated to pick up exceptionally large or cumbersome
items or obnoxious items, such as building materials, dead animals, discarded
automobiles, discarded appliances or large portions thereof. Special
arrangements may be made with the contractor which will require additional
payment from the homeowner.
(1991 Code, § 13-3) (Ord. passed 11-17-1981)
§ 50.04 CONTAINERS GENERALLY.
   (A)   All garbage and trash shall be placed in watertight covered garbage
containers which meet the approval of the Town of Newport and contractor. The
containers shall not exceed 95 gallons capacity.
   (B)   All yard trimmings, and other trash which is not normally contained
within such containers, must be bagged in an appropriate trash or yard bag, and
may not exceed 65 pounds in total weight.
   (C)   If garbage containers become damaged to the extent that garbage or
trash can leak out, the owner will be notified in writing to replace the
container within seven days or garbage collection will be discontinued. If the
container was provided by the contractor, it will be replaced promptly by the
contractor.
(1991 Code, § 13-4) (Ord. passed 11-17-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.
   Garbage and trash containers shall be placed on the town street rights-of-
way for collection. Garbage and trash not so placed will not be collected
without prior authorization of the Town Manager. Containers shall not be placed
on rights-of-way prior to 24 hours before 7:30 a.m., the scheduled collection
time, and shall be removed within 24 hours after collection. Persons who place
or leave trash, garbage or other refuse on the town right-of-way in violation
of this chapter shall be subject to its penalties.
(1991 Code, § 13-5) (Ord. passed 11-17-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.06 PLACEMENT OF RACKS OR ENCLOSURES.
   No person may place or construct on the town street rights-of-way any
permanent or semi-permanent wooden or other enclosure or rack designed for the
purpose of holding garbage containers.
(1991 Code, § 13-6) (Ord. passed 11-17-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Application for service
   
51.003   Customer’s deposits
   
51.004   Right of access and rights-of-way
   
51.005   Meter reading
   
51.006   Minimum monthly billing
   
51.007   Utility rates outside municipal limits
   
51.008   Collection charges and delinquent accounts
   
51.009   Consumer service line leaks and adjustments
   
51.010   Connects and disconnects
   
51.011   Change of occupancy
   
51.012   Resale of water
   
51.013   Connection to water and sewer system required
   
51.014   Water conservation incentive
   
51.015   Enforcement and suspension of services
   
51.016   Authority and amendment
   
51.017   Wellhead protection
   
51.018   Extension requirements
Water
   
51.030   Water main extensions
   
51.031   Point of delivery
   
51.032   Customer’s responsibilities, including backflow prevention
   
51.033   Meter testing
   
51.034   Private water systems: cross-connections with the town water system
prohibited
   
51.035   Establishment and periodic adjustment of user charges and fees
   
51.036   Water tap fees
   
51.037   Water rates
   
51.038   Water service impact fees
   
51.039   Irrigation services
Sewer
   
51.050   Sewer main extensions
   
51.051   Point of service
   
51.052   Building sewers and connections
   
51.053   Tap and impact fees
   
51.054   Customer’s responsibilities
   
51.055   Fats, oils and grease (FOG)
   
51.056   Privies
   
51.057   Establishment and periodic adjustment of user charges
   
51.058   Industrial wastewater charges
   
51.059   Excluded wastes
   
51.060   Pretreatment
   
51.061   Flow and concentration control
   
51.062   Measurement of flow
   
51.063   Control manhole
   
51.064   Determination of character and strength of wastes
   
51.065   Stoppage of sewer pipes
   
51.066   Illegal discharges into sanitary or storm sewers
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
    The following words, terms and phrases, wherever used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless
the context plainly indicates otherwise or that a more restricted or extended
meaning is intended. In addition, definitions contained in 40 C.F.R. Parts 35,
401 and 403, as amended, are hereby incorporated in this section by reference
and shall take preference over definitions in this section in case of any
conflicts. For the purposes of this chapter, the word “shall” is mandatory and
the word “may” is permissive. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ACCOUNT, WATER SERVICE. The record of water and sewer usage and monetary
transactions maintained by the town for each water consumer.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure per
the latest version of Standard Methods.
   BOARDING OR ROOMINGHOUSE. Defined by reference to the Town Zoning Ordinance
and the appropriate building code.
   BUILDING. A structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage
or shelter.
   BUILDING SEWER OR HOUSE CONNECTION. The connecting pipe from a building,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall, to the
municipal sewer system.
   BUILDING WATER SERVICE OR WATER CONNECTION. The connecting pipe from a
building, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall, to
the municipal water system.
   CAMPGROUND OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK Defined by reference to the Town
Zoning Ordinance and the appropriate building code.
   COLOR. The true color of the light transmitted by the waste solution after
removing the suspended material, including the pseudo-colloidal particles.
   CONCEALED LEAK. Any use of water of which the consumer has no knowledge,
such as leaking underground piping. Leaking water closets (toilets), faucets
and hose bibs are not considered as CONCEALED WATER LEAKS and are the
customer’s responsibility to maintain and correct on an as-needed basis.
   CONDOMINIUM. Defined by reference to the Town Zoning Ordinance and the
appropriate building code.
   CONSUMER. Any person or owner responsible for the use of water and/or sewer
service obtained from the town water/sewer system. Interchangeably used with
USER and CUSTOMER.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. All liquid and waterborne pollutants, exclusive of
“unpolluted wastewater” as defined in this section or wastewater or wastes from
processes or operations in industrial establishments (“industrial waste”), as
defined in this section.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a specified
purpose and use by the public, a corporation or persons.
   FAMILY. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping or
dwelling unit.
   HOTEL. Defined by reference to the Town Zoning Ordinance and the appropriate
building code.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. The liquid and waterborne pollutants resulting from
processes or operations employed in industrial establishments, as defined in
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget of the federal government, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
      (1)   Division A, Agricultural, Forestry and Fishing;
      (2)   Division B, Mining;
      (3)   Division D, Manufacturing;
      (4)   Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
      (5)   Division I, Services.
   INFILTRATION. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. INFILTRATION does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
   INFILTRATION and INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow without distinguishing the source (I&I).
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system (including
sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, water to air
(Florida) heat pumps, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections between storm
sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm water, surface
runoff, street wash waters or drainage. INFLOW does not include, and is
distinguished from, infiltration.
   METER. The town authorized measuring device used for determining water
consumption.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Defined by reference to the Town Zoning Ordinance and the
appropriate building code.
   MODIFIED SERVICE. Includes any and all services or building water and/or
sewer services where any new plumbing is installed, where the building water
and/or sewer service is changed or replaced in any way, where the water meter
is replaced, or any other changes to the plumbing system are made.
   MONTHLY METER CHARGE. The minimum monthly charge assessed to each meter
account based on the meter size as presented in the town’s fee schedule.
   MONTHLY UNIT CHARGE. The minimum monthly charge assessed to each unit of a
multiple unit establishment for service from a single meter. Each unit charge
shall be equivalent to the monthly service charge for a single three-fourths
inch meter and service as set out in the town’s fee schedule. Motels,
roominghouses, condominiums, restaurants and all other multiple unit
establishments shall be charged a MONTHLY UNIT CHARGE for each unit on the
premises, as determined by a site inspection by the Public Utilities Director.
   MOTEL. Defined by reference to the Town Zoning Ordinance and the appropriate
building code.
   NORMAL WASTE. A waste having an average concentration of 250 milligrams per
liter of BOD, or less, and 250 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, or
less, and a pH between 6.0 and 9.0 as determined by samples taken before
entering the public sanitary sewers.
   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation, lessee, receiver, trustee, guardian
or personal representative, holding legal title or right to occupy or carry on
business in a structure or any facility. Where there is more than one OWNER, as
defined, their duties and obligations under this policy are joint, and several,
and shall include the responsibility for the account for water service serving
their property.
   PERSON. Any association, company, corporation, firm, individual,
organization or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
   pH. The negative logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions activity of a solution. STABILIZED pH is that determined after a
sample of the waste has been subjected to natural aeration.
   PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any facility for wastewater treatment
and disposal not maintained and operated by the town.
   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. Any facilities for obtaining potable water not
maintained and operated by the town.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The organic wastes resulting from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-
half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Utilities Department
of the Town of Newport.
   RECEIVING STREAM. The body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the
discharge from a wastewater treatment plant, or that body of water, stream or
watercourse formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment serving food and/or beverages, and regulated by
the County Health Department.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
REPLACEMENT.
   SANITARY SEWER. A public sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of
ground and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
   SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Any part of the public sanitary sewer or systems,
including wastewater pumping stations, that discharge into wastewater treatment
facilities owned and/or operated by the town.
   SERVICE. The authorized connection of a pipe from the town water main to a
town water meter, or from a town sewer main to the point of service (usually a
clean-out at the edge of the right-of-way).
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater of any duration during which the
rate of flow or concentration of any constituent increases to such magnitude as
to affect adversely the operation of the sewer system or the ability of the
town’s wastewater treatment facilities to meet the water quality objectives.
   STANDARD METHODS. The analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by
the American Public Health Association, or EPA Methods of Chemical Analysis of
Water and Wastes, as published by the Environmental Protection Agency, Water
Quality Office in April 1971, or subsequent editions.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only storm waters, surface runoff,
street wash waters and drainage.
   STRENGTH OF WASTE. The concentration, expressed in milligrams per liter by
weight (mg/l), of a pollutant or substance contained in the liquid waste.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). The total solid matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water or liquid waste, and which is removable
by laboratory filtration.
   TOWN. The Town of Newport, North Carolina.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the Town of Newport.
   TOWN MANAGER. The chief administrative officer of the town. It may also
include any other town employee delegated to act for the town by the Town
Manager or by the Town Council.
   TREATMENT WORKS. Any devices and systems for the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of sewage, domestic sewage or liquid industrial
wastes.
   UNIT, COMMERCIAL. Any user of water that is not a dwelling unit, restaurant
or other specifically excepted user. Commercial accounts shall be charged for
water service according to the published town fee schedule for the size meter
serving the establishment.
   UNIT, DWELLING. An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen and bathroom
facilities designed for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence
by one family, served by a single meter.
   UNIT, MULTIPLE. More than one unit served collectively by one meter.
   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER.
      (1)   Any wastewater which is substantially free of pollutants and is
discharged from rain downspouts and drains, footing drains, storm and surface
water drains, or cooling water systems. UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER shall also mean
any wastewaters judged by the North Carolina Division of Water Quality, or its
successor, to be admissible to streams and watercourses under the jurisdiction
of such agency, and in accordance with the standards of water quality
established by such agency for the particular stream or watercourse into which
such unpolluted wastewater is to be discharged.
      (2)   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER shall contain, by definition, none of the
following:
         (a)   BOD in excess of ten milligrams per liter;
         (b)   Suspended solids in excess of ten mg/l;
         (c)   Free of emulsified greases or oils;
         (d)   Acids or alkalis;
         (e)   Phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor in receiving
waters;
         (f)   Toxic or poisonous substances;
         (g)   Noxious or odorous gases; or
         (h)   Temperature in excess of 150°F.
   USER. The terms USER, CUSTOMER and CONSUMER are used interchangeably in this
chapter. They all refer to users of water and/or sewer service.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of any treatment works, for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of such works.
   WATER, NON-POTABLE. Any water that does not meet the requirements of potable
water as defined in this section, but may be suitable for heating, cooling,
irrigation or other purposes.
   WATER, POTABLE. Water that is suitable for human consumption, and that meets
or exceeds all guidelines for drinking water as published by the Water Supply
Branch, North Carolina Division of Health Services in NCAC Title 15A,
Subchapter 18C, §§ .0100 through .2100, as amended, (known as the green book)
or its successors.
   WATER AND SEWER FEE SCHEDULE (FEE SCHEDULE). The schedule of water and sewer
rates, user charges and all other fees charged for water and sewer services,
deposits, tap and impact charges, and other miscellaneous services. The most
current copy of this fee schedule shall be maintained in the office of the Town
Clerk. The fee schedule is a separate document from this chapter, and may be
modified from time to time by the Town Council without changing or modifying
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.002 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Applicants shall be required to sign the standard Water Department
form of application for water service before the water is turned on. The
application for service shall clearly state the class, scope and type of use to
be made of the service, as well as the purpose for which it shall be used. Any
failure or deviation from the stated purposes shall be sufficient reason to
terminate water service. By signing the application for water service, the
applicant agrees to all terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, and
further agrees to comply with all such provisions to the same extent as if
those conditions were written in the application.
   (B)   The town may reject any application for service that may affect the
supply of service to other customers, or for other good and sufficient reasons.
   (C)   The town may reject any application for service when the applicant is
delinquent in payment of bills for service previously supplied at any other
location.
   (D)   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with,
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water and/or sewer line, or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the town.
   (E)   The owner(s) or his or her agent shall make application to the town
for a building water and/or sewer service permit. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the town or its representative. Pipe on the
consumer’s premises shall be so arranged that the point of connection is
conveniently located with respect to the town’s service lines and water and/or
sewer mains.
   (F)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building water and/or sewer service shall be borne 100% by the owner(s).
The owner(s) shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building water and/or
sewer service.
   (G)   The size, alignment, material of construction of a building water and/
or sewer service, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe,
joining, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements
of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the town.
   (H)   The connection of the building water and/or sewer service to the
municipal water system shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the town. All
connections shall be watertight and verified by proper testing.
   (I)   The applicant for the building water and/or sewer service permit shall
notify the Town Inspections Department when the building water and/or sewer
service is ready for inspection and connection to the municipal water and/or
sewer system. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Public
Utilities Director, or his or her designated representative.
   (J)   All excavations for building water and/or sewer services shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
   (K)   The town shall charge the applicant a water and/or sewer tap fee (as
set out in the town’s fee schedule) for which the town shall provide a water
meter and/or sewer tap at the town right-of-way line or other mutually
agreeable and convenient point. The owner(s) agree(s) that by signing the
applications for water service and the building water and/or sewer service
permit that they shall grant the town a right-of-way to install and maintain
the water and/or sewer service line to the metering point. All applications for
water service shall contain language granting the town an easement for these
purposes by the owner(s) of the property. The owner(s) shall be responsible for
installation and maintenance of the building water and/or sewer service to the
town’s metering point or service connection point.
   (L)   The town may reject any application for service which involves
excessive service cost, or which may affect the supply of service to other
customers, or for other good reasons. The Town Manager may also require the
actual cost of providing a service plus 10% be paid when the cost is
substantially above the fees set forth in the town’s fee schedule.
   (M)   All rents, rates, fees, charges and penalties for service under this
chapter shall be the legal obligation of the person contracting for them. In
the event one meter is used to provide water to several living units or
separate facilities located on one commonly owned property, then the owner of
said property shall be responsible for all water used through such meter and/or
sewer service provided, without regard to whether tenants of the owner pay a
portion of said water bill.
   (N)   The town shall not be responsible for the user’s piping or other
appliances under any circumstances.
   (O)   When two or more meters are to be installed for the same premises but
for different consumers, such meters shall be closely grouped and each clearly
designated to indicate to which consumer it serves. New multiple unit dwellings
(duplex, triplex and the like) shall have a separate meter for each living
unit, and shall be considered as separate dwellings for the purposes of
figuring tap fees, impact fees and the like.
   (P)   Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only.
   (Q)   Where meters are presently located on or near the premises of a user,
the user shall be responsible for the town’s meter and shall provide an
unobstructed and accessible location at all times for meter reading and system
maintenance.
   (R)   In compliance with the State Division of Health Services cross-
connection and backflow prevention program, where required, all new or modified
services shall be installed with an approved backflow prevention device. This
device shall be of a type that is approved by the Public Utilities Director.
The customer, at his or her own expense, shall install, operate and maintain
the approved backflow prevention device as directed by the town. Each backflow
device shall be tested upon installation and annually as required by public
water supply regulations. The customer’s responsibility starts at the point of
delivery from the town’s potable water system and includes the user’s entire
water system. The town reserves the right to refuse or discontinue service
unless the customer’s lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to
prevent cross-connection or backflow. There is no “grandfather clause” or any
exception to the requirements for backflow prevention. (See § 51.032.)
   (S)   Each consumer’s water service must be separately metered in a single
delivery and metering point. Each commercial unit and each storeroom or stall
used for business purposes shall have separate meters when deemed practical and
in the best interest of the town by the Town Manager. All commercial use,
including storerooms and stalls for business purposes, shall be metered
separately from any residential use and vice versa, whether now in service or
to be installed in the future.
   (T)   If the user’s piping on the user’s premises is so arranged that the
town is required to provide additional meters, the consumer may be required to
relocate the piping such that connection can be made with a single meter per
commercial or residential unit at the town’s right-of-way.
   (U)   The town shall not be liable for damage of any kind whatsoever
resulting from water and/or sewer or the use of water and/or sewer service on
the consumer’s premises. The town shall not be responsible for any maintenance
of, or for any damage done by or resulting from any defect in the piping,
fixtures or appliances on the consumer’s premises. The town shall not be
responsible for negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the
town resulting in any interruption of service.
   (V)   The user shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the
user’s side of the meter. The town will provide a like valve on the town’s side
of the meter.
   (W)   Application for industrial service; authorization required.
      (1)   All users discharging industrial waters or wastes other than normal
waste into the town’s sanitary sewerage system shall make application for
service to the town.
      (2)   Users making application for service to the town shall do so in
writing and shall provide the following information in support of the
application:
         (a)   Name, address and standard industrial classification of user;
         (b)   Average volume of wastewater to be discharged; 60-minute peak
wastewater flow rates including daily, monthly and seasonal variations; time
and duration of discharge;
         (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by
chemical analyses by a certified analytical laboratory for all applicable
parameters;
         (d)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all chemicals, materials and types of materials that are, or
could be, discharged;
         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all drains and sewers, and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation; and
         (f)   Any other information as may be deemed appropriate by the Town
Manager or his or her authorized representative.
      (3)   The Town Manager shall approve or disapprove all applications in
writing. The reasons for disapproval shall be provided.
      (4)   Approvals of applications for service shall be valid until
rescinded. The town reserves the right to modify the terms and conditions of
providing sewer service at any time based on demonstrable causes.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.003 CUSTOMER’S DEPOSITS.
   (A)   An applicant for water service shall make a cash deposit to secure
payments for such water and sewer service. The deposit shall be in accordance
with the scope of the service and it shall not draw any interest.
   (B)   All applicants shall sign the application for water service.
   (C)   New residential and commercial customers with three-fourths-inch or
one-inch meters shall provide a deposit as referenced in the town fee schedule.
   (D)   Deposits for new services larger than one inch are as referenced in
the town fee schedule.
   (E)   The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible
for payment of all service charges and fees incurred in connection with the
service furnished.
   (F)   A separate deposit is required for each meter installed.
   (G)   Upon discontinuance of service for non-payment of service charges and
fees, the deposit shall be applied by the town toward settlement of the
account. Any balance shall be refunded to the customer; however, if the deposit
is not sufficient to cover the service charges and fees, the town shall proceed
to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for the collection of
debts. This may, at the discretion of the town, include the use of a collection
agency. Service shall be restored only by payment of the balance, if any, of
the outstanding service charges and fees, and when a new deposit is made on the
basis of the deposit schedules above. A service fee shall be charged as adopted
by the Town Council for each meter reconnected during normal working hours, as
referenced in the town fee schedule as maintained in the Town Clerk’s office.
There shall be no reconnections made for services cut-off for delinquent
payments after normal business hours. Water/Sewer Department technicians are
not authorized to collect any fees or payments at any time.
   (H)   The town shall require a deposit from the owner of rental property.
When the property is rented, the renter shall pay a deposit in the same manner
as any other customer. The renter’s account shall be settled according to the
above procedures.
   (I)   If a delinquent customer is the owner of the premises to which the
services are delivered, the payment of the delinquent account will be required
before providing service at the request of a new and different occupant of the
premises; provided however that this provision shall not apply if the new and
different tenant or occupant of the premises has purchased the premises from
the delinquent customer/owner.
   (J)   When current accounts are discontinued and all bills, service charges
and fees are paid, the remaining portion of the deposit shall be refunded.
Refunds for less than $5 are payable by petty cash by the office of the Town
Clerk or Finance Officer; amounts over $5 will be refunded by check; mailed to
the last address on record.
   (K)   Sewer service shall only be available to water customers that are
located within the corporate limits of the town.
   (L)   The town shall require that where property is divided into separate
units for the purpose of rental and the property is served by only one meter,
the town shall require that the water account be placed in the name of the
owner or the realty company handling the rentals who shall be responsible for
all water bills incurred at this location.
   (M)   A property owner may, upon request, be entitled to a refund of his or
her water deposit following 12 months of good payment history with the town. To
qualify for the water deposit refund, the property owner, during that 12
months, shall not have had any town services terminated for non-payment and
shall not have had fees assessed for late payments for town services (water,
garbage and/or sewer) more than one time.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.004 RIGHT OF ACCESS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Duly authorized agents of the town shall have access to the premises
of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing town property,
inspection, observation, flow measurement, sampling and testing of industrial
waste and other pollutants, testing meters or any other maintenance purpose
required for the proper operation of the town’s water and/or wastewater system
and facilities.
   (B)   Each user shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or
conveyed, to the town a perpetual easement and right-of-way across any property
owned or controlled by the user wherever such perpetual easement or right-of-
way is necessary for the town water and wastewater facilities and mains so as
to be able to furnish service to the user. In the event that it is necessary,
in order to furnish service to the user under the provisions of this chapter,
for the town’s property or employees to enter upon the owner’s property, then
in that event, the owner does grant to the town, its agents and employees, a
right- of-way for the purposes of servicing, repairing, installing, removing or
for any other purpose necessary for the town to provide the services as set out
herein.
   (C)   The Town Manager and other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes that have a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The
industry may withhold information if the industry can establish that the
revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an
advantage to competitors.
   (D)   The property owner shall not permit any object, including, but not
limited to, vehicles, piles of soil or construction materials, debris,
shrubbery, trees, fences, pampas grass and the like to obstruct the access to
water meters for reading or maintenance. If necessary, the town may remove the
obstruction at the owner’s expense.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, interrupt or
interfere with any public utility water line, sewer line or drainage ditch or
tile either owned or under the control or use of the town without having first
obtained written permission from the Public Utilities Director or Town Manager.
   (F)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the Town Manager and duly authorized employees of the
town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the consumer. The consumer shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
town employees. The town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by town employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions.
   (G)   Utility easements; alleys; and rights-of-way.
      (1)   The purpose of this division (G) is to provide access for
maintenance of utility lines that are located within alleys, rights-of-way and
easements over private property.
      (2)   Utility lines located in easements located on private property,
street rights-of-way and alleys shall remain free and clear of all buildings
and structures and other improvements to allow for the maintenance of utility
lines.
      (3)   No property owner shall be permitted to leave or store building
materials and other miscellaneous items within the prescribed easement, alley
or right-of-way that would prohibit access of town equipment.
      (4)   The town shall have the authority to remove structures, fences,
gardens, trees, landscaping and debris located within the easements, street
rights-of-way and alleys in order to maintain utility lines. The cost of
removal of such items shall be the responsibility of the property owner and the
cost of removing such items by the town shall be added to the next water/sewer
bill for the property.
      (5)   Easements, alleys and rights-of-way that do not conform with these
regulations prior to the date of the adoption of this section shall be
evaluated on an “as necessary” case-by-case basis and corrective action
determined by the Town Manager.
      (6)   From the date of adoption of this chapter, all future easements
shall be a minimum width of 25 feet for water mains, 25 feet for sewer mains
six feet or less in depth and 35 feet for sewer mains over six feet deep.
      (7)   This division (G) shall become effective upon adoption and
enforcement shall be in accordance with the provisions listed in §
51.015.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.005 METER READING.
   (A)   All meters shall be read monthly. If a meter reading is unavailable
due to circumstances beyond the town’s control, an estimated reading shall be
made and the billing shall be based on the estimated reading. The billing shall
be adjusted to the actual consumption when a reading is obtained during the
next billing period. The meter reading period shall begin on the fifteenth of
each month or the next working day thereafter.
   (B)   It is the customer’s responsibility to ensure that water meters shall
not be obstructed by parked vehicles, piles of soil or trash, vegetation or any
other obstacle. In the event the town is required to send personnel to read the
meter a second or subsequent time because the meter was obstructed and
unavailable to be read, the customer shall pay a fee as set out in the town’s
fee schedule, as maintained in the customer service office, per attempted
reading. The town shall only attempt one re-read trip per day, and shall
attempt to contact the customer so that the problem can be corrected prior to
any attempts to re-read the meter.
   (C)   Bills for water and/or sewer will be figured in accordance with the
town’s published fee schedule then in effect and will be based on the amount
consumed for the period covered by the meter readings.
   (D)   Charges for service commence when a meter and/or sewer tap is
installed. Water charges begin immediately and will be billed to the builder or
owner. Once the builder/owner receives the certificate of occupancy, sewer
charges will begin, whether used or not, except that 60 days may be allowed for
initial hookup on newly constructed extensions of the water and sewer system;
unless otherwise approved in advance in writing by the Town Manager.
   (E)   Readings from separate meters will not be combined for billing,
irrespective of the fact that such meters may be for the same or different
premises, or for the same or different users, or for the same or different
services. This includes any and all sewer charges based on the different meter
readings. Compound meters are not considered separate meters.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.006 MINIMUM MONTHLY BILLING.
   (A)   The minimum monthly meter charge shall be the regular minimum for the
particular meter size as set out in the town’s fee schedule.
   (B)   The minimum monthly charge assessed to each unit of a multiple unit
establishment for service from a single meter shall be equivalent to the
monthly service charge for a single three-fourths-inch meter and service as set
out in the town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   Multiple units served by a single meter include mobile home parks,
apartments, condominiums, and the like: the account for such units shall be
billed the minimum monthly unit charge multiplied by the number of units
located at the establishment per month, or usage based on the meter size as set
out in the town’s fee schedule, whichever is greater.
   (D)   Hotels and motels shall be billed at the rate of one minimum monthly
unit charge for every three rooms at the establishment, or usage based on the
meter size as set out in the town’s fee schedule, whichever is greater.
   (E)   Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks shall be assessed the
minimum monthly unit charge for every two spaces or hook-ups at the campground/
park, or usage based on the meter size as set out in the town’s fee schedule,
whichever is greater.
   (F)   Restaurants shall be billed at a minimum unit charge for every 20
seats, or usage based on the meter size as set out in the town’s fee schedule,
whichever is greater.
   (G)   Sewer rates and charges are set forth in the town fee schedule. Sewer
is computed at 100% of the water usage from the meter. Multiple dwelling unit
accounts are charged at a sewer rate for each dwelling unit in the same manner
as water charges are computed.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.007 UTILITY RATES OUTSIDE MUNICIPAL LIMITS.
   Persons, firms or corporations receiving municipal water services at
locations lying outside the corporate limits of the town shall be charged at a
rate as set out in the town’s fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.008 COLLECTION CHARGES AND DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Customers will be billed a monthly minimum plus a charge for the
amount of water metered over the allotted minimum, in accordance with the
town’s fee schedule. This minimum charge shall be the based on the sum of the
number of units on the premises. The minimum water usage allowed shall be that
which would be equal to the number of units times the allotment for a three-
fourths-inch meter. Sewer charges are based on 100% of the water usage and
included in this monthly billing.
   (B)   Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from
becoming delinquent or relieve the customer from payment.
   (C)   Water bills are mailed out near the twenty-fifth of each month, and a
billing and past due date is clearly printed on the bill. Payment is due in
full by the fifteenth day of the following month, or the first working day
thereafter, or service shall be considered late on sixteenth, or the next
business day after, and a 4% penalty shall be added to the customers account.
Customers with a previous balance on their current water bill are subject to
cut-off policy; and a cut-off fee as set forth in the town’s fee schedule shall
be added to the account and the service will be disconnected. The Town Manager
may authorize the removal of the penalty based on a case-by-case investigation.
   (D)   Service disconnected for non-payment of bills shall be restored only
after all bills are paid in full. A service charge as set out in the town’s fee
schedule shall become due immediately for each account disconnected. There
shall be no services reconnected after normal business hours.
   (E)   Bills may be mailed in, paid in person at Town Hall during normal
business hours or placed in the depository box next to the Town Hall front door
after office hours. Utility bills may be drafted from the customer’s checking
or savings account. The form is available at the Water Department. Customers
may also pay their bills on line or by credit or debit card. Utilities
Department technicians are not authorized to accept any payments.
   (F)   There shall be a service charge for returned or unpaid checks, or
unpaid draft accounts, as set out in the town’s fee schedule. In the event of a
returned or unpaid check, water service may be terminated until all bills and
fees are paid in full. The town reserves the right to refuse further checks
from a consumer that has had returned checks.
   (G)   Any account which appears on three consecutive monthly disconnect
lists shall be discontinued, and the deposit applied to the bill. The same
customer shall only re-open an account after a reconnection fee as set out in
the town’s fee schedule, per account, is paid, along with all unpaid balances
and a new deposit fee. Unpaid balances shall be turned over to the credit
bureau or other collection agencies as determined by the Town Manager for
collection.
   (H)   Sewer connections that have been plugged or severed due to delinquent
accounts shall be unplugged or reconnected to the sewer system upon the payment
of all outstanding sewer user bills and payment of a reconnection fee, as set
out in the town’s fee schedule.
   (I)   Partial payments will be applied in the following order: penalties and
fees, solid waste, sewer, and lastly water charges.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014; Ord. 2023-03, passed 7-13-2023)
§ 51.009 CONSUMER SERVICE LINE LEAKS AND ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Adjustments may be made to bills only under the following conditions:
      (1)   On a concealed leak in the customer’s piping, an adjustment may be
made upon receipt of a statement from a licensed plumber that the leak has been
repaired;
      (2)   On a concealed leak in the customer’s piping, an adjustment may be
made upon receipt of a signed statement from the property owner or his or her
legal representative that the repair has been made and meets or exceeds the
plumbing codes of the town;
      (3)   Upon inspection by Utilities Department personnel that find the
problem corrected; and
      (4)   Under other circumstances, such as theft of services, where the
evidence indicates to the Town Manager that an adjustment is the appropriate
answer to the situation.
   (B)   When Utility Department personnel discover that a leak exists, and the
owner is notified of the same, the owner shall take immediate steps within
seven days to correct the situation. Undue delay by the owner shall cause
forfeiture of the benefits of adjustments. If the leak is of a severity as to
possibly cause property damage or to endanger the water system, the Utility
Department will immediately turn off the water without further notice.
   (C)   The Town Manager shall have the authority to grant an adjustment on
concealed water leaks to the customer’s annual average monthly water usage
along with an adjustment up to 100% of the excessive sewer usage unless the
concealed usage entered the sewer system
   (D)   If a water and/or sewer user believes a bill to be in error, the user
shall present a claim, in person or in writing, at the Customer Service
Department office before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claims, if made
after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective to prevent
discontinuance of service as provided in this section. The user may pay such
bill under protest and payment under protest shall not prejudice his or her
claim. The Town Manager may authorize corrections for billing errors.
   (E)   Customers who pay a sewer bill may be granted an adjustment to their
sewer bills for filling their pool. Customers must present in writing to the
Customer Service Department a request to have their sewer bill adjusted for
filling their pool. The customer should make every attempt to read his or her
meter prior to and after filling their pool. The customer may also request the
meter technician read his or her meter. If the customer fills their pool
without meter readings he or she must present the dimensions of the pool so
that an accurate adjustment to sewer may be calculated
   (F)   In extreme cases of personal hardship verified by the Town Manager, a
delay of up to 120 days of the payment date of the water bill may be granted.
Such a delay may be granted no more than one time per year and may be granted
only by the Town Manager. All other bills during that period of time shall be
due and payable in accordance with this section.
   (G)   The Town Manager or the Director of Public Utilities shall make
adjustments on bills for water usages requested or directed by the town to
minimize or eliminate operational problems.
   (H)   The Town Manager shall be the final reviewing authority for all
appeals.
   (I)   The leak must be a concealed leak. Leaking or running commodes, faulty
treatment systems (water softeners), faucets inside or outside, exposed piping,
outdoor showers, hose bibs, water fountains, dishwashers and the like normally
shall not necessarily be considered concealed leaks.
   (J)   The record owner of property to which water service is supplied shall
be responsible for the repair, maintenance or replacement of any leaks
occurring in the owner’s system without regard to whether the property is
occupied by the owner, a tenant or is unoccupied. Each owner shall be
responsible for a tenant’s use of plumbing fixtures, pipes and other water
using equipment located on the owner’s property.
   (K)   If the seal of a meter is broken by other than a town representative
or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the
consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his or her previous
bill and/or from other proper data. This division (K) in no way prohibits the
town from applying any penalties listed under §
51.015 for meter tampering if there is evidence that it has occurred.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.010 CONNECTS AND DISCONNECTS.
   (A)   The Water Department shall connect and disconnect water service, at
the customer’s request, at a no service charge during normal business hours and
at a fee, as set out in the town’s fee schedule, after normal business hours,
to be billed to the customer, provided however, that there shall be no service
charge for disconnections due to leaking services.
   (B)   Property owners may close out their account even though they still own
the property, however, there shall be a service charge as set out in the town’s
fee schedule, plus deposit, to re-establish the account.
   (C)   The Utility Department requires a minimum of two weeks’ notice to
enable the scheduling of new water and/or sewer taps.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.011 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Not less than three working days’ notice must be given in person, or
in writing, at the Customer Service Office, to discontinue service for a change
of occupancy.
   (B)   The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to
the time specified for departure, or the actual departure, whichever period is
longer.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.012 RESALE OF WATER.
   (A)   A new consumer shall not supply more than one residence from one
meter. Existing residential multi-dwellings (apartments, motels, condominiums
and the like) may be serviced through one meter of sufficient size and capacity
as determined by the Utility Department. Only one such building shall be served
by each meter, unless otherwise permitted by the Utility Department in writing.
Liability for payment of water usage shall be the responsibility of the owner
(s) of said buildings, or the person in whose name the application is made.
   (B)   Existing mobile home courts or mobile home parks may be serviced
through one meter of sufficient size and capacity as determined by the town.
The liability for payment of water bills and fees shall be the responsibility
of the owner(s) of said property. New mobile home courts or mobile home parks
shall have each trailer served by individual meters.
   (C)   It is unlawful under the regulations of the Public Water Supply Branch
and the Utilities Commission for a property owner to resell or bill tenants for
water usage without proper permitting from the appropriate state agency.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.013 CONNECTION TO WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   The owners of all developed property within Newport having
situated on the property one or more residential units or commercial
establishments located within a reasonable distance of any available town water
lines or town sewer collection lines into which residential units or commercial
establishments the owners have, or have had or have permitted facilities
necessary for potable water and/or suitable toilet and other facilities
necessary for the discharge of domestic or industrial wastes (“developed
property”) shall at their own expense connect such facilities directly to the
proper town water line or town public sewer or both in accordance with the
requirements of the town.
      (2)   When town water or sewer lines or both are newly constructed, all
developed property shall be connected as provided in the division (A)(1) above
within 12 months of the date when the lines are activated. No new wells or nor
new septic tanks or other private sewer systems shall be allowed for discharge
of domestic or industrial waster within a reasonable distance of the sewer
lines.
      (3)   Any developed property not now connected to town water and/or sewer
lines and having a properly functioning potable water and septic tank or other
legal private waste disposal system not constructed under the provisions of
division (L) below may continue to opt out of connecting to town water and/or
sewer lines, but if such lines are within a reasonable distance of town water
and/or sewer lines will pay an availability fee equal to the minimum water or
sewer or both (depending on what the owner opts not to connect to) fee for
service to a like property. For those properties paying an availability fee for
sewer, no septic tank maintenance fee will be payable. The town will stop
providing septic tank or private waste disposal systems to all such properties.
   (B)   Where a public water line is not available under the provisions of
division (A) above, such toilet and other facilities requiring potable water
shall be connected to a well or a private water system complying with the
requirements of the appropriate state and/or local regulatory agency. At such
time as a town public water line becomes available to a property served by a
well or a private water system, a direct connection shall be made to the town
public water line in compliance with this subchapter. There shall be no
physical connection (cross-connection) between any privately-owned water source
and the town system. The owner shall operate and maintain any well or private
water facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by any state or federal agencies.
   (C)   (1)   All persons wishing to connect with the public sewer system must
file a written application with the customer service department in accordance
with §
51.002.
      (2)   The Clerk shall issue such permit to any duly licensed plumber
after application is filed, which permit must state the location of the wye to
which connection is to be made. After the connection is made, the ditch must be
left open until final inspection is made by the Town Plumbing Inspector who
shall report on the back of the permit the result of his or her inspection.
Such permit must be returned to the Clerk by the Inspector to be filed in the
town records.
   (D)   Every application for a sewer connection shall state the name of the
owner of the lot; the name of the street on which such lot is situated; the 911
address number of the house or lot; the number and kind of connections desired;
and the character of the surface of the abutting street. Every such application
shall be signed by the person making the application, shall be accompanied by
the proper fee for making the connections applied for and shall be filed with
the Plumbing Inspector.
   (E)   In general, where possible, sewer connections shall be made into
manholes. Every sewer connection made directly to a main shall be made at the
wye provided for the lot to be served; if no such wye has been provided for
such lot, the connection may be made directly to the main at any convenient
point.
   (F)   All tap fees for connections to main sewer lines shall be in the
amounts provided in accordance with the Utility Department fee schedule.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any outlet other
than a sanitary sewer, within the boundaries of the town, any domestic or
industrial wastes except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with this subchapter and state and federal laws.
   (H)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
division (A) above, such toilet and other facilities necessary for the
discharge of domestic and industrial wastes shall be connected to a private
disposal system complying with the requirements of the appropriate state and/or
local regulatory agency. Before commencement of construction of a private
wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from
the appropriate regulatory authority and furnish a copy thereof to the Building
Inspector. The copy of the permit shall be accompanied by such supplementary
data as deemed necessary by the Building Inspector to maintain an accurate file
of such private wastewater disposal systems to facilitate the planning of
future public sewer service. The type, capacity, location and layout of a
private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of the
County Environmental Health Department, North Carolina Division of Water
Quality, or other such board or authority. The town may require a sewer service
line to be installed to the right-of-way for future use. The Utilities Director
shall determine the size and placement of this future service line after
consulting with the Building Inspector.
   (I)   For any property not connected to, and not required to be connected to
public were lines, the town shall charge a septic system maintenance fee to the
utility account holder as set forth in the Utility Department Fee Schedule. The
Utility Department shall then be responsible for routine pumping, maintenance
and repairs to the septic system. This does not relieve the owner of
responsibility to care for the system by following the rules of the County
Health Department or other responsible agency for vegetation control, parking
restrictions, repair area and the like.
   (J)   At such time as a town public sewer becomes available within a
reasonable distance to a property served by a private wastewater disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material at the owner’s expense.
   (K)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any state or federal
agencies.
   (L)   The Town Council may, on a case-by-case basis, permit new construction
with septic tanks provided with provisions to be connected to the town sewer
system via gravity or a pumping system when such sewer service becomes
available. Such sewer pumps shall be the property of and maintained by the
property owner.
   (M)   The town shall charge a septic tank maintenance fee to cover the cost
of the town maintaining the septic tanks and drain fields permitted in division
(K) above such that the owners have equivalent service to other customers on
the sewer system. The Utility Department shall operate and maintain the septic
systems as required by County Environmental Health or other similar agencies
that have proper jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.014 WATER CONSERVATION INCENTIVE.
   Whereas, it is desirable to encourage residents of the town to conserve
water and reduce impacts to water supply sources and wastewater collection
systems; and whereas, the town recognizes that water is not an inexhaustible
resource; now, therefore, the following conservation incentive is adopted.
   (A)   The town will allow a one-time reduction of $15 of the town utility
bill for any business or home that demonstrates the installation of a low-flow
toilet, low-flow shower head or low-flow faucet.
   (B)   To qualify for the $15 reduction of the town utility bill, the home or
business owner shall provide proof of installation to the Customer Service
Coordinator. Proof of installation shall be in the form of a signed letter from
a licensed plumber or contractor who completed the installation. If the owner
installs the equipment himself or herself, the Building Inspector, Public
Utilities Director or his or her designee may visit the site and verify the
installation. The homeowner shall provide copies of receipts showing purchase
date, price and place purchased. Information regarding the brand and model of
the fixtures installed shall also be provided. The town shall have the
authority to enter the premises and verify that the low-flow device has been
installed. The town will verify installation of low-flow devices as it deems
necessary.
   (C)   The $15 reduction of the town utility bill shall be a one-time offer.
The $15 reduction of the town utility bill is a maximum reduction and will be
applied once regardless of the number of low-flow devices installed. The credit
will be applied to the bill after evidence satisfactory to the town to show
proof of installation has been provided to the town.
(Ord. passed - -2002; Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.015 ENFORCEMENT AND SUSPENSION OF SERVICES.
   (A)   The town shall endeavor to assure compliance with the requirements of
these regulations by conference and persuasion. If such efforts, over a
reasonable period of time, are futile, the town shall take formal action as
provided hereafter.
   (B)   In any case involving a person who is receiving water and/or sewer
service from the municipal water system, and where the Public Utilities
Director, after consulting with the Town Manager, finds that such person has
failed to comply with any of these regulations, the procedure for enforcement
shall be as follows.
      (1)   The Public Utilities Director shall give notice to such person by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by a Town Police
Department officer, stating the specifics of the failure of compliance and
requiring that the person remedy the failure within 72 hours.
      (2)   The Public Utilities Director may thereupon, without further
notice, cause the water and/or sewer service from the municipal system to be
discontinued for such person.
      (3)   In any case where water and/or sewer service is discontinued by the
town for enforcement purposes, the restoration of such service shall be
conditioned on full compliance by such person and payment of any expense
incurred in the enforcement proceeding and in the restoration of service.
      (4)   The town may, at its discretion, continue or restore service in a
case of failure of compliance on condition that such person furnish a bond or
other security, with terms as specified by the town, and to hold harmless the
town from any loss or expense that it may incur as a result of such
noncompliance or any future noncompliance.
   (C)   In any case where the Public Utilities Director determines that the
health or safety of the public is threatened by the actions of a consumer,
water and/or sewer service shall be immediately terminated to that consumer.
The Public Utilities Director shall then notify the consumer in person along
with written notification by the Utilities Director or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by a Town Police Department
officer, of the reason for the termination of service, and the corrective
measures necessary prior to the resumption of service. In no case shall the
town or its representatives be held liable for any damages resulting from such
a termination of service.
   (D)   In any case involving a person who fails to comply with any of these
regulations, but who is not receiving water and/or sewer service from the
municipal system, the Public Utilities Director shall give notice to such
person by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the specifics of
the failure of compliance and requiring that the person promptly remedy the
failure. At the same time, the Public Utilities Director, in consultation with
the Town Manager, shall report the facts of such case, in writing, to the Town
Council, and to such other government agencies as may have jurisdiction and
power to take appropriate enforcement action.
   (E)   The town reserves the right to terminate water and/or sewer service
without notice for the following reasons:
      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse;
      (2)   Consumer’s failure to pay bills and fees as required by this
regulation;
      (3)   Emergency repairs;
      (4)   Insufficiency of supply or capacity due to circumstances beyond the
town’s control;
      (5)   Legal processes;
      (6)   Direction of higher public authorities;
      (7)   Strike, riot, fire, flood, storm, accident or other unavoidable
cause;
      (8)   Discovery of a cross-connection between a private or non-potable
source and the town water system; and
      (9)   Consumer’s willful disregard of town’s rules.
   (F)   If any person(s) alters, tampers with or bypasses the town’s water
service or meter(s) in a manner that causes such meter(s) to inaccurately
measure and register the water consumed or which would cause the water to be
diverted from the recording apparatus of the meter(s), or who tampers with any
water service which has been disconnected by the Water Department for any
reason, then said meter(s) shall be immediately removed and water service to
said property or premises shall be halted. Service to said property or premises
shall not be reinstated until a required administrative fee as stated in the
town’s fee schedule has been paid in addition to any damages done to said meter
(s). Nothing in this division (F) shall be construed to prevent the town from
pursuing criminal or civil actions against any person(s) who alters, tampers
with or attempts to bypass a water meter in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 14-151.1.
   (G)   In cases of wanton and willful damage to either the water or sewer
system, the town shall commence criminal proceedings under the appropriate
state law. The town may, in addition to prosecution by law, permanently refuse
service to any consumer who tampers with a meter or other measuring device, or
who wantonly or willfully illegally discharges to the sewer system.
   (H)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all users of the town
water and/or sewer system, whether within or outside of the town limits.
   (I)   In any case involving the use of the town sewerage system, the town
shall have the right to collect the costs of treatment for the wastewater
discharged by the user to the town sewerage system, including any fines levied
by the Division of Water Quality or its successors. There shall also be an
administrative fee as set in the town’s fee schedule.
   (J)   It is unlawful under the provisions of this chapter for any user or
consumer that has had their water service disconnected for cause to connect to
another water source. Connections made with hoses and other temporary devices
shall be removed and confiscated by the Utility Department when discovered.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.016 AUTHORITY AND AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall be the reviewing authority for all appeals of
actions or administrative determinations under the provisions of these
regulations. Notice of intent to appeal and request for a hearing shall be
addressed to the Town Clerk in writing and shall detail the nature of the
appeal. An early date for such hearing shall be set by the Town Manager and the
appellant promptly notified in writing. The decision of the Town Manager after
such a hearing shall be final and conclusive, and shall be conveyed to the
person(s) involved in writing.
   (B)   The Town Council expressly reserves the absolute right to amend,
modify, rescind or supplement this chapter.
   (C)   No modifications of rates, or any of these rules and regulations by
any employee of the town shall be binding upon the town except and unless it
has been agreed in writing, signed and accepted by the Town Council.
   (D)   Upon adoption of this chapter, any previous and conflicting policies
and ordinances are hereby repealed.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.017 WELLHEAD PROTECTION.
   (A)   The town has adopted a wellhead protection plan.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall conflict or contravene the items below,
which are separate documents that have been adopted by the Town Council and are
included by this reference.
   (C)   Included in the wellhead protection plan are the following items:
      (1)   The wellhead protection plan;
      (2)   The Wellhead Protection Ordinance; and
      (3)   The wellhead protection portions of the Town Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.018 EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, any property owner
(s) desiring water and/or sewer service from the town water and sewer system in
areas where it is not presently provided shall apply in writing to the Town
Council requesting the extension of water and/or sewer service. No requests for
the extension of service shall be considered unless submitted in writing in
accordance with the requirements of this policy.
   (B)   The town shall require the applicant to submit as part of the written
application such information, plans or data as may be required to adequately
determine if the requirements of this policy are to be met. Plans and
specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and
shall be suitable for submission to NCDENR Public Water Supply Section and the
Division of Water Quality or their successors for approval. Materials and
equipment to be used in the extension shall be of the same type and standards
used in the town system unless otherwise approved by the town. The town
reserves the right to have the Town Engineer review the proposed plans and
specifications for the town and at the expense of the project developer or
owner.
   (C)   When application is made for water and/or sewer extension to serve an
area or development project that is planned as part of a larger project or
subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time application is
made, the owner or owners shall submit plans in sufficient detail in order to
determine the location, size and type of facilities which will be necessary to
serve the entire development or subdivision when completed. No extension to the
water and/or sewer system shall be made without approval of the Town Council,
and no application shall be approved except in accordance with the requirements
of this policy.
   (D)   The minimum distance for any extensions of a water and/or sewer main
shall be determined by the Public Utilities Director. In general, the minimum
distance for extensions shall be not less than one platted block. In any case
where such extension is possible, water main extensions shall not be less than
the distance to connect both ends of the extension to an existing water main,
whenever the physical conditions of the proposed extension will permit. The
minimum distance for sewer extensions shall be made from manhole to manhole.
   (E)   The size of water and/or sewer mains to be installed and other
required system facilities shall be determined by the Public Utilities Director
in accordance with the recognized standards and accepted engineering practices
and design.
   (F)   Any water and/or sewer mains extended under the provisions of this
section shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the approved
plans, and other requirements of the town. All facilities installed under the
provisions of this section, whether within or outside the corporate limits,
shall become the sole property of the town and under its jurisdiction and
control for all purposes at the time such facilities are connected to the
municipal system. When required, the property owners shall grant to the town
such utility easements as it may require. In addition, a deed to the town for
water and/or sewer facilities installed, which are located outside the
corporate limits, the cost of which is borne by individual property owners,
shall be executed prior to the time any extension provided for in this section
is connected to the municipal system. No certificates of occupancy or water
and/or sewer service shall be provided until all of the town’s requirements and
specifications have been met, including a letter of certification of completion
to the town and appropriate state agencies, completion of “punch lists” and the
receipt of “as built” plans for the project.
   (G)   The Town Council may, in its discretion, as a condition under which
water or sewer service, or both, will be extended, require the owners of a
proposed subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed streets
therein at their own expense and in accordance with the ordinances then in
force governing the acceptance of public streets for the town. If required,
this section shall apply to subdivisions that are located either within or
outside the corporate limits.
   (H)   All water and sewer service lines shall be extended to the edge of the
right-of-way. The Public Utilities Director shall work with the design engineer
to locate the water and sewer services at an agreeable location to be
determined for each lot in the project. Water and sewer services shall be
terminated as described in the following subchapter on water and sewer.
   (I)   The following exceptions are authorized. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the Town Council from extending water and/or sewer mains within the
corporate limits on its own motion, without receipt of an application from
property owners, and assessing the cost of such extensions in accordance with
division (L) below, when, in the opinion of the Town Council, the general
public interest demands such extension of service.
   (J)   When application is received for a proposed new project and approved
by the town, then the developer or owner shall install the extensions or have
them installed by a licensed utility contractor under the supervision and
inspection of the project engineer and in accordance with approved plans. The
Public Utilities Director shall also inspect the project during construction,
and shall have final approval of the project. The town reserves the right to
require the project engineer to provide full time resident inspection of the
project.
   (K)   If an extension application is approved by the Town Council, the owner
shall be required to pay 100% of the total cost of all extensions including the
cost of engineering, resident inspection and inspection provided by the town;
provided the town may participate to the extent agreed upon by the Town Council
in the cost of larger size mains that are in excess of the size mains required
to serve the project. No reimbursement shall be made upon annexation and all
extensions connected to the town system and located inside or outside the
corporate limits shall become the property of the town at the time such
facilities are connected and accepted.
   (L)   In the case of extensions to existing developed areas, when the
approved extensions have been completed and the total cost has been determined,
a percentage of the total cost shall be assessed against the property owners
whose property is served by the extension at an equal rate per front foot in
accordance with and under the authority of G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10, as amended.
   (M)   Any property owner shall have the opportunity to pay his or her
proportionate share of the cost assessed in accordance with division (L) above
in full or in equal annual installments with interest as required by statute.
   (N)   Prior to the beginning of any construction by the developer of any
water and/or sewer extensions approved by the town, the owner or developer
shall deposit with the town funds in an amount equal to 100% of the total
estimated cost of such extensions. Such funds shall be in the form of a bond,
cash or other securities deemed acceptable by the Town Manager and Finance
Officer. In the event of a default or any other failure of the developer to
complete the project to the requirements and specifications of the town, the
town shall use this deposit to cover the costs of completing or abandoning the
project as necessary to meet town standards and specifications, or any other
applicable state and/or federal regulations.
   (O)   If the application for extension of water and/or sewer is approved by
the town and state regulatory agencies, the developer shall install the system
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
   (P)   The developers, subdividers, owners and the like shall provide
easements in such form as the town may require for mains, service lines,
manholes and appurtenances and for installation and maintenance thereof. Such
easements shall be furnished prior to any service being provided.
   (Q)   At the time of submission of plans for the systems the owners shall
ask that the property to be served and all improvements thereon be annexed to
the town at such times as the town finds this lawful and practical. Such
request for annexation shall remain open indefinitely, shall bind the heirs,
successors, grantees and assigns of the owner, developer, subdivider and the
like, and may be accepted by the town at any time unless the area involved
becomes annexed to some other municipality. The request for annexation may be
withdrawn if the town does not provide water and/or sewer services, as
requested by the developer, owner, subdivider and the like, but not if such
action is caused by failure to pay for services rendered or for damages done to
the system or systems by the willful or negligent acts of the developers,
subdividers, owners and the like, or their heirs, successors, grantees or
assigns of the agents, servants, employees, invitees or licensees or any of
them.
   (R)   Any water and/or sewer mains extended under the provisions of this
policy shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the approved
plans, specifications and other requirements of the town. All facilities
installed under the provisions of this policy shall become the sole property of
the town and under its jurisdiction and control for any and all purposes
whatsoever at the time such facilities are accepted. The cost borne by
individual property owners shall be executed prior to the time any extensions
are provided and connected to the town system.
   (S)   The Town Council may in its discretion, as a condition under which
water and/or sewer service will be extended, require the owner(s) of a proposed
subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed street therein
at his, her or their own expense and in accordance with the ordinances then in
force governing the acceptance of public streets within the town.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
WATER
§ 51.030 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   All water main extensions shall be constructed according to the latest
version of the Rules Governing Public Water Systems, NCAC Title 15a, Subchapter
18c, §§ .0100 through .2100 as amended by the state.
   (B)   In addition to the above, all extensions and water services shall also
conform to the specifications of the American Waterworks Association (AWWA),
the American Society of Testing Engineers (ASTM) and other such nationally
recognized standards organizations as should apply.
   (C)   All new water mains shall be cleaned by “pigging” prior to
disinfection and pressure testing. The exact procedure for each main shall be
determined in the field by the Public Utilities Director in consultation with
the project engineer. This procedure shall be completed at no cost to the town.
   (D)   Materials, fittings and equipment shall be as deemed by the Utilities
Director so as to match materials and supplies currently in use by the town.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.031 POINT OF DELIVERY.
   The point of delivery shall be the point where the meter is located,
normally at the right-of-way line. All water lines, plumbing and equipment,
including backflow prevention devices, on the customer’s side of the meter
shall be maintained by the customer.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.032 CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITIES, INCLUDING BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (A)   All meters, service connections and other equipment shall be and
remain the property of the town. Owners of the premises shall provide a space
for such property and equipment, and in the event of loss or damage to such
property, including meter boxes and lids, arising from the owner’s negligence
or the negligence of the owner’s agents, assigns, lessees, tenants or persons
on the property with the consent of the owner, the owner shall pay the costs of
repair or replacement of the damaged property or equipment.
   (B)   All water services shall incorporate an approved backflow prevention
device as needed. The type of device required shall be determined by the Public
Utilities Director. In all cases, the requirements of § .0406(b) of the “Rules
Governing Public Water Supplies” or other documents incorporated by reference,
as amended, shall be met.
   (C)   If the town determines that a backflow prevention device needs to be
repaired or replaced to ensure the safety of the public water supply, the
device shall be repaired or replaced as necessary by the town and the owner
shall pay the cost incurred by the next monthly billing. The owner shall have
the opportunity to make repairs or replace a defective backflow device if the
repairs can be made in a timely manner as determined by the Public Utilities
Director.
   (D)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, deface, tamper with or remove any equipment or materials or properties
of the town. Only persons authorized by the Town Manager or Public Utilities
Director will be allowed to uncover, adjust, maintain and remove such equipment
and materials or property.
   (E)   No person shall obstruct the water meter with parked vehicles,
landscaping or by any other means. Such meters shall be accessible at all times
for reading or other necessary maintenance. If a meter is obstructed such that
it may not be read, there shall be a re-read fee applied to the bill as set
forth in the town’s fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.033 METER TESTING.
   (A)   Water Department technicians shall make a reasonable attempt to test
the meter while the customer or his or her designated representative is
present.
   (B)   A leak test at the request of a customer shall be performed within a
reasonable amount of time. A reasonable attempt shall be made by Water
Department technicians to have the customer or his or her designated
representative present while the leak test is performed. A data log for radio
read meters may be available at the customer’s request.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.034 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS: CROSS-CONNECTIONS WITH THE TOWN WATER SYSTEM
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Where a public water supply line is not used, cooking, sanitary and
other facilities requiring potable water shall be connected to a private water
system complying with the requirements of all appropriate state and local
regulatory agencies.
   (B)   There shall be no physical connection (cross-connection) between any
privately-owned water source and the town water system. The existence of such a
cross-connection shall be cause for the immediate termination of water service.
Customers that were formerly on a well and are now served by the municipal
water system shall have their wells disconnected from all plumbing and this
disconnection shall be inspected by the Utilities Director or his or her
representative.
   (C)   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain any private water facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
   (D)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by other federal, state or
local agencies.
   (E)   At such time as the owner of a private water system shall desire to
obtain municipal water service, he or she shall apply through all normal
procedures described within this chapter.
   (F)   It is permitted to use a private water system for irrigation, provided
that such system has no connection to the municipal water system, nor is there
any provision for any such cross-connection.
   (G)   Cross-connections are illegal under both federal and state regulations
along with this chapter, and the discovery of a cross-connection shall result
in the immediate termination of water service, and disconnection fees as set
forth in the town’s fee schedule.
   (H)   State regulations require that all backflow devices be tested, and
repaired if needed, annually by a certified backflow device tester, and that a
copy of the test report shall be furnished to the town.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.035 ESTABLISHMENT AND PERIODIC ADJUSTMENT OF USER CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall review not less often than once per year the
usage of water, the total costs of operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the water production and treatment facilities, and the user
charge system.
   (B)   The Town Council shall revise the user charges, if necessary, to
accomplish the following:
      (1)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user classifications. Each user shall pay its
proportionate share of operation and maintenance (including replacement) costs;
      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the water production, treatment, and distribution facilities;
and
      (3)   Apply excess revenues collected to a capital reserve account.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.036 WATER TAP FEES.
   (A)   Tap-on fees shall be charged and collected from all new users in
accordance with the rates on file in the town’s fee schedule. The Town Council
shall review tap-on rates periodically and shall revise tap-on rates if
necessary. The Town Council shall retain the authority and right to offer
special tap-on charges for specified periods of time to new customers along
newly constructed lines in areas previously not served by the municipal water
system.
   (B)   Tap fees for three-fourths-inch and one-inch services are set in the
town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   The town does not have the equipment for making taps larger than two
inches in size. Therefore, these taps shall be made by a contractor. There
shall be a fee for this service as set out in the town’s fee schedule.
   (D)   There shall be a facility fee set for inspection and meter
installation of contractor installed taps other than those listed in division
(B) above as set forth in the town’s fee schedule.
   (E)   Any installation that requires a tap at a greater depth than six feet
shall pay a surcharge as described in the town’s fee schedule.
   (F)   Any installation that requires a bore under a street shall have a fee
as listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (G)   Any installation that requires an open cut of a street shall have a
fee as listed in the town’s fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.037 WATER RATES.
   (A)   The minimum charge shall be made for each meter installed regardless
of location.
   (B)   Multi-residential and multi-commercial users (trailer courts,
condominiums, duplex apartments and the like) served through one meter, shall
be billed at the city’s regular published rates, or the published minimum rate
per residential unit, per month, whichever is greater. The property owner or
homeowners association, as applicable, shall be responsible for payment of the
bill. The rates are set forth in the town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   Multi-residential or multi-commercial users, when possible and
practical as determined by the town, shall install individual meters on each
user at the property line or other location as determined by the Public
Utilities Director. The town will operate and maintain the individual meters.
The town shall invoice each individual user on a monthly basis in the same
manner as single-family residences are administered.
   (D)   Water use through fire services shall be for fire-related uses only.
All other types of water consumption through fire services are strictly
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.038 WATER SERVICE IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The town is required to maintain and upgrade its water system for fire
protection, supply and storage capacity, and to meet health and safety
regulations established by state and federal agencies. Impact fees are over and
above any other fees required by the town for the connection to the municipal
water system, and shall be required for all new or modified services.
   (B)   The Impact Fee Table is given in the town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   The purpose of impact fees is to build a capital reserve fund for
required system modifications, upgrades and expansions.
   (D)   All impact fees, tap fees and all other fees and deposits shall be
paid before any building permits will be issued. No impact fee shall be
assessed for a building permit which does not involve new or modified water
service.
   (E)   Impact fees shall apply to:
      (1)   All new construction connected to the town’s water or sewer system;
      (2)   New connections of existing buildings or other improvements not
previously connected to the town’s water or sewer system;
      (3)   Improvements, additions or changes in existing buildings or other
improvements requiring increased capacity or increased use of water or sewer
from the city; and
      (4)   New construction that replaces existing structures shall have an
impact fee based upon the increased capacity or increased use of water or sewer
from the town.
   (F)   Impact fees shall not be charged on buildings or other improvements
constructed or made to repair or replace like buildings or improvements damaged
or destroyed by fire or other disaster; provided however, that the repair or
replacement will not result in any increased capacity requirements over that
required to serve the damaged or destroyed buildings or improvements. The
decision of the Town Manager as to such increased capacity requirement shall be
final.
   (G)   Additions or alterations to existing office, commercial or industrial
buildings shall be required to pay an impact fee based on the same rates that
apply to new construction. The rates may be calculated using the increased
average daily flow created by the building addition or change of use. The full
payment of the impact fee shall be paid to the town upon issuing the building
permit.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.039 IRRIGATION SERVICES.
   (A)   A customer may request an additional, separate water service for
irrigation of lawns and gardens. This service shall be provided and charged for
water service fees only.
   (B)   The irrigation tap for three-fourths-inch and one-inch services shall
be made off of the existing customer service line and the meter set adjacent to
the existing water meter. The tap fee and impact fee for this second service
shall be at one-half of the regular tap and impact fees as set forth in the
town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   For services larger than one inch and/or for services that require a
new tap on the water main, full tap and impact fees as set forth in the
appropriate sections of the town’s fee schedule shall apply.
   (D)   All irrigation services shall have a reduced pressure zone (RPZ)
backflow device immediately connected to the meter. This device shall be the
property of the owner, and shall be furnished by the owner or his or her
plumber, at no cost to the town.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
SEWER
§ 51.050 SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   All regulations promulgated by the State Division of Water Quality and
its successors shall be followed and adopted by this reference.
   (B)   In addition to the above, all extensions and sewer services shall also
conform to the specifications of the Water Environment Federation (WEF), the
American Society of Testing Engineers (ASTM) and other such nationally
recognized standards organizations as should apply.
   (C)   All sewer main extensions shall be inspected by video camera, and the
locations of all taps recorded on videotape. This inspection shall take place
in the presence of town representatives, and representatives of the project
engineer. No line extensions shall be accepted without this inspection by
camera, and all flaws detected during the camera inspection process being
repaired. A DVD recording of this inspection shall be provided to the town.
   (D)   (1)   Where new or upgraded lift stations are required, they shall be
designed such that materials, fittings and equipment shall be as deemed by the
Utilities Director so as to match materials and supplies currently in use by
the town.
      (2)   All such lift stations, or those with added significant flow, shall
be provided with the following minimal equipment:
         (a)   An automatic starting, automatic switch over generator fueled by
LP (or natural, when available) gas, of sufficient size to operate all of the
electrical equipment at the lift station;
         (b)   A radio telemetry system compatible with the existing town
system and equipment, including programming and necessary upgrades to the base
station to accept the new signals;
         (c)   A basket system for the removal of large solids, rags and the
like;
         (d)   A boom and winch operated removal system for both the pumps and
basket screenings. This system shall be made of hot dipped galvanized or
stainless steel construction;
         (e)   Where the power is available, all pumps shall be 240-volt three-
phase operation; and
         (f)   All control panels, cabinets and the like shall be of NEMA 4X
stainless steel construction. All hatch type doors shall be of either stainless
steel or aluminum construction.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.051 POINT OF SERVICE.
   The point of service shall be the point where the end of the town service
tap is located, normally at the customer’s property line. All sewer lines,
plumbing and equipment, including backflow prevention devices, on the
customer’s side of the service tap shall be maintained by the customer.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.052 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the town.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits. In either case,
the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Town Manager after consulting with the Utilities Director and Building
Inspector:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, in which case the
front building’s sewer may be extended to the rear building’s sewer and the
whole considered as one building sewer, but the town does not and will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such single connection.
   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by owner’s engineer, to meet all
requirements of this section.
   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Environment
Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. 9, or their successor organizations or
specification manuals, shall apply.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer should be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer at the user’s expense.
   (H)   No person shall make connection to roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater or any other
source of inflow to a building drain that in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable
rules and regulations of the town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9, or its
successor manual. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight
and be verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the Public Utilities Director before
installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Utilities
Director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the Utilities Director or his or her representative.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.053 TAP AND IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   The town shall charge the applicant a sewer tap fee as stated in the
town’s fee schedule for which the town will provide the sewer tap from the town
right-of-way line to the sanitary sewer main. The owner shall be responsible
for installation of the building sewer on the owner’s property to the town’s
right-of-way including the connection to the tap provided by the town. The
connection of the building sewer to the town tap shall be inspected and
approved by the Utilities Director prior to the owner’s covering the
connections.
   (B)   Impact fees shall be charged to offset the costs of wastewater
treatment capacity improvements such as pump stations, sewer main capacity and
the sewage treatment plant.
   (C)   Impact fees shall apply to:
      (1)   All new construction connected to the town’s sewer system;
      (2)   New connections of existing buildings or other improvements not
previously connected to the town’s sewer system;
      (3)   Improvements, additions or changes in existing buildings or other
improvements requiring increased capacity or increased use of sewer from the
town; and
      (4)   New construction that replaces existing structures shall have an
impact fee based upon the increased capacity or increased use of sewer from the
town.
   (D)   Impact fees will not be charged on buildings or other improvements
constructed or made to repair or replace like buildings or improvements damaged
or destroyed by fire or other disaster; provided however, that the repair or
replacement will not result in any increased capacity requirements over that
required to serve the damaged or destroyed buildings or improvements. The
decision of the Town Manager as to such increased capacity requirement shall be
final.
   (E)   All of the required impact fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of
any building permits for the project.
   (F)   Additions or alterations to existing office, commercial or industrial
buildings shall be required to pay an impact fee based on the same rates that
apply to new construction. The rates may be calculated using the increased
average daily flow created by the building addition or change of use. The full
payment of the impact fee for this section shall be paid to the town upon
issuing the building permit.
   (G)   The impact fee shall be as stated in the town’s fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.054 CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, deface, tamper with or remove any equipment or materials or properties
of the town. Only persons authorized by the Utilities Director will be allowed
to uncover, adjust, maintain and remove such equipment and materials or
property.
   (B)   The Utility Department of the town shall require new or replacement
water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from
the systems into floodwaters, and shall permit no new on-site waste disposal
systems within town limits, except as permitted in §
51.013(M).
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the property owner, or his or her
designated agent, to maintain in good working order and free from clogs or
other obstructions both the building sewer and the sewer service to the main.
The town does not maintain the sewer service lateral lines, provided, however,
that if the customer demonstrates to the town that the sewer service line is
damaged or defective the town will repair the sewer service. The town is not
responsible for, or maintenance to, the connection from the building sewer to
the sewer service point.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the property owner(s) or his, her or their
designated representative when removing a mobile home or demolishing a building
that is connected to the sewer system to cap off the sewer line such that
inflow of water into the sewer system is prevented. Once the line is capped
off, the Customer Service Office shall be contacted to arrange an inspection of
the sewer line.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.055 FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG).
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to pour or dispose of cooking oil, grease, lard
and similar fatty substances by pouring them down a waste drain or garbage
disposal. Similarly, it shall be unlawful to place wastewater containing oil,
fat or grease (exclusive of petroleum substances) of concentrations greater
than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at the point of discharge into the sewer system.
   (B)   Customers that fail to prevent FOG from entering their sewer lateral
lines and clogging the municipal sewer lines shall be subjected to a penalty by
the Utilities Director after consulting with the Town Manager the same as
failing to maintain a grease trap as set forth in the town’s fee schedule. This
does not preclude the town from charging the more stringent fees for willful or
repeated violations as in division (F) below.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand separators (traps) shall be required by the town
for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease, oil and/or sand and/
or other substances in excessive amounts. Gas stations, automotive repair
shops, restaurants, cafeterias and other similar businesses shall provide
grease, oil and/or sand separators. The Public Utilities Director shall
determine where such installations are necessary and the minimum cleaning
(pumping) schedule for said facilities.
   (D)   The minimum size for a grease trap shall be 1,100 gallons. Undersink
type traps are prohibited.
   (E)   There shall be a daily fee as set forth in the town’s fee schedule for
failure to pump or maintain grease traps or interceptors as directed by the
Utilities Director after consulting with the Town Manager.
   (F)   There shall be a daily administrative fee or penalty for causing
grease obstructions and/or sewer overflows. This penalty shall be directed by
the Utilities Director after consulting with the Town Manager and shall be up
to the amount specified in the town’s fee schedule.
   (G)   Commercial establishments that discharge FOG in amounts greater than
100 mg/l shall be charged a sewer surcharge for all organic loading parameters
as discussed below for industrial users. Sampling and surcharge billing of such
establishments shall follow the regulations below for industrial
establishments, and they shall henceforth be treated under the rules and
regulations for industrial users.
   (H)   Commercial establishments that prove, by a minimum of four consecutive
quarterly samples, that they are no longer discharging excessive quantities of
FOG shall be treated as regular commercial establishments from the date of the
last sample forward. This does not preclude the town from taking further
samples and possibly re-instituting the FOG surcharge as indicated.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.056 PRIVIES.
   Privies are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.057 ESTABLISHMENT AND PERIODIC ADJUSTMENT OF USER CHARGES.
   (A)   The Town Council shall review not less often than once per year the
sewage contributions of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance
(including replacement) of the sewerage facilities, and the user charge system.
The Town Council shall revise the user charges, if necessary, to accomplish the
following:
      (1)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user classifications. Each user shall pay its
proportionate share of operation and maintenance (including replacement) costs;
      (2)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the sewerage facilities; and
      (3)   Apply excess revenues to a capital reserve account.
   (B)   Charges shall be based on actual costs.
   (C)   Each user discharging any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in
the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the treatment works shall
pay for 100% of such increased costs.
   (D)   All flow to the sewerage facilities not directly attributable to the
users (i.e., infiltration and inflow) shall be distributed among all users and
user classes of the sewerage facilities in the same manner that operations and
maintenance costs are distributed.
   (E)   Domestic wastewater charges shall be applicable to all sewer system
users. Industries with discharges from sanitary conveniences only are
considered domestic customers.
   (F)   The domestic wastewater charge is hereby established at a rate as
shown in the town’s fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.058 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER CHARGES.
   (A)   Industrial wastewater charges or “surcharges” shall be applied to
industrial users, defined as follows.
      (1)   (a)   INDUSTRIAL USER means any nongovernmental, nonresidential
user of the city sewerage system that discharges more than the equivalent of
25,000 gallons per day (GPD) of sanitary wastewater and is identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions:
            1.   Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
            2.   Division B, Mining;
            3.   Division D, Manufacturing;
            4.   Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
            5.   Division I, Services.
         (b)   In determining the amount of a user’s discharge for purposes of
classification, domestic wastewater discharges exceeding 25,000 GPD or the
weight of biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids (SS) equivalent to that
weight found in 25,000 GPD of sanitary wastes are considered industrial users.
Sanitary wastes, for purposes of this calculation of equivalency, are the
wastes discharged from residential users.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL USER shall mean any other industrial, commercial or
institutional user of the sanitary sewerage system that discharges wastewater
to the treatment works which contain toxic pollutants, poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to contaminate the sludge at the treatment works, or to injure or
to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard
to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or
has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment
works.
      (3)   Industrial user shall also mean any person discharging wastewater
with concentrations in excess of 350 mg/l for BOD or suspended solids or 50 mg/
l for Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN, as defined in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition).
   (B)   The industrial wastewater charges shall be established not less than
one time per year and at the same time domestic user charges are established.
Industrial wastewater charges shall be based on the actual costs for providing
sewer services during the preceding fiscal year. The charges so computed along
with projected increases in costs shall be the basis for estimating the monthly
billings to each such customer for the following fiscal year. The actual costs
shall be determined as soon after the end of each fiscal year as possible and
until such time the charges for the current year shall be based on either the
rates for the year or on estimated rates for the current year.
   (C)   The costs included in the computation of actual charges for the
preceding fiscal year, or of estimated charges for an ensuing fiscal year,
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Operation and maintenance expenses;
      (2)   Insurance, debt service and other fixed costs; and
      (3)   Laboratory and other testing and monitoring costs.
   (D)   Industrial wastewater surcharges, in addition to the normal charges
charged for domestic wastewater as established in §
51.057, shall be established for each of the following parameters:
      (1)   BOD, per pound;
      (2)   Suspended solids, per pound; and
      (3)   Other parameters as applicable; per pound.
   (E)   The surcharges shall be as set out in the town’s fee schedule. In
addition, laboratory costs, monitoring costs and special costs shall be
annualized and added to the monthly surcharge.
   (F)   Industrial wastewater surcharges shall become effective on the first
regular meter reading date for each user after such user is connected to the
city system, and after written notice from the city of classification as an
industrial user. Interim monthly charges based on domestic user charges shall
be invoiced and collected during the period equitable industrial rates are
being developed.
   (G)   The Town Council may establish classes of industrial users and assign
representative strengths of wastewater to each. Such class wastewater
characteristics may recognize analyses of representative users of each class
based on typical data from other sources. To the extent practical, actual data
for each industrial user’s wastewater shall be used. Industrial users assigned
standard strength parameters may request sample analyses of wastewater. Upon
determination of the characteristics on samples representative of the
wastewater on not less than three working days, such characteristics shall be
used in determining the charges until the wastewater may again be sampled.
   (H)   The Town Council may consolidate the component charges of the
industrial wastewater charges into a single volume charge that includes the
characteristic charges computed for a unit volume of 1,000 gallons. Such a
weighted volume charge may be applicable to a class of users or to each user
where his or her actual wastewater characteristics are known.
   (I)   Industrial users exhibiting marked, seasonal load variations shall pay
charges that recognize the dedication or reservation of capacity for the
treatment of their seasonal peak operating loads, and any unusual operation and
maintenance costs directly related to such seasonal loads. This provision shall
apply only to those industrial users whose peaks loads exceed 10% of any
capacity parameter and are at least twice its off-season loads.
   (J)   The user charge system in this subchapter shall take precedence over
any pre-existing agreements concerning the charges to be collected for
providing wastewater treatment services or reserving capacity.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.059 EXCLUDED WASTES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials,
waste materials, wastes, gases or liquids into any sewer forming part of the
sanitary sewerage system, except where these may constitute occasional,
intermittent inclusions in the wastewaters discharged from residential
premises:
      (1)   Any waste, liquid or vapor, at a temperature exceeding 65°C or
150°F or at such lower temperatures that will create hazardous conditions
within, or cause deterioration of, the sanitary sewers;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 50 milligrams per liter
of petroleum substances, non-biodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral
origin;
      (3)   Wastewater containing oil, fat or grease (exclusive of petroleum
substances) of concentrations greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not,
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at the point of
discharge into the sewer system;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Properly shredded
garbage shall not exceed one-half inch in any dimension;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 6.0 or
higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of either
causing damage or creating a hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of
the sanitary sewerage system and wastewater treatment facilities or interfering
with proper operation of the town’s wastewater treatment facilities;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a color that is not removable by the
existing wastewater treatment plant processes and causes the plant effluent to
exceed color requirements for discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a BOD5 in excess of 350 mg/l unless
identified as an industrial waste for billing purposes;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a total suspended solids (TSS)
concentration in excess of 350 mg/l unless identified as an industrial waste
for billing purposes; and/or
      (9)   Any waters or wastes having an ammonia (NH3) concentration in
excess of 30 mg/l, or a TKN concentration in excess of 50 mg/l, unless
identified as an industrial waste for billing purposes.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following materials,
waste materials, waste gases or liquids into any sewer forming part of the
sanitary sewerage system, or into any storm sewer or drain:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha or other hydrocarbon solvents or
oils, or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases including any
waters or wastes which contain, at the point of discharge to the sewer system,
explosive elements such that any single reading on an explosion hazard meter
exceeds 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) or any two successive readings
that exceed 5% of the LEL;
      (2)   Any other solid or viscous substance in quantity or character
capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or interference with proper
operation of wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, ceramic wastes, paper products, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
thread, glass, rags, metal, feathers, bones, tar, plastics, wood, paunch
manure, insulation materials, fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds,
processed grains, viscera or other fleshy particles from processing or packing
plants, lime or similar sludges;
      (3)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or any substance capable of creating
a public nuisance when introduced into the sewerage system; and/or
      (4)   Any unpolluted wastewater into the sewer system, as defined in §
51.001.
   (C)   No person shall discharge into any sewer forming part of the sanitary
sewerage system, any of the following materials in concentrations exceeding the
stated limits:
      (1)   Any toxic or poisonous substance or any other materials in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the wastewater treatment
processes, to cause a violation of any effluent or sludge disposal permit, or
to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to cause a violation of the
water quality standards or effluent standards for the steam or watercourse
receiving the effluent from the town wastewater treatment plant;
      (2)   Concentrations of heavy metals and other incompatible pollutants in
the discharge of any user of the sanitary sewerage system shall not exceed
values listed below (all values are in mg/l) or as amended by state or federal
regulations:
Pollutant Concentration
Pollutant            Concentration
Antimony             1.5
Arsenic              0.01
Cadmium              0.1
Chromium, hexavalent 0.1
Chromium, total      0.5
Copper               0.5
Cyanide, total       0.1
Lead                 0.5
Mercury              0.05
Nickel               0.5
Phenolic compounds   5.0
Selenium             0.1
Silver               0.1
Zinc                 0.5
 
      (3)   Any radioactive isotope in concentration greater than that
permitted by the latest effective regulations promulgated under applicable
federal law.
   (D)   In the event of conflicts between values established in this section
and values established by applicable state or federal rules, regulations, laws
and the like, the more stringent value shall apply. Effluent limits contained
in the town’s national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit,
the limits of the town’s sludge disposal permit, and water quality standards
assigned Newport River shall at no time be exceeded or contravened as a result
of discharges to the town’s sewer system either within or without the values
established in this section.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.060 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is prohibited from discharging any substance as
specified in this chapter shall have the sole responsibility to devise, at his
or her own expense, the methods for eliminating the problem so as to make any
waste discharge eligible for a permit or for compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   Each user shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this section and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the town shall be constructed, operated,
and maintained in good working order at the user’s expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the town for review, and shall be acceptable to the town before construction
of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no
way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of
this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the wastewater pretreatment facilities
or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the town prior
to the user’s initiation of the changes. All records relating to compliance
with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency or the state upon request. The town reserves
the right to have these plans reviewed by the town’s engineer or other
consultant in order to determine the overall effect on the municipal wastewater
system. This review shall be at the expense of the industrial customer.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand separators (traps) shall be required by the town
for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease, oil and/or sand and/
or other substances in excessive amounts. Gas stations, automotive repair
shops, restaurants, cafeterias and other similar businesses shall provide
grease, oil and/or sand separators. The Public Utilities Director shall
determine where such installations are necessary and the minimum-cleaning
(pumping) schedule for said facilities.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.061 FLOW AND CONCENTRATION CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any wastes or wastewaters in a slug, as
defined in §
51.001.
   (B)   Any person discharging or proposing to discharge wastes which may
include slugs, as defined in §
51.001, may be required to provide facilities, or adopt procedures, for
regulating, controlling or equalizing the concentration of any constituent or
the rate of waste discharge. Such facilities shall have a capacity of at least
80% of the normal volume of one 24-hour production period of wastewater and an
outlet to the sewer controlled by a waterworks-type rate controller, or other
device approved by the Public Utilities Director. Approval of a device does not
relieve the discharger of the requirement to control the discharge rate.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.062 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (A)   The volume or quantity of industrial waste discharged by any person
into the sanitary sewerage system shall be measured by one or more of the
following methods.
      (1)   If the volume of water used by any person in his or her industrial
or process operations is substantially the same as the volume secured from the
town waterworks system, then the volume of water purchased shall be considered
to be the volume of waste discharged.
      (2)   If, on the premises of any person discharging industrial waste into
the sanitary sewerage system, a substantial portion of the water secured from
the town waterworks system is not used for industrial purposes, or is not
returned to the sanitary sewerage system, the quantity of industrial waste
shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   By a meter (or meters) on the water supply line (or lines) to
his or her industrial and/or process operations;
         (b)   By a meter (or meters) on the waste line (or waste lines) from
his or her industrial and/or process operations; and
         (c)   If meters as required under divisions (A)(2)(a) and (A)(2)(b)
above have not been installed, by an estimate made by the Public Utilities
Director of the proportion of the water purchased which is used for industrial
purposes and returned to the sanitary sewerage system.
   (B)   If any person discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste
into the sanitary sewerage system does not secure his or her entire water
supply requirements from the town waterworks system such person shall install
and maintain a meter (or meters) on the waste line (or waste lines) from his or
her industrial and/or process operations, or shall install such additional
meters on the private water supply as required to permit a determination of the
total quantity discharged to the sewers from both sources under procedures
comparable to divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.063 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   (A)   Any person who is discharging industrial waste into the sanitary
sewerage system shall provide reasonable access, means and facilities for the
purpose of permitting the convenient observations, measurements and sampling of
such industrial waste. If such access, means and facilities are not otherwise
available such person shall construct and maintain an accessible and safe
control manhole on the waste line or lines for such purposes.
   (B)   Any person proposing to discharge industrial waste in quantities
greater than 25,000 gallons per day (GPD), or with strengths equivalent to
25,000 gallons per day (GPD) of domestic wastewater, shall provide a control
manhole in accordance with the requirements of the town.
   (C)   The Public Utilities Director shall determine if an automatic sampling
station is required. If it is required, it shall be constructed in such a
manner so as to be easily accessed by the town at any time. The sampler shall
operate in a flow proportional mode. The sampling station shall be located at a
mutually agreeable point between representatives of the industry and the Public
Utilities Director. The operation and maintenance of the sampling station shall
be the responsibility of the industry. Samples shall be split with the industry
upon request.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.064 DETERMINATION OF CHARACTER AND STRENGTH OF WASTES.
   (A)   The industrial waste and/or other pollutants being discharged by any
person into the sanitary sewerage system shall be subject to periodic
inspection. A determination of character and strength of such wastes may be
made annually, or more often as may be deemed necessary by the Public Utilities
Director.
   (B)   Samples shall be collected manually or mechanically over such period
of time and composited in such a manner as to be representative of the wastes
being discharged. In general, this means that automatic samplers shall operate
in the flow proportional mode. The laboratory methods followed in the
examination of such wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of
Standard Methods or equivalent publication as specified by the appropriate
regulatory agency.
   (C)   The determination of the character, strength or quantity of the wastes
as made by the Town Manager or his or her authorized assistants shall be
binding as a basis for computation of fees, charges or for actions by the Town
Council. When requested by the person discharging wastes, the samples may be
split to permit analysis by the discharger, or a qualified independent
laboratory, for the discharger’s information. The person discharging wastes may
request additional sampling and analyses which will be performed, as soon as
practical, with all costs, as determined by the town, being borne by the
discharger.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014)
§ 51.065 STOPPAGE OF SEWER PIPES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge, throw or deposit any substance into
a municipal sewer pipe that causes a stoppage in the sewer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fill his or her land or
cause his or her land to be filled in such manner or way that any existing
sanitary or storm sewer is affected thereby, except under the following
conditions.
      (1)   Prior to filling or making any contract for filling, the owner
shall obtain a permit from the town and shall post a bond guaranteeing to
replace, repair or extend the storm or sanitary sewer, as the case may be, to
the newly created waterline at the expense of the owner or adjoining owners, as
the case may be, at the conclusion of the work.
      (2)   No owner shall at any time, individually or through a contractor,
cause filling or spoil to be deposited upon any of the public areas (streets,
alleys or other accessways) in which storm or sanitary sewer facilities are
located without safeguarding such filling by direct contact with the Public
Works Director to ensure the proper fall or relocation if necessary.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.066 ILLEGAL DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY OR STORM SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall pour, throw or discharge any substance, either solid
or liquid, into any sanitary or storm sewer at any manhole or at any opening
therein other than a sewer connection; nor shall any person discharge into any
sanitary or storm sewer any substance likely to cause undue injury to the same
or any substance of such high causticity or of a sufficiently acid nature, or
of an organic chemical or petroleum chemical nature (fuel, motor oil,
pesticides, and similar chemicals) to interfere materially with the equipment
used in connection therewith or that might cause harm or pollute the sanitary
sewer or storm sewer system.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any rainwater
from roofs of buildings, gutters or downspouts or any surface water entering
any catch basin to drain into any part of the sanitary sewer system of the
town.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow the discharge
from heat pumps using water for heat exchange into the sanitary sewer system of
the town.
(Ord. passed 5-3-2011; Ord. passed 9-11-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 52: WATER AND SEWER RATES
Section
   
52.01   Deposits
   
52.02   Water rates
   
52.03   Sewer rates
   
52.04   Water and sewer tap fees
   
52.05   Impact fees
   
52.06   Miscellaneous fees
§ 52.01 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   New residential and commercial property owners with three-fourths-inch
or one-inch meters shall provide a deposit as listed in the town’s fee
schedule. Rental properties shall require a deposit as listed in the town’s fee
schedule.
   (B)   (1)   Deposits for new services larger than one-inch are listed in the
town’s fee schedule.
      (2)   Deposits for services outside the town limits are listed in the
town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   There shall be an account set up fee for all new accounts, as listed
in the town’s fee schedule.
(Effective 7-1-2014)
§ 52.02 WATER RATES.
   Water rates are listed in the town’s fee schedule.
(Effective 7-1-2014)
§ 52.03 SEWER RATES.
   (A)   Septic tank maintenance fee.
      (1)   (a)   Customers that are located within the city limits or have
been annexed shall pay a monthly septic tank maintenance fee as listed in the
town’s fee schedule.
         (b)   This fee shall cover the costs of septic system maintenance
including tank pumping and cleaning or replacing drain fields that have failed
due to age or other non-controllable incidents.
      (2)   The town shall charge to the owner or other responsible party any
cost of repairs to a septic system that are due to negligence, disturbing the
system by digging or other actions that damage the system beyond normal usage
and wear.
      (3)   All rules and regulations of the County Health Department or the
state regarding subsurface treatment systems shall be obeyed at all times and
shall be additionally enforced by the town.
   (B)   Sewer. Sewer shall be calculated at 100% of the metered water usage.
   (C)   Industrial sewer surcharges. The surcharge shall be calculated by the
following formula:
 
Surcharge = [(O & M cost/unit of BOD) + (O & M cost/unit of suspended solids) +
(O & M cost/unit of any pollutant)] x volume
 
(Effective 7-1-2014)
§ 52.04 WATER AND SEWER TAP FEES.
   (A)   Water tap fees are listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (B)   For contractor installed taps, there shall be a meter installation and
inspection fee (facility fee) as listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   Sewer tap fees are listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (D)   Water and sewer taps in excess of six feet in depth shall be charged
at a rate as listed in the town’s fee schedule. This fee shall be paid prior to
a certificate of occupancy being issued or service established.
   (E)   (1)   If a bore is necessary there shall be a fee as listed in the
town’s fee schedule.
      (2)   This fee shall be paid prior to a certificate of occupancy being
issued or service established.
   (F)   If a road cut is necessary, there shall be a fee as listed in the
town’s fee schedule. This fee shall be paid prior to a certificate of occupancy
being issued or service established.
(Effective 7-1-2014)
§ 52.05 IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Water service impact fees are listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (B)   Multiple residential dwelling unit complexes (apartments, mobile
homes, condominiums and the like) shall pay impact fees at a rate listed in the
town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   Sewer service impact fees are listed in the town’s fee schedule.
(Effective 7-1-2014)
§ 52.06 MISCELLANEOUS FEES.
   (A)   The town shall charge a reconnection fee for the restoration of water
service after disconnection for non-payment. This fee is listed in the town’s
fee schedule.
   (B)   The town shall charge a service restoration fee for sewer taps that
have been plugged due to non-payment or illegal discharges into or abuse of the
sewer system. This fee is listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (C)   There shall be a returned check fee for each returned check. This fee
is listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (D)   There shall be a fee per trip for attempting to re-read water meters
obstructed by parked vehicles, piles or trash or debris, vegetation, fences and
the like. This fee is listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (E)   There shall be a service fee for miscellaneous services. This includes
temporary service for up to two weeks for cleaning rental units, showing homes
and the like. This fee is listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (F)   The Utilities Director is authorized to negotiate fees for sewer
camera services at his or her discretion, when appropriate. This fee is listed
in the town’s fee schedule.
   (G)   There shall be an administration fee for all cases of meter tampering.
This fee is listed in the town’s fee schedule.
   (H)   There shall be an administrative fee for all cases of illegal waste
water discharges. This fee is listed in the town’s fee schedule.
(Effective 7-1-2014)
CHAPTER 53: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
53.01   Declaration of applicability of chapter
   
53.02   Definitions of stages of water shortages
   
53.03   Publicity
   
53.04   Stage I water shortage condition
   
53.05   Stage II water shortage condition
   
53.06   Stage III water shortage condition
   
53.07   Abatement; lifting of restrictions imposed during a water shortage
   
53.08   Enforcement
   
53.09   Variances
   
53.10   Review
   
53.11   Effectiveness
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DECLARATION OF APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   In the event it appears that water demand on the Newport Department of Water
and Sewer (NDWS) water system may exceed supply and transmission capabilities,
the Utilities Director shall recommend to the Manager of the town that
voluntary water conservation be implemented. The Utilities Director, following
consultation with the Manager, shall declare a Stage I water shortage condition
advisory requesting voluntary water conservation by consumers. In the event
that voluntary conservation measures fail to relieve the demand on the system,
the Utilities Director may shall advance to a Stage II or Stage III water
shortage condition. The Utilities Director, following consultation with the
Manager, shall declare that a Stage II or Stage III water shortage condition
exists.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2002; Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS OF STAGES OF WATER SHORTAGES.
   (A)   If the average daily run time of all wells, for ten consecutive days
exceeds 12 hours daily, a Stage I water shortage condition shall be declared.
   (B)   If the average daily run time of all wells, for seven consecutive days
exceeds 15 hours daily, a Stage II water shortage condition shall be declared.
   (C)   If the average daily run time of all wells, for three consecutive days
exceeds 18 hours daily, or there is only one well available for service, a
Stage III water shortage condition shall be declared.
   (D)   In emergency situations it may be necessary to go straight to a Stage
II or Stage III water shortage condition without first implementing lesser
water shortage stages.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.03 PUBLICITY.
   (A)   In the event that a water shortage condition occurs, an extensive
publicity campaign will be initiated using public media and specialized methods
to inform the public of an impending or existing water shortage.
   (B)   This publicity campaign shall include a press release to local
newspapers, radio and television stations. In the event of an emergency
shortage situation, direct contact shall be made with the press, radio and
television stations.
   (C)   If a water shortage condition occurs, a notice of water shortage along
with a copy of this chapter shall be prepared and hand delivered to all water
customers that have water meters one inch and larger in size.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.04 STAGE I WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   Generally. In the event a Stage I water shortage condition is
declared, the following guidelines shall apply:
      (1)   The publicity campaign identified in §
53.03 shall be initiated; and
      (2)   The conservation measures in division (B) below will be encouraged
and recommended.
   (B)   Voluntary water use restrictions. In the event a Stage I water
shortage condition is declared, the following guidelines shall apply and the
public shall be encouraged to adhere to the following:
      (1)   Limit car washing to the minimum;
      (2)   Limit lawn and garden watering to that, which is necessary for
plants to survive;
      (3)   Do not wash down outside areas such as sidewalks, patios, parking
lots, service bays or aprons and the like;
      (4)   Do not leave faucets running while shaving or rinsing dishes;
      (5)   Water shrubbery to the minimum required reusing household water
when possible;
      (6)   Limit use of clothes washers and dishwashers and when used, operate
fully loaded;
      (7)   Use of showers for bathing, rather than bathtub and limit showers
to no more than four minutes;
      (8)   Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage;
      (9)   The use of disposable and biodegradable dishes;
      (10)   The use of flow restrictive and water saving devices;
      (11)   Limit hours of operation of water cooled air conditioners; and
      (12)   All residents, businesses and institutions are requested to
temporarily delay new landscape work until the water shortage has ended.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2002; Ord. passed 6-24-2010) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 STAGE II WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   Compliance. In the event the Utilities Director issues a declaration
of a Stage II water shortage condition, then it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation, to use or permit the use of water from the NDWS
water system for any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the
declaration of water shortage has been rescinded. In exercising the authority
for declaring a water shortage condition consideration shall be given to water
storage levels and available sources of supply, available usable storage on
hand, drawdown rates, the projected supply capability, outlook for
precipitation, daily water use patterns and availability of water from other
sources.
   (B)   Restrictions. In the event a Stage I water shortage condition is in
effect, and demand increases, equals or exceeds the system supply, or an
emergency situation arises, a Stage II water shortage condition shall be
proclaimed. In addition to the voluntary guidelines already in effect, it shall
be unlawful to use water supplied by the NDWS water system in the following
manner:
      (1)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers and vegetable
gardens except on even or odd days according to whether the address is even or
odd;
      (2)   To fill newly constructed swimming and/or wading pools or refill
swimming and/or wading pools which have been drained;
      (3)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boards, airplanes or any
other type of mobile equipment, including commercial washing except on even or
odd days according to whether the address is even or odd;
      (4)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways, service
station aprons, parking lots, office building, exteriors of existing or newly
constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks or patios, or to use water for other
similar purposes;
      (5)   To use water from public or private fire hydrants for any purpose
other than fire suppression or other public emergency;
      (6)   To operate or induce water into any ornamental fountain, pool or
pond or other structure making similar use of water;
      (7)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias or other food
establishments, except upon request;
      (8)   To operate water cooled air conditioners or other equipment that
does not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety are adversely
affected; and
      (9)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or to intentionally waste
water.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2002; Ord. passed 6-24-2010) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.06 STAGE III WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   Generally. In the event the Utilities Director issues a declaration of
Stage III water shortage condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the NDWS water
system for any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the declaration
of water shortage has been rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring
a water shortage condition consideration shall be given to available sources of
supply, available usable storage, water storage levels, drawdown rates, the
projected supply capability, outlook for precipitation, daily water use
patterns and availability of water from other sources.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   In the event a Stage II water shortage condition exists and water
usage exceeds the system supply, then a Stage III water shortage condition
shall be declared.
      (2)   In addition to the restrictions for Stage I and Stage II Water
shortage conditions, the following prohibitions shall also apply:
         (a)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers and vegetable
gardens;
         (b)   To induce water into any pool;
         (c)   To use water outside a structure for any use other than an
emergency involving a fire;
         (d)   To operate an evaporative air conditioner which recycles water,
except during operating hours of business; and
         (e)   The use of disposable utensils, cups and plates is required at
all eating establishments.
      (3)   In addition, fire protection shall be maintained by drafting of
ponds, rivers and the like wherever possible.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2002; Ord. passed 6-24-2010) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 ABATEMENT; LIFTING OF RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED DURING A WATER SHORTAGE.
   (A)   Water shortage conditions will expire when the Utilities Director,
after consultation with the Manager of the town, deems that the condition,
which caused the alert, has abated.
   (B)   The Utilities Director, upon consulting with the Town Manager, may
lessen the level of restrictions from level to level or remove the restrictions
entirely when the trigger conditions no longer apply or the emergency situation
has been abated.
   (C)   An appropriate press release shall be given to the media to announce
the lessening or removal of water use restrictions.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2002; Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of the water shortage response plan will be enforced by Town
Utility Department and police personnel. Violators may be reported to the Town
Manager (townmanager@townofhewport.com) or to either Town Hall (252-223-4749)
or to the Utility Department at 252-223-4418.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.09 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any water use customer may apply in writing to the Town Manager for a
variance to these restrictions. The Utilities Director, after consulting with
the Town Manager, may issue a variance to the restrictions if the conditions
warrant the variance.
   (B)   Each variance request shall be investigated by the Utilities Director
on a case by case basis.
   (C)   If a variance is warranted, the Utilities Director shall issue a
written permit for the variance. The permit shall contain specific conditions
for the customer to use water that would be prohibited under the water
restriction level. Such water use permits shall only be valid until the water
use restrictions have ended or the current emergency has been abated.
   (D)   Examples of conditions that warrant an exemption from water use
restrictions include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The operation and maintenance of medical equipment;
      (2)   Heating and cooling systems in medical facilities; and
      (3)   Any condition that would directly effect the health of a person.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.10 REVIEW.
   This chapter shall be reviewed and updated as necessary at a minimum
schedule of every seven years, or when conditions or regulations change that
require revising this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.11 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The effectiveness of the town water shortage response plan will be
determined by comparing the stated water conservation goals with observed water
use reduction data. Other factors to be considered include frequency of plan
activation, any problem periods without activation, total number of violation
citations, desired reductions attained and evaluation of demand reductions
compared to the previous year’s seasonal data.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties for failure to abide by the requirements of this chapter
shall be as follows.
      (1)   (a)   The first violation of this chapter shall be a written
warning to cease and desist in the use of water contrary to the provisions of
this chapter. The written warning shall contain the penalties stated below for
the customer’s reference.
         (b)   Failure to cease and desist in the use of water contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall result in a civil penalty of $50 for the first
violation.
      (2)   A second violation of the provisions of this chapter shall result
in a civil penalty of $250 for the second violation.
      (3)   A third violation of this chapter shall result in a $500 civil
penalty and the immediate termination of water service for a minimum period of
24 hours, or longer if the conditions that caused the violation continue.
      (4)   A fourth violation of this chapter shall result in a $1,000 civil
penalty and the immediate termination of water service until the water shortage
condition has been abated.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the penalties listed above from
being applied in succession on the same or subsequent days if the customer does
not abate the violation condition. In an emergency condition, the Utilities
Director shall have the ability to order the termination of any water service
or use thereof that could cause the town water system to violate state or
federal rules and or regulations.
(Ord. passed 6-24-2010)
CHAPTER 54: REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
Section
   
54.01   Authority
   
54.02   Municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreements
   
54.03   Reimbursement procedures and funding
§ 54.01 AUTHORITY.
   The town hereby authorizes the reimbursement of certain negotiated municipal
infrastructure costs incurred by a developer or property owner. The
reimbursement shall be governed by a municipal infrastructure reimbursement
agreement negotiated by the Town Manager or designee. All municipal
infrastructure reimbursement agreements in excess of $100,000 shall be approved
by the Town Council. Additional authority for such agreements may exist
elsewhere, and this chapter is supplementary to such authority. This chapter is
authorized by G.S. § 160A-499.
(Ord. 2025-06, passed 10-9-2025)
§ 54.02 MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.
   The Town Manager, or designee, is authorized to negotiate municipal
infrastructure reimbursement agreements with private developers and property
owners in accordance with this chapter, G.S. § 160A-499, and other applicable
policies and procedures. Reimbursements may be paid from any lawful source. The
municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement shall be available only for
design and construction of municipal infrastructure that is included in the
town’s capital improvement plan and serves the developer or property owner. For
the purpose of this chapter, municipal infrastructure includes, without
limitation, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, lift stations, stormwater
drainage devices, lines and culverts, water and wastewater treatment
facilities, streets, bridges, curb and gutter, sidewalks, greenways, bikeways,
traffic control devices, and other associated facilities. In negotiating
municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreements, the town shall require the
private developer’s or property owner’s compliance with the requirements of
G.S. §§ 143-128.2 and 143-129 relating to the public advertising and bidding
requirements that would be applicable if the municipal infrastructure
construction contract had been awarded by the town. Any developer or property
owner that fails to properly follow the public advertising and bid opening
practices required by this chapter shall be in material breach of the municipal
infrastructure reimbursement agreement, and such developer or property owner
shall not receive any reimbursement. This chapter does not limit the Town
Manager or Council from negotiating the placement of additional obligations on
the developer or property owner, including, without limitation, additional
procurement practices set forth in G.S. Ch. 143.
(Ord. 2025-06, passed 10-9-2025)
§ 54.03 REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES AND FUNDING.
   Reimbursements under a municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement may
be paid from any lawful source. Without limiting the foregoing, the town may
provide reimbursement by fee credits against required fees when a developer or
property owner installs improvements of a type that generally would be paid for
by the town out of a capital reserve account funded by development fees. The
municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement shall set forth a description
of the infrastructure that is subject to reimbursement, the amount of
reimbursement for which the developer is eligible, and the schedule for
reimbursement. No reimbursements shall be made unless and until the developer
submits a claim for reimbursement and the town approves the claim as being in
accordance with the municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement.
(Ord. 2025-06, passed 10-9-2025)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
      
72.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
74.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Trains blocking streets
   
70.02   Noisy operation of vehicle
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Obedience to; legibility and the like
   
70.16   Semaphores and manually operated devices
   
70.17   Official traffic-control devices
   
70.18   Designation of main traveled or through streets and highways
   
70.19   Stopping or yielding right-of-way other than at intersections
   
70.20   Applicability to authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.21   Direction of traffic by police
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 TRAINS BLOCKING STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any train to block any street in the town longer
than five minutes. Any emergency shall be a defense to any violation of this
section.
(1991 Code, § 16-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 NOISY OPERATION OF VEHICLE.
   The operation of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise, or in such manner as to cause squealing or
screeching of tires, or in such manner as to cause the tires to propel rock,
sand or gravel is prohibited.
(1991 Code, § 16-2) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 OBEDIENCE TO; LEGIBILITY AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable to the operation of the vehicle and placed in
accordance with the traffic ordinances, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this subchapter.
   (B)   No provisions of this subchapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without
signs being placed to give notice thereof.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006)
§ 70.16 SEMAPHORES AND MANUALLY OPERATED DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to fail to obey mechanical or manually operated
semaphores or stop and go signs within the corporate limits, when operated by
any police officer or member of the schoolboy patrol, so designated and
authorized by school officials, and when such schoolboy patrol member is in
authorized uniform.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   There shall be erected or have been erected at all intersections indicated
on the geographical mapping system (GIS) attached hereto (entitled “Town of
Newport Traffic Control, Signs and Devices,”) stop signs and yield signs as
depicted on the attached GIS map. All such stop signs or yield signs are hereby
declared to be official traffic-control devices placed in accordance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006)
§ 70.18 DESIGNATION OF MAIN TRAVELED OR THROUGH STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   Where such official traffic-control devices are erected at an intersection
as shown on the attached GIS map, the street or road which does not have a stop
sign facing traffic on it at that intersection shall be the main traveled or
through highway or street.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006)
§ 70.19 STOPPING OR YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY OTHER THAN AT INTERSECTIONS.
   When a stop or yield sign, as indicated on the attached GIS map, has been
erected or installed at a place other than an intersection, it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop or yield right-of-way in
obedience thereto and yield the right of way to pedestrians and other vehicles.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.20 APPLICABILITY TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   A driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer may:
      (1)   Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the posted speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified direction so long as he or she does not endanger life or property.
   (C)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicles from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006)
§ 70.21 DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BY POLICE.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this Traffic Code, for which no
other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of the provisions of §§
70.15 through
70.19 or the provisions of G.S. § 20-158, shall be punishable by a fine of $50
for each such offense, unless some other, greater fine or penalty is provided
by the General Statutes of North Carolina applicable to violations of G.S. §
20-158, in which case, such greater fine or penalty shall apply.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(1) above, violation of any other
provisions of §§
70.15 through
70.21 shall be punishable by a fine of $10; provided, however, that if a
violator shall appear at the Town Hall within 48 hours of the violation and pay
a penalty of $5, there shall be no fine imposed.
(Ord. passed 7-5-2006)
CHAPTER 71: PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Section
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Permit required
   
71.03   Exceptions
   
71.04   Certain activities prohibited
   
71.05   Revocation of permit
   
71.06   Interference prohibited
   
71.07   Frequency restricted
   
71.08   Denials and appeals
   
71.09   Additional regulations applicable to picketing
   
71.10   Special events support policy
   
71.11   Sale, service and consumption of beer and wine during special events
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. The portion of any street lying between the intersections with other
streets.
   GROUP DEMONSTRATION. Any assembly together or concert of action between or
among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making
known any position or promotion of such persons or of or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention to
such assembly.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any
kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public
grounds or places.
   PICKET LINE. Any two or more persons joining together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of
any organization or class of persons.
(1991 Code, § 16-91) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986)
§ 71.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in
any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place within the town unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 16-92) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational or recreational activity where such activity is under the
supervision and direction of proper school authorities;
   (C)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
   (D)   Bands or marching units proceeding to or from a point of assembly or
parade termination to participate in or after participating in a parade; and
   (E)   The annual Christmas parade conducted by the committee appointed by
the Town Council.
(1991 Code, § 16-93) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986)
§ 71.04 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:
   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm or replica thereof or
any weapon or article, including, but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks
or flashlights, which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; provided,
however, that members of the armed forces of the United States of America while
in uniform and discharging their lawful duties and law enforcement personnel
while on duty may carry firearms, nightsticks, flashlights, swords and other
weapons regularly carried during performance of duties, and that it shall be
permissible for school marching bands to use unloaded rifles or replicas
thereof for rifle or twirling drill, for members of the color guard of the
Veterans of Foreign Wars and the American Legion to carry swords and unloaded
rifles or replicas thereof, and for clowns to use firearms firing blanks for
the entertainment of the general public;
   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or vicious animal, whether leashed or
unleashed;
   (C)   The conduct of a parade, picket line or group demonstration during
hours of darkness without prior authorization of the Town Council granted at a
regular or special meeting thereof;
   (D)   Parades, picket lines and group demonstrations within any public
building or structure; and
   (E)   Distribution of written materials or any candy, prizes or favors
during a parade.
(1991 Code, § 16-95) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall have authority to revoke any permit granted for a
parade, picket line or group demonstration and to stop and disburse any parade,
picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
   (A)   The violation by any participant of §
71.04;
   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit; and
   (C)   The conduct of the parade, picket line or group demonstration for any
purpose other than that set forth in the permit application.
(1991 Code, § 16-96) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986)
§ 71.06 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade,
picket line or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit
duly issued by the Town Manager.
(1991 Code, § 16-97) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.07 FREQUENCY RESTRICTED.
   No more than one parade may be conducted on any one calendar day.
(1991 Code, § 16-98) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986)
§ 71.08 DENIALS AND APPEALS.
   (A)   In the event that an application for a parade permit, picketing permit
or group demonstration permit is refused by the Town Manager, the applicant may
apply to the Town Council for a hearing concerning the same.
   (B)   At such hearing, the applicant shall have the burden of proof of
showing that the proposed parade will not be contrary to the health, welfare,
safety and morals of the town. The Town Manager shall be heard in rebuttal to
the granting of the application.
   (C)   If, after hearing the applicant and Town Manager, the Town Council
shall find as a fact that the proposed parade will not be contrary to the
health, welfare, safety and morals of the town and that the application
otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter, the application shall be
granted by the Town Council. Otherwise, the action of the Town Manager in
denying the application shall be upheld.
(1991 Code, § 16-101) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986)
§ 71.09 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PICKETING.
   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations.
   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
for vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Not more than ten picketers promoting the same objective shall be
permitted at any one time to use either one of the two sidewalks within a
single block.
   (C)   Picketers may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding
two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective for which the
picketing is done provided the words used are not derogatory or defamatory in
nature; the staff on which such placard is carried shall not exceed 40 inches
in length, must be made of wood, shall not exceed three-fourths of an inch in
diameter at any point, and must be blunt at each end.
   (D)   Picketers must march in single file and not abreast and not march
closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Picketers shall
not be allowed to walk more than five feet from the curbline and shall be in
continuous motion.
   (E)   If picketers promoting different objectives desire to use the same
sidewalk for picketing and such use would result in the presence of more than
ten pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group of
pickets for the use of such sidewalk on an equitable basis.
(1991 Code, § 16-102) (Ord. passed 9-18-1986)
§ 71.10 SPECIAL EVENTS SUPPORT POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Special events provide opportunities to promote community welfare
and quality of life, help build a sense of community, showcase local and
regional talent, enrich cultural opportunities and draw first-time visitors to
the town and contribute to the local economy.
      (2)   The town recognizes the benefits and opportunities made available
through special events. Therefore, the town seeks to facilitate, promote,
coordinate and/or participate in special events that provide a benefit to the
larger community and fit within the capacities of public parks, facilities and
streets.
      (3)   This policy outlines a process for approval of events requiring
special assistance from the town, it further aids in identification of
resources required and cost allocation for the provision of services during
special events.
      (4)   It is the policy of the town that any approved special event should
not result in the expenditure of excessive public resources and that the town
should be compensated by the event organizer for costs incurred by the town.
      (5)   This policy is intended to work in concert with all other
applicable rules, regulations, laws and ordinances of the town.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMUNITY PROGRAMMING PARTNERS. Any individual, group or organization
which has a contractual agreement and a budgeted arrangement with the town to
offer special events. Support offered by the town for special events will be
limited to those terms and conditions outlined in the contract between the town
and the community programming partner.
      CUSTOMER SERVICE COORDINATOR. The staff member assigned by the Town
Manager’s office to serve as liaison between the town and the event organizer
during the application review process. This individual will seek input from the
affected departments and any support organizations (Newport Fire and Emergency
Medical Services, and if necessary Carteret County, State of North Carolina) as
may be necessary. This individual is also responsible for ensuring that all
deadlines and requirements of this policy are met.
      EVENT ORGANIZER. Any individual, firm or organization proposing a special
event:
         (a)   On public property controlled by the town; or
         (b)   On private property within the city limits or within the town’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction if the event organizer requests support service
and/or town resources or personnel.
      EVENT PERMIT. Upon approval and payment of fees, the Town Manager’s
office shall issue the event organizer a permit to conduct the special event.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Refers to all town-owned or maintained parks, buildings,
facilities, athletic fields, public streets and the right-of-way of public
streets.
      SPECIAL EVENT. An event occurring on public property controlled by the
town. This includes, but is not limited to, road races, public gatherings,
parades, competitions, concerts, festivals, neighborhood events and
entertainment/amusement events. This does not include events conducted by the
town or pre-existing arrangements with existing community programming partners.
Event organizers for events held on private property shall make application
pursuant to this policy if the nature and scope of the event will involve town
personnel or resources.
      SPECIAL EVENT APPLICATION. A form required by the town whereby the event
organizer shall apply to utilize public property and/or public resources or
personnel for a special event. The application will be submitted to the
customer service coordinator.
      SUPPORT SERVICE. Services provided by the town to ensure that a special
event is conducted in such a way as to protect the safety, health, property and
general security of the public and integrity of public property. Each
department head or designee shall estimate the town support service
requirements and costs for each special event. This includes manpower,
equipment, supplies and consumables required to service the special event.
   (C)   Classes of special events.
      (1)   Class A.
         (a)   A special event that meets either of the following criteria:
            1.   May require 200 or more extra staff hours by town employees;
or
            2.   Is expected to draw an approximate number of spectators and
participants that is more than 5,001 persons within a consecutive 24-hour time
period.
         (b)   Class A event applications must be submitted to the customer
service coordinator no later than 45 days prior to the event date.
      (2)   Class B.
         (a)   A special event that meets either of the following criteria:
            1.   May require between 100 to 199 extra staff hours by town
employees; or
            2.   Is expected to draw an approximate number of spectators and
participants that is between 2,001 and 5,000 persons within a consecutive 24-
hour time period.
         (b)   Class B event applications must be submitted to the customer
service coordinator no later than 45 days prior to the event date.
      (3)   Class C.
         (a)   A special event that meets either of the following criteria:
            1.   May require between 99 or less extra staff hours by town
employees; or
            2.   Is expected to draw an approximate number of spectators and
participants that is 2,000 persons or less within a consecutive 24-hour time
period.
         (b)   Class C event applications must be submitted to the customer
service coordinator no later than 45 days prior to the event date.
      (4)   Class D. A special event which may require no or very limited staff
hours by town employees other than dropping off barricades or cones and the
like. Staff time is limited to permit application review and nominal support
for the event. Events of this nature are normally confined to a single block on
a street or limited use of public facilities. Class D event applications must
be submitted to the customer service coordinator no later than ten days prior
to the event date.
      (5)   Exceptions to deadlines. Applications that fail to meet the
deadlines outlined above may be accepted by the town if, in the opinion of the
customer service coordinator, there is sufficient time to process and approve
the application, identify any conditions of approval and arrange resources to
effectively service the event.
   (D)   Special events permit process.
      (1)   Application. Any event organizer desiring to hold a special event
on any public property in the town or owned by town or which will involve town
resources or personnel must complete an application on the appropriate form and
submit it to the customer service coordinator no later than the time specified
by the event class outlined in division (C) above. At the time of submission,
the event organizer shall pay the application fee and submit the event location
and layout. Applications for special events will be available on the town web
site or in the office of the customer service coordinator.
      (2)   Department review.
         (a)   The department head of all town departments will review the
application and make specific recommendations concerning the following:
            1.   Recommended changes to the proposed location, scope, date and
time for the special event; and
            2.   The type, amount and anticipated charges for any town manpower
or other resources needed for the special event.
         (b)   The department heads shall ensure that the review and action on
the proposed special event is completed and returned to the customer service
coordinator no later than 30 days prior to the date of the Class A, B or C
event.
      (3)   Town administrative review. The completed application and
department review materials will be forwarded to the Town Manager’s office for
review and analysis. With the exception of Class D events, the Town Manager’s
officer shall ensure that their review and action on the proposed special event
is completed no later than 25 days prior to the event date.
      (4)   Appeal. Written appeals to a decision made by the Town Manager to
deny approval of an application may be presented to Town Council within 15
calendar days of said decision. Applicants may appeal only in the event of a
denial of an application. Appeal of decisions pertaining to fees, costs or
conditions of a special event are not permitted.
      (5)   Payment of fees. No later than 20 days prior to the event date, the
event organizer will remit to the town the fees for the special event at which
time the permit will be issued by the Town Manager’s office.
      (6)   Issuance of event permit. No special event shall take place without
a duly executed and issued permit pursuant to the guidelines outlined in this
policy.
      (7)   Execution of event. Events shall be executed by the event
organizer.
   (E)   Criteria for evaluation. The criteria for evaluating and scheduling
special events are as follows:
      (1)   Completeness of application and event layout;
      (2)   Impact and cost of the event on public health, welfare and safety;
      (3)   Impact and cost of the event on town support services;
      (4)   Impact of the event on the environment;
      (5)   Frequency of the same or similar event(s) as well as potential
conflicts with previously approved events;
      (6)   Impact on the surrounding businesses or residences;
      (7)   Ability for the park or public place to remain open to other users,
unless a street closure permit has been issued;
      (8)   Perceived benefit of event for town community;
      (9)   Likelihood of participation by town residents;
      (10)   Previous history of event organizer in facilitating special
events; and
      (11)   Ability of event organizer to achieve goals set forth for special
events.
   (F)   Special event estimated cost matrix.
      (1)   A $25 non-refundable application processing fee will be charged for
all but Class D events. The application fee is due at the time of application.
 
Fees  Non-Refundable Fees B.            Refundable Fees    Insurance
      A.                                                   Requirements
Class Facility Fee        Staff Charges Sanitation Deposit Policy Minimum
A     Per fee structure   TBD           $300               $1,000,000
B     Per fee structure   TBD           $200               $1,000,000
C     Per fee structure   TBD           $100               $1,000,000
D     Per fee structure   TBD           0                  0
 
      (2)   The application fee, facility usage fee and staff charges fees are
non-refundable. The sanitation deposit will be returned in full provided that
the property is left in appropriate order and no damage is reported. Failure to
return the town facilities to their pre-event condition will result in loss of
deposit, liability for repair and/or additional clean up fees as determined by
the town, as well as potential denial of future applications. The town’s
decision on any loss of deposit shall be final. The sanitation deposit may be
waived by the Town Manager.
      (3)   The town will charge facility usage or rental fees for the use of
specific facilities. The fees are intended to cover wear and tear, initial
supplies, water, electricity and the like. Facility fees shall not apply to
special events that are solely within the right-of-way of public streets. The
town reserves the right to obtain additional fees for other arising or unusual
expenses as it deems necessary.
   (G)   Event cancellation/refund of fees. If the special event is cancelled
after the payment of fees because of conditions beyond the control of the event
organizer, the town may consider a partial to full refund of fees paid, with
the exception of the application fee. The Town Manager will assess any costs
already incurred by the town and coordinate with the affected department heads
to ascertain the amount of refund.
   (H)   Rules and prohibitions.
      (1)   Adherence to town ordinances and rules. All applicants must adhere
to all town ordinances and posted park/facility rules, with exception of any
items exempted by written permission only. A copy of the park rules and
guidelines will be issued upon event approval. (See
Chapter 92, §
92.22 for prohibited activities.)
      (2)   Resource estimates. The town shall be the final authority in
estimates of attendance, need for additional staff hours, and/or assignment of
manpower and equipment to special events.
      (3)   Sanitation.
         (a)   A sanitation deposit shall be submitted to the town as outlined
herein unless waived by the Town Manager. Said deposit is refundable within 30
days of the end of an event provided the facility is left in a satisfactory
post event condition.
         (b)   The event organizer is responsible for making arrangements with
the town for additional trash receptacles. Plastic trash can liners will be
placed in all existing trash cans prior to the event. It is the event
organizer’s responsibility to deposit any trash in appropriate trash
receptacles following the event in order to ensure return of the sanitation
deposit. If the size of the event warrants additional receptacles, the Public
Works Department will review the application, and the organizer will be
contacted. It will be the event organizer’s responsibility to make all
arrangements and pay any fees applicable for any additional equipment or
services.
         (c)   All trash receptacles must be dumped upon completion of the
event into pre-determined receptacles or dumpsters as approved by the town and
prior to the park or other public property or facility opening the next day,
unless arranged in advance with the town. Dumpster locations shall be approved
or determined by the town at time of permit issuance.
      (4)   Restroom facilities. For all Class A through C permit events of
four hours duration or more, portable toilets may be required. This requirement
may be met if sufficient town restroom facilities are available on-site. The
Utilities Director or Building Code Official will assist the event organizer in
determining the number of toilets needed, although a ratio of two toilets per
500 attendees can be used as a guide. An appropriate mix of toilets for males
and females must be provided. In compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the event organizer must provide sufficient handicap
accessible portable toilets. It is the event organizer’s responsibility to make
all arrangements (drop-off, pumping during the event and pick-up) and pay any
rental fees. The town will stock supplies for permanent restroom facilities
prior to start of event. The town may choose to close public toilets.
   (I)   Revocation of permit. The town shall have authority to revoke any
permit upon violation of the conditions set forth herein, and/or where staging
of the event would have an immediate and adverse effect on the welfare and
safety of persons or property. The Chief of Police or Fire Official or Fire
Chief or his or her designee shall have authority to close any event
immediately upon violation of conditions set forth herein or to preserve safety
of persons or property.
   (J)   Modification of policies. The Council for the town may waive, modify
and/or amend said policies, partially or in its entirety, at any time solely at
the town’s discretion. This may occur only by formal action of the Town
Council.
(Ord. passed 2-2-2010)
§ 71.11 SALE, SERVICE AND CONSUMPTION OF BEER AND WINE DURING SPECIAL EVENTS.
   It shall be lawful to serve, sell and consume beer and wine on any street,
road, sidewalk, bicycle path, park or other public property in control of the
town, or other public property and easements in the town, but only during
special events in accordance with the following special conditions:
   (A)   Each special event shall have an event organizer who shall be made
known to the town.
   (B)   The event organizer shall apply for and obtain a special events permit
from the town. The manager is authorized to issue the permit upon compliance
with the applicable requirements of this section and state law.
   (C)   The event organizer shall apply for and obtain all necessary health
department and ABC licenses and permits as required by law before the town will
issue a permit.
   (D)   The permit as issued by the town will clearly state and define the
area in which the beer and wine may be sold or served or consumed. The
boundaries of the area will be clearly delineated and access to the area where
beer and wine are being sold or served or consumed shall be restricted to event
guests who are at least 21 years of age. Beer and wine shall not be carried or
consumed outside of the delineated area. Additionally, the event organizer
shall be responsible for providing waiters or servers for the beer and wine so
that those consuming the same shall not serve themselves.
   (E)   Permits shall be issued for wine and beer only. Spirituous liquor or
mixed drinks shall not be
permitted.
   (F)   The event organizer is responsible for maintaining decorum and order
and leaving the premises
in a broom clean condition.
   (G)   The contents of beer bottles or cans or wine bottles shall be poured
into appropriate cups to be served and all empty bottles or cans shall be
handled and stored in such a manner as not to be broken or left on the
premises. Bottles and cans shall not be given to the consumer for use or any
other purpose.
   (H)   The event organizer shall either possess or secure special event
general liability insurance with
liquor or alcoholic beverage coverage, with minimum limits of $1,000,000. The
town must be additionally insured on the certificate of insurance.
   (I)   The manager may revoke any permit granted when the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of this section and/or the terms and conditions of
the permit. Additionally, violations of any part of this section or the permit
shall also subject the offender to be charged and punished for a violation of a
criminal misdemeanor under G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. O2018-02, passed 10-9-2018)
CHAPTER 72: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Golf Carts
   
72.01   Purpose
   
72.02   Definition
   
72.03   Allowed
   
72.04   Rules and regulations
   
72.05   Allowable uses
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GOLF CARTS
§ 72.01 PURPOSE.
   There is a public interest in having a means of travel that is cost
effective, energy efficient and an alternate means of travel for short
distances within the town instead of using motor vehicles. This subchapter
establishes the minimum standards for the operator to use when traveling upon
public streets, roads and highways and property owned or leased by the town.
(Ord. passed 11-8-2012)
§ 72.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and manufactured for the operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of
exceeding 20 mph. The definition is repeated here for convenience only and the
definition set out in G.S. § 20-4.01(12b), as amended from time to time, is
controlling for this purpose.
(Ord. passed 11-8-2012)
§ 72.03 ALLOWED.
   The operation of golf carts on the public streets, roads and highways within
the corporate limits of the town and on property owned or leased by the town in
compliance with the rules and regulations of this subchapter shall be
permitted; however, it shall be unlawful to operate any golf cart that is not
properly registered with the town or to operate any golf cart at any place or
in any manner not authorized herein.
(Ord. passed 11-8-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The following rules and regulations are adopted for the operation of
golf carts. Low speed vehicles shall be operated under the North Carolina DMV
regulations for licensed motor vehicles.
   (B)   Golf carts may only be operated on public streets or property owned or
leased by the town within the corporate limits of the town in accordance with
the following rules and regulations.
      (1)   A motor vehicle license issued by a state agency shall be required
to operate a golf cart on a public street, road or highway.
      (2)   Golf carts may be driven on public streets, roads and highways
within the town and on property owned or leased by the town only if equipped
with:
         (a)   Headlamps;
         (b)   Front and rear turn signal lamps;
         (c)   Tail lamps;
         (d)   Stop lamps;
         (e)   Reflex reflectors: one red on each side as far to the rear as
practicable, and one red on the rear;
         (f)   An exterior mirror mounted on the driver’s side of the vehicle
and either an exterior mirror mounted on the passenger’s side of the vehicle or
an interior mirror;
         (g)   A parking brake;
         (h)   A windshield; and
         (i)   A Type 1 or Type 2 seat belt assembly installed at each seating
position.
      (3)   Golf carts are permitted to be operated only on streets with a
posted speed limit of 35 mph or less.
      (4)   Golf cart operators must adhere to all traffic regulations and
requirements applicable to the road or street being traveled and must yield the
right-of-way to approaching vehicles.
      (5)   Golf carts are not permitted to travel on sidewalks.
      (6)   All occupants shall be in a seated position on an installed seat
while the cart is in motion.
      (7)   All persons operating golf carts must be observant of, and
attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers,
other motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians. The Town Police Department has the
authority to revoke the registration of any cart owner or operator for
violations of the terms of this subchapter.
      (8)   Golf carts shall be parked in the same manner and place as
designated parking for other motor vehicles. Stopping, standing or parking
carts in places and in a manner not allowed for vehicle parking or so as to
impede the flow of traffic, pedestrian walkways or passageways are prohibited.
Parking in reserved handicapped locations requires the appropriate handicap
placard or sticker.
      (9)   Golf carts shall not be used for commercial purposes such as, but
not limited to, taxicabs, buses or hauling freight.
      (10)   Golf carts shall not be used for the towing of another cart,
wagon, skateboard or a person on roller skates, bicycle and the like.
      (11)   Before a golf cart can operate on town public streets or property
owned or leased by the town, the cart owner must apply for and display a valid
registration sticker issued by the Town Police Department. The sticker must be
renewed annually.
      (12)   Before a registration sticker can be issued, the cart must meet
the requirements set forth in this section, and the applicant must provide
proof of insurance as required by G.S. § 20-279.21, and maintain such insurance
while the cart is in operation in the town and must be registered with the Town
Police Department.
      (13)   No open containers of alcoholic beverages are permitted on a golf
cart while on a public street, road or highway or on property owned or leased
by the town.
(Ord. passed 11-8-2012) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 ALLOWABLE USES.
   Golf carts operated under the following uses are not required to meet the
provisions of §
72.03:
   (A)   The operation of golf carts at golf courses, private clubs or on
private property, with the consent of the owner;
   (B)   The operation of golf carts within gated or limited access communities
unless the streets of the community are dedicated for public use or maintained
by the town or state;
   (C)   The use of golf carts in connection with a parade, a festival or other
special event, provided the consent of the sponsor is obtained and such vehicle
is used only in conjunction with such event; and
   (D)   The use of golf carts by town personnel for official business.
(Ord. passed 11-8-2012)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Operation of a golf cart in violation of the provisions of §§
72.01 through
72.05 will subject the offender to a civil penalty of $50 for each offense,
which shall be paid to the Town Clerk within 48 hours of notice of the
violation, failing which the penalty shall increase to $100.
   (C)   Civil penalties may be collected by civil actions in the courts. No
criminal penalties will result from such violations.
(Ord. passed 11-8-2012)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   One-way streets
      
II.   Speed limits
      
III.   Stop intersections
      
IV.   Through truck traffic
SCHEDULE I. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The section of West Railroad Boulevard from, its intersection with
Howard Boulevard west to the intersection of Hill Street shall be one-way
traffic flowing west to a duly erected “stop” sign at the intersection of Hill
Street and West Railroad Boulevard.
   (B)   Violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with North
Carolina Motor Vehicle Law, G.S. §§ 20-1 et seq.
(1991 Code, § 16-4) (Ord. passed 9-7-1982)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The speed limit zones are depicted on a Geographical Information
System (GIS) map below.
   (B)   The general speed limit within the town is 35 mph unless otherwise
posted and indicated on the below speed limit map.
   (C)   This schedule only applies to town-owned and maintained streets. All
other streets such as state and private-owned and maintained are shown for
reference only.
   (D)   The town law enforcement will only have jurisdiction on private
property to enforce traffic laws only by an agreement or contract with the
town.
   (E)   Other law enforcement agencies shall have the same vehicle and traffic
enforcement as town law enforcement agencies.
   (F)   The GIS vehicle speed limit map shall bear the date of adoption and
the town seal.
   (G)   Any person operating a motor vehicle in excess thereof shall be in
violation of this schedule and subject to a fine of $50 for each such
violation.
(1991 Code, § 16-51) (Ord. passed 4-7-1964; Ord. passed 9-15-1981; Ord. passed
12-7-1999; Ord. passed 2-1-2000; Ord. passed 10-2-2007)
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Those intersections described in the schedule below are hereby
declared to be stop intersections for all vehicles entering from any of the
streets or alleys entering the intersection. Every driver of a vehicle shall
stop in obedience to the stop signs erected at such intersections before
entering the intersection and shall not proceed into or cross the intersection
until it has first been determined that no conflict with traffic will be
involved. Right-of-way shall be extended to the vehicle first arriving and
entering such intersections.
Three-Way Stops
   The Bayberry Road and Graystone Drive intersection
   The Bayberry Road and Palmetta Drive intersection
   The Graystone Drive and Foxhall Road intersection
   The Watson Avenue and Mindora Court intersection
   The Watson Avenue and New Bern Street intersection
   The Watson Avenue and Shelia Court intersection
Four-Way Stops
   The East Forest Drive and West Forest Drive intersection
   The Johnson Street and West Railroad Boulevard intersection
   The Main Street and East and West Railroad Boulevard intersections
   The South Lakeview and West Railroad Boulevard intersection
 
   (B)   All vehicles approaching the corner of East Railroad Boulevard and
Park Avenue will stop before traversing the corner.
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
      (2)   Any violation of division (A) above shall result in a civil penalty
assessed in the amount of $20. If this penalty is not paid within 48 hours of
the violation, the penalty shall be increased to $50.
(Ord. passed 8-2-2005; Meeting minutes of 1-3-2006)
SCHEDULE IV. THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC.
   (A)   (1)   All through truck traffic shall be prohibited from using East
Forest Drive, Carolina Avenue and New Bern Street.
      (2)   Trucks shall not be permitted to make a left turn onto New Bern
Street from the commercial zone.
(1991 Code, § 16-3)
   (B)   All through truck traffic, by trucks with more than two axles, with
exception of emergency and service vehicles, shall be prohibited from using
Main Street from its origin at Orange Street to its end at Chatham Street and
East and West Railroad Streets from their origin at Main Street to their end at
Chatham Street in the town.
   (C)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
      (2)   Violation of division (B) above shall be a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $50.
(Ord. passed 12-3-1985; Ord. passed 7-2-2002)
CHAPTER 74: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking zones
      
II.   Parallel parking
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be illegal to park or leave standing any motor vehicle, as
defined in G.S. § 160A-303(b), on the right-of-way of any public street,
highway, alley or thoroughfare in the town in the following areas:
Street Restricted Area
Street                             Restricted Area
On Bayberry Road                   From US 70 to W. Railroad Boulevard
On East Forrest Drive              From Howard Boulevard to W. Forrest Drive
On Greystone Drive, Foxhall Road
Huntmaster Court and Coachman Lane  
within the Sand Ridge subdivision
                                   From the Verdun Street and Kirby Lane
On Howard Boulevard                intersection to the E. Forrest Drive and
                                   Mason Lane intersection.
On New Bern Street                  
On South Park Lane                  
                                   Including, but not limited to, the
                                   pavement and the shoulders of Johnson
On Johnson Street right-of-way     Street, between East Forest Drive and
                                   Chatham Street at all hours and on all
                                   days with the exception of mechanical
                                   failure
On W. Railroad Boulevard           On its eastside, from Chathan Street to
                                   Howard Boulevard
 
   (B)   The Public Works Department shall cause “No Parking” signs to be
erected on the streets designated in this section.
(1991 Code, § 16-71) (Ord. passed 5-26-1978; Ord. passed 2-17-1981; Ord. passed
9-7-1982; Meeting minutes of 5-1-2001; Ord. passed 1-3-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
SCHEDULE II. PARALLEL PARKING.
   Parking on the south side of East Railroad Boulevard from its intersection
with west side of Chatham Street to a point 86 feet westwardly of the west
right-of-way margin of Chatham Street, measured along the south side of East
Railroad Boulevard, shall be parallel parking only and shall be within the
painted lines.
(1991 Code, § 16-72) (Ord. passed 1-20-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
93.   CEMETERY
      
94.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
      
95.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
96.   BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Animals constituting a public nuisance
Animal Control
   
90.15   Animal control
   
90.16   Duties of Town Police Department
   
90.17   Definitions
   
90.18   Responsibility of custodian of animals
   
90.19   Certain acts declared public nuisances
   
90.20   Rabies control
   
90.21   Prohibited acts
   
90.22   Impounding animals
   
90.23   Care and treatment
Livestock
   
90.35   Running at large
   
90.36   Keeping hogs and cows within city
   
90.37   Keeping chicken and fowl within the corporate limits
   
90.38   Location of stables and animals; grazing horses and mules
Bird Sanctuary
   
90.50   Creation
   
90.51   Territorial limits
   
90.52   Hunting, killing, trapping of birds
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 ANIMALS CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the town any
animals or poultry in such numbers and so housed as to result in noxious or
offensive odors, or loud and disagreeable noises, and thereby to constitute a
public nuisance.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 90.15 ANIMAL CONTROL.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Police Department to perform all the duties
incidental to the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and to
perform such other duties as by law or ordinance, may be imposed on them and
shall work in cooperation with the Town Zoning Officer, the Town Manager, the
County Health Department and the County Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.16 DUTIES OF TOWN POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall be charged with the responsibilities of:
   (A)   Enforcement of the town’s laws ordinances and resolutions relating to
the care, custody and control of animals or fowl within the town limits; and
   (B)   Cooperating with the County Health Department and the County Animal
Control Officer in the assistance of the enforcement of the laws of the state
with regards to dogs; the vaccination of dogs against rabies; and the
confinement and leashing of vicious animals.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when it is off the
property of its custodian and not under restraint as defined below.
   CUSTODIAN. The person owning, having charge of, sheltering, feeding,
harboring or taking care of any animal.
   FARM. A tract of land devoted to agricultural purposes.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is UNDER RESTRAINT within the meaning of this chapter
if:
      (1)   It is controlled by means of a chain, leash or other like device;
      (2)   It is on or within a vehicle being driven or parked; or
      (3)   It is within a secure enclosure.
   STRAY DOG. Any dog within the town, off the premises of the owner, and not
under restraint.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has made an attack on a human being by
biting or in any manner causing abrasions or cuts of the skin; or one which,
without provocation, attacked other pets.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.18 RESPONSIBILITY OF CUSTODIAN OF ANIMALS.
   The custodian of every animal shall be responsible for the care, vaccination
and behavior of such animal.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.19 CERTAIN ACTS DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The following acts are hereby declared a public nuisance for which an animal
may be impounded:
   (A)   Any dog or other animal or fowl which by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking or the making of other noises shall disturb the neighborhood;
   (B)   Any animal which chases, snaps at or attacks pedestrians, bicycle
riders or vehicles;
   (C)   Any animal which turns over garbage pails, damages gardens, flowers,
vegetables or personal property of another;
   (D)   A female dog in heat not under restraint;
   (E)   Any stray dog running at large in the town;
   (F)   Any dog off the premises of the custodian not wearing rabies
vaccination tags if required by this chapter; and/or
   (G)   Dogs shall not be allowed in parks, recreation areas or cemeteries of
the town unless such dog is a bona fide service animal.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998; Meeting minutes of 5-1-2001) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.20 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Vaccination. Every dog or cat four months of age or older housed in
the town shall at all be currently vaccinated against rabies. The custodian of
all such animals shall provide proof of such vaccination upon demand of the
police officer. Failure to provide such proof may result in such animal being
impounded subject to redemption in the manner provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Confinement. Whenever any person or animal is bitten by a dog, cat or
other animal within the town, the police officer (or for the provision of this
section, Animal Control Officer, hereafter called officer) shall have the right
and authority to have such animal examined to determine whether it has
hydrophobia. In such case, upon demand of the officer, the custodian of such
animal shall deliver it to the officer, who may impound such animal during such
period, not less than ten days, as may be necessary to determine whether it has
hydrophobia. If the officer finds that such animal has hydrophobia or any
symptoms thereof, then said animal shall be destroyed; otherwise, it shall be
returned to its custodian, provided such custodian shall pay the expense of
examination and of keeping said animal in confinement. If such custodian fails
to pay for the upkeep of said animal upon demand, the officer is empowered to
proceed as otherwise provided in §
90.22.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.21 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the town to do any of the
following:
   (A)   Vicious animals. To keep or cause to be kept any vicious animal, as
defined in this chapter, unless confined within a secure building or enclosure,
or under restraint;
   (B)   Howling and barking dogs, cats or other animals or fowl. To keep or
harbor any dog, cat, fowl or other animal, which, by frequent or habitual
howling, yelping, barking or the making of other noises, shall annoy or disturb
the neighborhood;
   (C)   Stray dogs. To cause, permit or allow a dog to be away from the
premises of the owner, or to be in a public place, or on any public property in
the town; unless such dog is under restraint;
   (D)   Interference with police officer. To interfere with, hinder or molest
a police officer, or other authorized officer, or person, in the performance of
any duty authorized by this chapter, or to seek to release any animal in the
custody of such person;
   (E)   Rabies vaccination. To have custody of any dog or cat over the age of
four months which is not currently vaccinated against rabies; or
   (F)   Dog feces. To fail or neglect to remove immediately any dog feces
deposited on public or private property, without the consent of the owner of
such property, by a dog in the care, charge, control or custody of said person,
or owned possessed or harbored by said person. For the purpose of this section,
dog fecal matter shall be immediately removed by placing such matter in a
closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it by depositing the
matter in a trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit, or other closed or sealed
container.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 IMPOUNDING ANIMALS.
   Any animal that, in the judgement of the police or the Animal Control
Officer, has strayed or which is not properly vaccinated for rabies or is
deemed a public nuisance, may be impounded and confined to the animal pound in
a humane manner, subject to redemption, adoption or destruction as provided in
current pound regulations.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 CARE AND TREATMENT.
   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide an animal sufficient good and wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment.
   (B)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment or otherwise abuse an
animal.
   (C)   No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
   (D)   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal,
provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his or her own
property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
LIVESTOCK
§ 90.35 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful to allow any horse, mule or livestock to run at large.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.36 KEEPING HOGS AND COWS WITHIN CITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hog or cow within the city,
except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to bona fide farms.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.37 KEEPING CHICKEN AND FOWL WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful to house, cage, coop or in any other manner keep or
maintain any duck, pigeon, chicken or other fowl within the corporate limits or
to allow any duck, pigeon, chicken or other fowl to run at large within the
corporate limits. The provisions of this section as to keeping of fowl shall
not apply to bona fide farms.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.38 LOCATION OF STABLES AND ANIMALS; GRAZING HORSES AND MULES.
   It shall be unlawful to erect, keep or maintain in the city, any horse or
mule stable or to tether or permit to graze or stand any horse or mule within
50 feet of any residence.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
BIRD SANCTUARY
§ 90.50 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a bird sanctuary under the authority and provisions
of G.S. § 160A-188 with territorial limits as fixed in §
90.51.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.51 TERRITORIAL LIMITS.
   The territorial limits of the bird sanctuary created in §
90.50 shall be all territory within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
§ 90.52 HUNTING, KILLING, TRAPPING OF BIRDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, kill or trap any birds within
the territorial limits of the city; provided, however, that this prohibition
shall not include or protect any bird declared a pest by the appropriate
agencies or departments of the state, nor shall the protection of this
prohibition extend to birds designated by the Council.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Where there is a violation of any provision of this chapter, the town, at
its discretion may take one or more of the following enforcement actions.
   (A)   A police officer may issue a citation subjecting the violator to a
civil penalty of $50 which penalty may provide for a delinquency charge of $25
upon nonpayment after 20 days and which penalty and delinquency charge may be
recovered by the town in a civil action. Each day shall constitute a separate
violation.
   (B)   A misdemeanor warrant may be issued either immediately or upon the
issuance of a citation and the violator’s failure to pay the citation.
Misdemeanors shall be punishable by a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment
for up to 30 days for each day a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   A civil action seeking a penalty of $500 per day of violation plus
injunction and order of abatement may be directed.
(Ord. passed 11-3-1998)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
Health Nuisances
   
91.001   Prohibited conditions
   
91.002   Investigation
   
91.003   Notice to abate
   
91.004   Appeal from notice
   
91.005   Order of Town Council
   
91.006   Abatement by town
   
91.007   Request of town to abate
   
91.008   Lien for town’s expense
   
91.009   Additional remedies
   
91.010   Enforcement
Noise
   
91.025   General prohibitions
   
91.026   Illustrative enumeration
Junked, Wrecked, Abandoned Property
   
91.040   Definitions
   
91.041   Enforcement
Junkyards
   
91.055   Location restricted
   
91.056   Noncompliance prohibited
   
91.057   Abatement of dangerous conditions
   
91.058   Screening of existing yards
   
91.059   Burning junk, causing noxious odors
   
91.060   Permit required
   
91.061   Immunity
Junked or Abandoned Vehicles
   
91.075   Removal authorized
   
91.076   Pre-towing notice
   
91.077   Post-towing notice
   
91.078   Hearing
   
91.079   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
Nuisance Vehicles
   
91.090   Notice
   
91.091   Appeal
   
91.092   Removal
HEALTH NUISANCES
§ 91.001 PROHIBITED CONDITIONS.
   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or other
parcel of land within the corporate limits, or within one mile thereof is
declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to
constitute a public nuisance:
   (A)   The growth of noxious weeds or grass causing or threatening to cause a
hazard detrimental to the public health or safety;
   (B)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by
virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes
or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health;
   (C)   Any accumulation of rubbish, trash, old building materials, junk
causing or threatening to cause the accumulation of stagnant water, or causing
or threatening to cause the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes or
vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health;
   (D)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the
rules and regulations of the County Health Department;
   (E)   The keeping or housing of chickens, fowl or any barn yard animal such
as cows, horses, swine goats and the like, within a residential area, except on
a bona fide operating farm, is declared a health nuisance and is prohibited.
For purpose of this section provision, a RESIDENTIAL AREA is defined as one in
which there are three or more residences within 200 feet of the lot, tract or
parcel upon which such animals are located; and
   (F)   The keeping of domestic pets, such as dogs, cats or other animals in
quantities and/or in confined spaces that may cause noxious odors, fumes,
flies, snakes, rats, vermin or the accumulation of feces or animal matter is
prohibited.
(1991 Code, § 11-21) (Ord. passed 8-6-1968; Ord. passed 11-15-1975; Ord. passed
5-2-2006; Ord. passed 10-2-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.002 INVESTIGATION.
   The Code Official, upon notice from any person of the existence of any of
the conditions described in §
91.001, shall cause to be made by the appropriate County Health Department
official or town official such investigation as may be necessary to determine
whether, in fact, such conditions exist as to constitute a public nuisance as
declared in this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 11-22) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.003 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   Upon a determination that conditions which constitute a public nuisance
exist, the Code Official shall notify in writing the owner, occupant or person
in possession of the premises in question of the conditions constituting such
public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof within 15 days
from the receipt of such written notice.
(1991 Code, § 11-23) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.004 APPEAL FROM NOTICE.
   (A)   (1)   The person receiving an order under this subchapter may appeal
from the order of the Code Official to the Town Council by giving notice of
such appeal to the Code Official within ten days of receipt of the order, and
the appeal shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the Town Council at
which a quorum is present.
      (2)   At such hearing, the appellant may present evidence, be heard and
be represented by counsel.
   (B)   Failure of the person receiving the order from the Code Official to
appeal such order shall result in such order becoming final ten days after it
has been received by such person.
(1991 Code, § 11-24) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.005 ORDER OF TOWN COUNCIL.
   After the hearing of an appeal under this subchapter, the Town Council shall
issue such order affirming, modifying, amending or countermanding the Code
Official’s order as it shall deem just under all of the evidence and in
consideration of all presentations made to it together with such independent
investigation as it may undertake or order undertaken. The appellant shall
comply with the order of the Town Council within 15 days after its issuance.
(1991 Code, § 11-25) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.006 ABATEMENT BY TOWN.
   If any person, having been ordered by a final order to abate such a public
nuisance, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition
constituting the nuisance within the time as limited above, the Code Official
shall cause such condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having
employees of the town go upon such premises and remove or otherwise abate such
nuisance under the supervision of an officer or employee designated by the Town
Manager.
(1991 Code, § 11-26) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.007 REQUEST OF TOWN TO ABATE.
   Any person who has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may, within the
time allowed herein, request the town in writing to remove such condition, the
cost of which shall be paid by the person making such request.
(1991 Code, § 11-27) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.008 LIEN FOR TOWN’S EXPENSE.
   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise
remedying such a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of such lot or
parcel of land, and it shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to mail a
statement of such charges to the owner or other person in possession of such
premises with instructions that such charges are due and payable within 30 days
from the receipt thereof.
   (B)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges, such
charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance
existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
(1991 Code, § 11-28) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.009 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The procedures set forth in this subchapter shall be in addition to any
other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of
public nuisances and shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal
action against any person violating such provisions of this division, as
provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(1991 Code, § 11-29) (Ord. passed 11-15-1975)
§ 91.010 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The enforcing officer may impose civil penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The enforcement officer may summarily remove, abate or otherwise
remedy a situation that in his or her opinion presents an immediate threat to
life or property which must be abated without delay.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2006)
NOISE
§ 91.025 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in creating any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of such
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public health,
welfare, and peace is hereby prohibited.
(1991 Code, § 11-46) (Ord. passed 6-1-1982) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.026 ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.
   The following acts, among others, are hereby declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of this subchapter, but such enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create
any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, or the use of any gong or siren
upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle;
   (B)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, loudspeaker,
amplifier or musical instrument in such manner or with such volume,
particularly during hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence;
   (C)   The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by causing frequent or long
continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
   (D)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise;
   (E)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler or
engine, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning
of danger;
   (F)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises
which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
   (G)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or service
station in any residential area so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be
emitted therefrom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or
on Sundays;
   (H)   The creation of any excessive noises on any street adjacent to any
school or institution of learning while the same is in session which
unreasonably and unnecessarily interferes with the working of such
institutions, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that such area is a school area;
   (I)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street adjacent
to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such, streets
adjacent, to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
   (J)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair
of any building in a residential or business district other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or
less while the emergency continues;
   (K)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the
noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
   (L)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
   (M)   The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale or display of merchandise;
   (N)   The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes except where
specific license is received from the Town Council;
   (O)   Shouting, fighting or creating noise through loud and boisterous
speech or singing so as to be audible off of the premises upon which such
activities and noise occur if so loud as to disturb the peace and tranquility
of persons occupying residences, motels, hotels, rest homes, nursing homes, or
hospitals in the vicinity; and
   (P)   The playing, operating or use of any radio, boom box, stereo, CD, DVD
or tape player or any other sound production, reproduction or emitting device
in any motor vehicle so that sound produced or emitted is audible from the
exterior of the motor vehicle.
(1991 Code, § 11-47) (Ord. passed 6-1-1982; Ord. passed 5-2-2006) Penalty, see
§
10.99
JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 91.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that:
      (1)   Has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours;
      (3)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two hours; or
      (4)   Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days.
   JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD. The use of any part of a lot, whether inside or
outside of a building, for the storage, keeping, abandonment, assembly,
dumping, wrecking, sale or resale of junk, salvage or scrap materials; or the
dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles and other vehicles or
machinery or equipment or parts thereof.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. An abandoned motor vehicle that also:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move;
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100;
or
      (4)   Does not display a current license plate.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes all machines designed or intended to travel over
land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle in the condition described as a JUNKED
MOTOR VEHICLE above, but not necessarily an abandoned motor vehicle described
as an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE, on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance or unlawful,
including, without limitation, a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement subject to latching or locking,
such as trunks, hoods and the like;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Town Council;
      (8)   So offensive to the sight as to damage the community, neighborhood
or area appearance, upon a finding that such aesthetic regulation is necessary
and desirable for the protection of property values, promotion of tourism,
indirect protection of health and safety, preservation of the character and
integrity of community, or promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional
stability of area residents; or
      (9)   Defined as a JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE and as a NUISANCE VEHICLE and
kept or located on the outside of any building or screen fence of any
automotive service station and automotive repair garage for more than ten days.
   OWNER OR OPERATOR OF A JUNKYARD. Includes any person who shall keep,
maintain, operate or use any building, lot, parcel of ground or other place for
assembly, collection, dumping, wrecking, storing or keeping, depositing or
removing any old iron, old automobiles, wrecked automobiles for dismantling and
sale of parts, machinery, accessories thereto or any refuse, junk or waste
material for the purpose of salvage or sale.
   SCREENS. Shall be of durable material, a height of not less than six feet
above the finished grade. SCREENS shall be maintained in good repair and
condition at all times, routinely painted an earth tone color so as to blend in
with the surrounding neighborhood. Areas surrounding the SCREEN shall be
landscaped and maintained free of debris and trash.
   VISIBLE. Capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal
visual acuity.
(1991 Code, § 11-66) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.041 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to the fines and penalties provided by law and those set out for
violations of this subchapter, this subchapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction,
including mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement.
(1991 Code, § 11-67) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
JUNKYARDS
§ 91.055 LOCATION RESTRICTED.
   No junkyard shall be established, operated or maintained any portion of
which is located 1,000 feet from the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any
public street, road or highway, or residential zoned area, or any other zoned
area that does not permit junkyards, except this prohibition shall not apply
to:
   (A)   Those junkyards which are screened at all seasons of the year by
natural objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means so as not to be
visible from the main-traveled way of the street, road, highway, residential
area or other zoned area not allowing junkyards as a permitted use; and
   (B)   Those junkyards in areas zoned industrial in accordance with the town
zoning ordinance, and screened in accordance with division (A) above.
(1991 Code, § 11-86) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.056 NONCOMPLIANCE PROHIBITED.
   Any person who establishes, operates or maintains a junkyard not excepted by
§
91.055 and lying within 1,000 feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of
any public street, road, highway, residential zoned area or any zoned area that
does not permit junkyards shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day that
the junkyard remains in violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(1991 Code, § 11-87) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.057 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   If the Building Inspector shall find that the junkyard is dangerous or
prejudicial to public safety because of any one or more of the reasons
hereinafter set out, he or she shall notify the owner and person in occupancy
of the junkyard of such finding and shall state in notice that the recipient
has 30 days from the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to
correct the condition found, failing which the town will cause the condition to
be abated at the owners’ and occupants’ expense (and they shall be jointly and
severally liable therefor), that the expense of this action shall be a lien
upon the premises where the trouble existed and shall be collected in the
manner for collection of unpaid taxes.
   (B)   A condition shall be dangerous or prejudicial to public health and
safety if the Building Inspector finds that it:
      (1)   Is a breeding ground for mosquitoes, insects, rats, vermin or other
pests;
      (2)   Is a place where pools or ponds of water collect;
      (3)   Consists of one or more areas where weeds or other noxious
vegetation are allowed to grow above eight inches height;
      (4)   Has junk, wrecked cars, car parts, machinery or equipment not
securely enclosed so as to prevent access by children;
      (5)   Contains areas or materials wherein rats, mice, vermin and other
pests may seek shelter and make nests;
      (6)   Unreasonably distracts the operators of motor vehicles;
      (7)   Interferes with the view of motor vehicle drivers or traffic
regulations or control; or
      (8)   Constitutes an attractive nuisance.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by a finding of the Building Inspector may appeal
therefrom to the Town Council by filing a written notice of the appeal with the
Town Clerk within 20 days of the date of the mailing of personal delivery of
the notice from the Building Inspector required by this division (C).
(1991 Code, § 11-88) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.058 SCREENING OF EXISTING YARDS.
   Any junkyard lawfully in existence on the effective date of this subchapter
which is not excepted from this subchapter under §
91.055, and any other junkyard lawfully in existence which may not be exempted
under §
91.055 hereof, shall, within 180 days of written notice, be screened by natural
objects, plantings, fences or other appropriate means so as not to be visible
from the main-traveled way of any street, road, highway or any residential
zoned district or other district zoned so as not to permit junkyards at any
season of the year. Such fence or screen shall be maintained in a clean and
neat appearance and in a good state of repair. No junk or debris shall be kept
on the outside of the screened area. Screened type gates shall be provided and
kept closed at all times except when materials are being conveyed in or out of
the premises.
(1991 Code, § 11-89) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.059 BURNING JUNK, CAUSING NOXIOUS ODORS.
   It shall be unlawful to burn in any junkyard any refuse or junk, including
rubber tires, batteries and rubber from wires, or other materials which cause
noxious odors.
(1991 Code, § 11-90) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.060 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, operate or maintain a junkyard within the
jurisdiction of the town without obtaining a permit as provided in the town
zoning ordinance. No junkyard permit shall be issued under the provisions of
this section except those junkyards which come within the provisions of §
91.055. The permit shall be valid until revoked for nonconformance with this
subchapter and rules and regulations promulgated by the Town Council. Any
person aggrieved by the decision to refuse to grant or to revoke a permit may
appeal the decision to the Superior Court of the county. The person seeking
review must file a petition with the County Superior Court within 30 days after
written notice of the decision by the town is mailed to or personally served
upon the person seeking review. Failure to file such a petition within the time
stated shall operate as a waiver of the right of such person to review
revocation of or refusal to issue the permit under this subchapter or the
zoning ordinance.
(1991 Code, § 11-91) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.061 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the town nor any person shall be held to answer in any civil or
criminal action to any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession
of any junked or abandoned vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this subchapter.
(1991 Code, § 11-92) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 91.075 REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle found by the Building Inspector or Chief of Police
to be junked or abandoned shall be removed to a place of storage, after giving
the notice required by §
91.076, and held for a period of 30 days to provide an opportunity for the
owner thereof or his or her agent to claim the same as provided; provided,
however, no junked or abandoned motor vehicle on private property may be
removed without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises unless the Building Inspector has declared it to be a health or safety
hazard.
   (B)   If a vehicle is removed at the request of an owner of private property
upon which the vehicle is located, the person requesting such removal shall
post a bond in cash, secured by a sufficient real property lien, or issued by a
company licensed in the state to write such bonds in an amount to be determined
by the Building Inspector to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or
liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.
   (C)   Junked or abandoned vehicles shall not include any vehicle in an
enclosed building nor any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
being operated in a lawful manner and place if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the business, nor to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place
or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.
(1991 Code, § 11-111) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.076 PRE-TOWING NOTICE.
   (A)   If the names and mailing addresses of the owners of the vehicle can be
ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, a notice of intent to
remove the vehicle and assess the charges therefor shall be mailed by first-
class mail at least ten days before removal occurs. The person who mails the
notice shall retain a written record to show the name and address to which
mailed, and the date mailed. If such name and address cannot be ascertained,
notice shall be given by affixing written notice on the windshield or some
other conspicuous place on the vehicle not less than seven days before towing
actually occurs.
   (B)   A junked or abandoned vehicle may be removed without giving the
minimum ten or seven days’ prior notice only in those circumstances where the
Town Building Inspector or Chief of Police finds, and enters such findings in
appropriate records, a special need for prompt action because the vehicle
impedes the flow of traffic or otherwise jeopardize the public welfare so that
immediate towing is necessary.
(1991 Code, § 11-112) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.077 POST-TOWING NOTICE.
   (A)   (1)   Any vehicle which has been determined to be a junked or
abandoned vehicle may be removed in accordance with §§
91.075 and
91.076 to a storage garage or area by a towing business contracting to perform
such services for the town.
      (2)   Wherever such vehicle is removed, the town shall immediately notify
the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include:
         (a)   A description of the removed vehicle;
         (b)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
         (c)   The violation charged, if any;
         (d)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
         (e)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   This notice shall be given by phone if feasible and in all cases
mailed to the owner’s last known address, unless waived in writing, or unless
no address is available.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in this state, notice shall be mailed
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in this state, notice shall
be mailed to the owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever a junked or abandoned vehicle is removed and such vehicle has
no valid registration or registration plate, reasonable efforts shall be made,
including the checking of vehicle identification number, to determine the last
known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the
information set forth in division (A) above.
(1991 Code, § 11-113) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.078 HEARING.
   (A)   After removal of a vehicle found to be a junked or abandoned vehicle,
the owner or person entitled to possession may at any time within 20 days of
notice of removal request in writing a hearing to determine if probable cause
existed for removing the vehicle. The request must be filed with the
magistrate’s office at the County Courthouse in Beaufort, North Carolina. The
magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and
the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-
219.11(c), (d), (e) and (f).
   (B)   At any stage of the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the vehicle by paying the towing
and storage fees or by posting a bond for double the amount of the storage and
towing fees. The bond shall be in the form as provided in §
91.075 but in the amount and for the purpose herein provided.
(1991 Code, § 11-114) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.079 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   (A)   With the consent of the owner, the town may dispose of any vehicle
holding it for any prescribed period of time.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) above, any unclaimed junked or
abandoned motor vehicle shall be held for a period of at least 30 days. The
owner of any such vehicle may claim his or her vehicle during the 30-day
retention period by exhibiting proof of ownership to the town, and by paying
all reasonable costs incident to the removal and storage of the vehicle plus
administrative expenses. If after the vehicle is held 30 days it remains
unclaimed, such vehicle may be sold at a private sale as herein provided.
   (C)   (1)   Notice of the impending sale shall be given to the Department of
Motor Vehicles stating that a lien is asserted and a sale is proposed, and a
fee of $4 shall be sent with the notice. The notice shall include the date the
lien arose, the basis for the lien, the amount of the lien, the fact that no
hearing is required prior to the sale in accordance with G.S. § 160A-303(d)(2)
(e). The vehicle may then be sold at private sale upon notice mailed not less
than 30 days before the date of the proposed sale to the last known registered
owner, the person with whom the town has dealt (if different), to each secured
party or person claiming an interest in the vehicle who is actually known or
can be reasonably ascertained.
      (2)   The notice shall state:
         (a)   The town claims a lien on the vehicle and the town’s address;
         (b)   The name of the last registered owner, the name of any other
person with whom the town has dealt;
         (c)   A description of the vehicle;
         (d)   The amount due;
         (e)   The place of the sale; and
         (f)   The time and date of sale.
      (3)   If, prior to the sale, the owner thereof or any person claiming a
lien thereon or interest therein notifies the town that public sale is
requested, no private sale shall be made. After such request, notice of the
public sale shall be given as if no notice of sale by private sale had been
given. No less than 20 days prior to a public sale, the town shall notify the
Division of Motor Vehicles of the proposed sale on the form prescribed by the
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under the provisions of G.S. § 20-114(c). Notice
shall also be mailed at least 20 days before the proposed sale to the last
known registered owner, to the person with whom the town has dealt (if
different), to secured parties and all who claim an interest in the vehicle if
actually known or reasonably ascertainable. Notice shall also be posted at the
county courthouse door at least 20 days before the proposed sale. Notice of the
public sale shall contain the same information as required above in this
division (C) for notices of private sale. Notice of the public sale shall also
be published not less than once a week for two consecutive weeks in the
Carteret County News-Times, the date of last publication being not less than
five days prior to sale. The public sale must not be held on Sunday, must be
held between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., and must be held in the county. The
proceeds of sale, public or private, shall be applied to the reasonable
expenses of the sale, payment of towing and storage charges, and any surplus to
the persons entitled thereto, but when such persons cannot be found or there is
a dispute as to whom is entitled to the surplus, the surplus shall be paid to
the Clerk of the Superior Court to be held for the person or persons entitled
thereto. A purchaser for value at a properly conducted sale, and a purchaser
for value without constructive notice of a defect in the sale, acquires title
to the vehicle free of any interests over which the lien created by this
division (C) has precedence. The town shall not purchase any vehicle sold at
private sale and shall not be entitled to acquire title to the vehicle free of
other liens if purchased at a public sale. If no one purchases the vehicle and
its value is less than the amount of the lien for towing and storage, the town
may have it destroyed.
(1991 Code, § 11-115) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
NUISANCE VEHICLES
§ 91.090 NOTICE.
   If the Building Inspector, Chief of Police or Town Council shall find that
any vehicle is a nuisance vehicle, he, she or it shall give notice to the owner
thereof (if known or ascertainable by reasonable diligence) and the person in
possession or upon whose property it is located, giving such person 20 days
from the mailing of the notice of personal delivery thereof to remove the
vehicle or otherwise abate the nuisance. The notice shall state that failure to
remove the vehicle or abate the nuisance within the time stated in the notice
shall be punishable by criminal penalties.
(1991 Code, § 11-136) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.091 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by a decision under this subchapter by the Building
Inspector or Chief of Police may appeal to the Town Council to review the
decision by filing notice of appeal within 15 days after mailing or personal
delivery of the notice herein provided to be given by the Building Inspector or
Chief of Police. Such appeal notice shall be filed with the Town Clerk
containing such information as the Clerk may require.
(1991 Code, § 11-137) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
§ 91.092 REMOVAL.
   After the decision that a vehicle is a nuisance has become final, the Chief
of Police or the Building Inspector may cause the vehicle to be removed, and
the expense of such removal shall be paid by the person upon whose premises the
vehicle is located, and if not paid, shall be a lien upon the land or premises
where the trouble arose, and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
(1991 Code, § 11-138) (Ord. passed 8-19-1986)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Recreation Advisory Commission
   
92.01   Created
   
92.02   Membership
   
92.03   Officers, procedures
   
92.04   Facilities generally
   
92.05   Fiscal authority
   
92.06   Appropriation of funds
   
92.07   Reports
Rules and Regulations
   
92.20   Rules, regulations generally
   
92.21   Forfeiture of privileges
   
92.22   Prohibited activities
   
92.23   Fire control
   
92.24   Closure
   
92.25   Ejection of violators
   
92.26   Application for permits, issuance
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 92.01 CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Recreation Advisory Commission.
(1991 Code, § 12-21) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980)
§ 92.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Recreation Advisory Commission members are selected from those
citizens who apply for membership through the Town Clerk.
   (B)   The Recreation Advisory Commission shall be appointed by the Town
Council and shall consist of seven members, in addition to three ex officio
members. The ex officio members shall be two Town Council members and a staff
member nominated by the Town Manager. Ex officio members shall serve without
voting power.
   (C)   Each term shall be for three years, except that three appointments
designated by the Town Council in November 2008 shall be for two-year terms
initially.
   (D)   Vacancies in the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired terms by
appointment of the Town Council.
   (E)   The members shall serve without compensation.
   (F)   An appointed member who has three consecutive unexcused absences from
Commission meetings shall lose his or her status as a member of the Recreation
Advisory Commission. Absence due to sickness, death or other emergencies shall
be regarded as excused; members wishing to be excused shall provide prior
notice to the Secretary no later than 12:00 noon on the day of the meeting.
(1991 Code, § 12-22) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
§ 92.03 OFFICERS, PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Recreation Advisory Commission shall elect annually from its
membership a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson.
   (B)   The staff liaison shall serve as Secretary to the Commission.
   (C)   It may adopt by-laws and regulations governing its procedures not
inconsistent with provisions of the state laws and the ordinances of the town.
   (D)   The Recreation Advisory Commission shall, from time to time, make
recommendations to the Town Council concerning rules and regulations governing
the operation and conduct of recreational facilities operated by the town.
   (E)   The Recreation Advisory Commission shall hold regular meetings at such
time and place as it may be designate.
(1991 Code, § 12-23) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
§ 92.04 FACILITIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Town Council shall provide, maintain, operate and supervise public
parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and recreational
facilities owned or controlled by the town or leased or loaned to the town by
the owners thereof.
   (B)   (1)   The Recreation Advisory Commission may make recommendations/
suggest policies to the Town Manager, Town Council and Recreation Department
and serve as a liaison to the citizens of the community.
      (2)   It may advise the town on the following:
         (a)   Recreational and cultural facilities and programs;
         (b)   Operational policies and procedures for recreation activities;
         (c)   Advise in the acquisition of lands and structures through gift,
purchase, lease or loan, as approved by the Town Council; and
         (d)   Lead and/or facilitate the development of long-range
recreational plans to be considered by the Town Council.
(1991 Code, § 12-24) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980; Ord. passed 11-4-2008; Meeting
minutes of 4-14- )
§ 92.05 FISCAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The town, for the purpose of providing recreational activities and
facilities for its citizens, may accept any grant, gift, bequest or donation of
any personal property offered or made for recreation purposes and may accept
any grant, gift or devise of real estate.
   (B)   Any gift, bequest or money or other personal property, grant or devise
of real estate shall be held, used, and finally disposed of in accordance with
the terms and conditions under which such grant, gift or devise is made and
accepted.
   (C)   The Recreation Advisory Commission shall have no authority to incur
any obligations binding the town.
   (D)   The Recreation Department shall have no authority to incur any
obligations binding the town other than current obligations or contracts to be
fully executed within a then current fiscal year and which have been approved
by the Town Manager and the Town Council and are all within the budget
appropriations made by the town for the Recreation Department as a line
department.
(1991 Code, § 12-26) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
§ 92.06 APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   Funds appropriated by the town and budgeted to the Recreation
Department as a line department shall be disbursed by the Town Manager upon
vouchers issued by the town and within the budget appropriations made.
   (B)   Funds received by the Recreation Department from sources other than
appropriations shall be deposited by the town to the credit and for the use of
the Recreation Department.
   (C)   Any funds received by gift, bequest or otherwise shall be disbursed in
accordance with the terms of such gift or bequest.
(1991 Code, § 12-27) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
§ 92.07 REPORTS.
   The Recreation Advisory Commission Chairperson or his or her designee shall
make full and complete reports to the Town Council at such times as may be
requested and at such other times as to the Town Council may seem proper.
(1991 Code, § 12-28) (Ord. passed 3-4-1980; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 92.20 RULES, REGULATIONS GENERALLY.
   The Town Council has the authority and the responsibility to establish and
enforce any rules and regulations governing the use and maintenance of parks
and recreational facilities.
(1991 Code, § 12-46) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
§ 92.21 FORFEITURE OF PRIVILEGES.
   Flagrant misuse of parks and recreational facilities will result in
forfeiture of future reservation privileges.
(1991 Code, § 12-47) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.22 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in any park, recreation center,
playground, ball field, tennis court or any other recreation facility, and the
parking facilities thereof, owned or controlled by the town to:
   (A)   Willfully mark, deface disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any structure, equipment, facilities or other property, either real or
personal;
   (B)   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure
the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant or to dig or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area;
   (C)   Bring in, dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash;
   (D)   Fail to obey all law enforcement officers and Recreation Department
employees, such persons
being hereby authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever
needed in the parks;
   (E)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property;
   (F)   Drive any vehicle on unpaved park areas unless loading or unloading,
or such other areas as may be specifically designated by the Town Manager or
his or her designee;
   (G)   Park a vehicle in other that established or designated parking areas;
   (H)   Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for the
purpose. The Town Council or its designee shall have the authority to regulate
the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure
the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of the public;
   (I)   Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches,
follows generally the rule of “first-come, first served”, unless a picnic
reservation has been issued;
   (J)   Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and
other refuse is place in receptacles provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by
the user to be properly disposed of elsewhere;
   (K)   Camp in any area without permission of the Town Council. No person
shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in any park after closing hours
any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for
such purpose, such as a camper-trailer, house trailer or the like, without the
permission of the Town Council;
   (L)   Bring, or have in his or her possession, or set off or otherwise cause
to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, or other fireworks or
explosives or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or
highway adjacent thereto;
   (M)   Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated for the purpose by the Town Council. No person
shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, or other inflammable material within any park area or any highway, road
or street abutting or contiguous thereto;
   (N)   Enter an area posted as “Closed to the Public”; provided, however,
that this restrictions shall not apply to town employees or officers while on
duty and acting in their official capacity;
   (O)   Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, benches, floors of other
areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a
breach of the public peace;
   (P)   Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area, or participating in any authorized activity;
   (Q)   Sell food, beverages or merchandise or solicit donations for any
individuals, group, company or corporation without express permission from the
Town Manager;
   (R)   Carry, use or possess firearms or other dangerous weapons of any
nature within any park; provided, however, this section shall not apply to law
enforcement officers when engaged in the discharge of their duties;
   (S)   Enter, use or remain within any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and sunrise unless a written permit therefor has been obtained from the Town
Council; and
   (T)   Possess or consume any alcoholic beverages on parks and recreation
property unless a special event permit is received under the provisions of §
71.11.
(1991 Code, § 12-48) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982; Ord. passed 11-4-2008; Ord. O2018-
02, passed 10-9-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.23 FIRE CONTROL.
   No open fires are allowed.
(1991 Code, § 12-49) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.24 CLOSURE.
   Any section or part of any park or recreation area or facility may be
declared closed to the public by the Town Council at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily
or otherwise) or to certain uses, or both.
(1991 Code, § 12-50) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982; Ord. passed 11-4-2008)
§ 92.25 EJECTION OF VIOLATORS.
   The Town Council and any authorized town employees shall have the authority
to eject from any recreation facility any person acting in violation of this
chapter, or in violation of rules and regulations enacted pursuant to this
chapter or any other ordinance adopted by the Town Council.
(1991 Code, § 12-51) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982; Ord. passed 11-4-2008) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 92.26 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS, ISSUANCE.
   All permits required by this chapter may be obtained during normal working
hours at the Town Hall from customer service.
(1991 Code, § 12-52) (Ord. passed 2-23-1982)
CHAPTER 93: CEMETERY
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Maintenance of cemetery lots
   
93.02   Supervision and control
   
93.03   Burial and disinterment; authorization, restrictions
   
93.04   Use, maintenance, care specifications
   
93.05   Removal of trash, debris, building materials and the like
   
93.06   Destroying, injuring, tampering with monuments, flowers, trees and the
like
   
93.07   Sale of merchandise
   
93.08   Firearms, driving on walk and hours of operation
   
93.09   Use as playground
Sale of Lots, Contracts
   
93.20   Execution of conveyances
   
93.21   Transfer by private owner of lot
   
93.22   Prices and fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 MAINTENANCE OF CEMETERY LOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot in any cemetery in the town to
allow or permit the same to grow up in noxious weeds, bushes, vines, grasses or
other like substances, and all cemetery lots shall be kept and maintained by
the owners thereof in a clean condition; in case of the violation of this
section after ten days’ notice, the town authorities may have such lots cleared
and the expense thereof shall be assessed and collected against the owner in
like manner as the taxes levied by the town authorities.
(1991 Code, § 11-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to supervise the cemeteries
of the town and to ensure that the same are kept in good order and maintained
as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Manager may delegate these duties to a department head.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003)
§ 93.03 BURIAL AND DISINTERMENT; AUTHORIZATION, RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Burial in cemetery only. No person shall bury or cause to be buried
any dead body in any place within the town other than a properly established
cemetery.
   (B)   Disinterment. No person shall disinter the remains of any body buried
within the town without first having obtained written permission from the
Health Director and the town and as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 USE, MAINTENANCE, CARE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any work on a lot belonging to any other person
without first notifying the Town Manager, and presenting in writing a note from
the owner authorizing person to do such work.
   (B)   Specifications for the foundations of monuments, tombstones and
markers must be approved in advance by the Town Manager.
   (C)   All interments in municipal cemeteries shall be in vaults, except in
the case of cremation remains.
   (D)   More than one burial in a grave space shall be prohibited, except in
the case of cremation remains.
   (E)   Planting in the municipal cemeteries that may be deemed detrimental to
other property, or operations of the cemeteries may be removed at the direction
of the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.05 REMOVAL OF TRASH, DEBRIS, BUILDING MATERIALS AND THE LIKE.
   The town may remove or cause the removal of any material, buildings,
monuments, trash, debris or other objects that are deemed to be unsightly,
hazardous or not properly maintained.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.06 DESTROYING, INJURING, TAMPERING WITH MONUMENTS, FLOWERS, TREES AND THE
LIKE.
   No person shall destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove, without
permission of the Town Manager, any fence, railing or other work built for the
protection, identification or ornamentation of any tomb, monument or
gravestone, or for the adornment or protection of a cemetery; nor willfully
pluck any flowers or shrubs, or cut, destroy, break, remove or injure any
flower, tree, shrub or plant in any municipal cemetery; or commit any other
trespass in any municipal cemetery.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.07 SALE OF MERCHANDISE.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale any article of merchandise or any
drink or beverage or any other thing of value within the limits of cemeteries.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.08 FIREARMS, DRIVING ON WALK AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any firearms in any cemetery within the town
except in the case of a military burial.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle over walkways or burial sites of a
cemetery, or allow any vehicle to stand thereof if forbidden by the Town
Manager or cemetery authorities.
   (C)   The municipal cemeteries shall be closed between the hours of sunset
and sunrise.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.09 USE AS PLAYGROUND.
   No persons shall use any part of any cemetery within the town as a
playground.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
SALE OF LOTS, CONTRACTS
§ 93.20 EXECUTION OF CONVEYANCES.
   (A)   (1)   The town shall have the power to make contracts for the sale of
lots in the public cemeteries of the town, at prices prescribed by the Town
Council.
      (2)   The size of lots sold shall be in accordance with the cemetery
plots.
      (3)   Indentures for cemetery lots shall be executed by the Mayor and
attested by the Town Clerk and no indenture shall be delivered until the town
has received the full purchase price of the lot.
      (4)   Prices shall include perpetual care.
   (B)   Nonresidents of the town shall be required to pay a purchase price of
50% per lot more than the price established for residents.
   (C)   The town will consider purchase of cemetery lots from individuals who
wish to sell lots back to the town at the price originally sold.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003)
§ 93.21 TRANSFER BY PRIVATE OWNER OF LOT.
   (A)   No interest in a burial space or section in any municipal cemetery may
be transferred or assigned to any third person except by the written consent of
the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   Such transfer or assignment shall not be made for a sum greater than
the original purchase price for any burial space or section.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003)
§ 93.22 PRICES AND FEES.
   All municipal cemetery lot prices shall be established by Council and such
fee schedule shall be published in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2003)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Section
   
94.01   Damaging streets and sidewalks
   
94.02   Obstructing streets or sidewalks
   
94.03   Protection of drainage ditches
§ 94.01 DAMAGING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful to damage any street or sidewalk in the town by a
tractor, plow or otherwise.
(1991 Code, § 14-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.02 OBSTRUCTING STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any street or sidewalk in the town.
(1991 Code, § 14-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.03 PROTECTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES.
   It shall be unlawful to place any tree limbs, rubbish, trash, grass
cuttings, pine straw, shrubbery cuttings, briers, motor oil or any other
objects whatsoever in or upon any of the ditches in the town which serve to
drain surface waters from the streets, roads, sidewalks, easements and
properties in the town.
(1991 Code, § 14-3) (Ord. passed 7-11-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Adoption of the North Carolina Building Code, Fire Prevention Code
(Fire Prevention Code § 101)
   
95.02   Fire Official (Fire Code § 103)
   
95.03   Permits (Fire Code § 105)
   
95.04   Fees
   
95.05   Inspections (Fire Code § 106)
   
95.06   Automatic dialing Fire Department telephone number prohibited
   
95.07   Issuance of violation notice (Fire Code § 109)
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 ADOPTION OF THE NORTH CAROLINA BUILDING CODE, FIRE PREVENTION CODE
(FIRE PREVENTION CODE § 101).
   (A)   The town does hereby adopt the North Carolina Building Code, Fire
Prevention Code, including all pertinent references and requirements therein
and all future changes and additions.
   (B)   There is hereby adopted the inspection schedule as depicted in § 106
of the Fire Prevention Code, and all future changes and additions.
(1991 Code, § 19-1) (Ord. passed 2-2-1999)
§ 95.02 FIRE OFFICIAL (FIRE CODE § 103).
   (A)   The office shall be under the administrative supervision of the
Newport Fire Chief. The Fire Chief will be designated as the Fire Official.
   (B)   Fire Inspectors shall meet the qualifications of and be certified by
the Code Officials Qualification Board, under the North Carolina Department of
Insurance.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the Fire Inspector to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of North Carolina Fire Code,
including all pertinent references, and any other requirements that the Fire
Official may direct.
(1991 Code, § 19-3) (Ord. passed 2-2-1999)
§ 95.03 PERMITS (FIRE CODE § 105).
   Permits required by the Fire Code shall be obtained from the Fire Code
Official.
§ 95.04 FEES.
   Permit fees and service fees are contained in the Town of Newport Fee
Schedule Ordinance.
§ 95.05 INSPECTIONS (FIRE CODE § 106).
   The Town of Newport hereby adopts the schedule of inspections as published
in § 106 of the current edition of the Fire Prevention Code.
§ 95.06 AUTOMATIC DIALING FIRE DEPARTMENT TELEPHONE NUMBER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or developer to install or
operate in any building a fire alarm system containing a device which
automatically dials a telephone number of the Fire Department to report an
alarm. The Fire Code Official should be contacted for advice of the appropriate
telephone number to use located at the E911 dispatch center.
(1991 Code, § 19-24) (Ord. passed 2-2-1999) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 ISSUANCE OF VIOLATION NOTICE (FIRE CODE § 109).
   Violations of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code shall be remedied by
procedures and actions by § 109 of the Fire Prevention Code as referenced
herein.
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty, generally.
      (1)   The penalty for the first offense shall be $35, $125 for the second
offense and $500 for the third and subsequent offenses of the same or similar
nature within any one calendar year. Thirty days shall be given to remedy a
violation before an additional penalty is imposed. Failure to so correct shall
cause each day of the same or similar violation to be a separate offense.
      (2)   The penalties imposed are civil penalties to be recovered by the
town in a civil action in the nature of debt, if the offender does not pay the
penalty within the prescribed period of time after he or she has been cited for
violation of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code.
      (3)   The notice of violation may specify a period during which the
violation shall be corrected. If it is not corrected during the specified
period of time, the violator shall be guilty of a new and separate offense for
each day that the violation continues.
      (4)   If the violator does not pay the civil penalty within 15 days after
service or posting of the notice of violation, an additional civil penalty in
the sum of $10, in the nature of a delinquency charge, shall be added to the
amount specified in the notice of violation, and the notice of delinquency
charge shall be served on the violator or mailed to him or her, again by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (5)   The delinquency notice shall advise the violator that failure to
comply with the order of the Fire Official may result in the issuance of
criminal process to enforce the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code.
   (B)   Court enforcement.
      (1)   Should any person violate the Fire Code or any part of this
chapter, and the Inspector determines that the violation is best remedied by a
court of competent jurisdiction, he or she shall have the authority to seek
remedy by mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order to abate or seeking a
criminal warrant or criminal summons charging the violator with a misdemeanor.
A maximum fine of $500 is imposed for each offense. Each day the violation
occurs or continues shall be a separate offense.
      (2)   The imposition of any penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue; and violators shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within the time specified under
division (A)(3) above.
(1991 Code, § 19-28) (Ord. passed 2-2-1999)
CHAPTER 96: BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
96.01   Permits
   
96.02   Responsibilities of alarm users
   
96.03   Violations
   
96.04   Instructions for completing alarm permit applications
   
96.05   Compliance
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 PERMITS.
   (A)   No automatic burglar alarm system or automatic burglar alarm shall be
located in the town without first obtaining a permit from the Town Clerk and
registering the system. Each permit shall be numbered, and this number shall be
given by the permittee to the alarm company.
   (B)   Burglar alarm system permits will be issued by the Town Clerk for a
period of one year. Applications for a permit will be on a form provided by the
Town Clerk.
   (C)   Renewals will be valid for a period of one year.
   (D)   A separate alarm permit shall be required for each premises on which a
burglar alarm system is used or installed. Burglar alarm system permits are
nontransferable.
(Ord. passed 3-2-2010)
§ 96.02 RESPONSIBILITIES OF ALARM USERS.
   (A)   The permit holder, to whom a permit is issued, shall be responsible
for compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
   (B)   The alarm mechanism will be adjusted to suppress false indications of
trouble so that the alarm system will not be activated due to:
      (1)   Flashes of light;
      (2)   Rattling and vibrating windows or doors caused by wind;
      (3)   Vehicular noise;
      (4)   Electrical power fluctuations; and
      (5)   Other forces unrelated to an actual emergency.
   (C)   The permit holder shall be responsible for all false activations due
to faulty equipment, improper adjustment of equipment or human error.
   (D)   An authorized person must respond to the site of the alarm within 30
minutes if requested to do so by the Police Department.
   (E)   The alarm system shall be adjusted to allow an intermittent sound
audible outside of an enclosed building for no longer than 30 minutes after
activation.
   (F)   Except for testing at normal intervals during the hours from 9:00 a.m.
until 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, the alarm must not be manually activated
for any reason other than the occurrence of an event that the system was
intended to report (i.e., robbery, holdup, burglary, break-in).
   (G)   Property where the alarm device is located must be properly secured to
prevent birds, animals, rats, rodents and other animals from entering the
premises or activating the alarm system.
   (H)   The permit holder shall authorize the Chief of Police or his or her
designee to contact the alarm company for any purpose, including, but not
limited to, obtaining records and information about alarm calls or activation.
   (I)   The permit holder shall request the alarm company to attempt to verify
that the alarm signal is valid by telephoning the alarm user before requesting
a dispatch. A second call to a different number shall be standard operating
procedure by the alarm company if the first call fails to reach an alarm user
who can properly identify himself or herself, except in the case of panic or
holdup, burglary or robbery in progress.
(Ord. passed 3-2-2010)
§ 96.03 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A person who operates an alarm system with a permit (permit holder)
will be in violation of the chapter if any of the following occurs.
      (1)   Activating an alarm system:
         (a)   When no burglary, robbery or other crime dangerous to life or
property is being committed or attempted on the premises, except for normal,
periodic testing during prescribed hours; or
         (b)   Otherwise causing an alarm when there is no burglary, robbery or
other emergency for which the alarm system is designed to detect.
      (2)   Failure to keep the information on alarm applications current;
      (3)   Using an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more
than ten minutes or intermittently for more than 30 minutes and in any case for
more than 30 minutes total time; or
      (4)   Using an automatic telephone dialing device that reports, activates
a signal, direct dials, makes contact with or causes to be transmitted a
recorded message or otherwise makes direct contact with the Town Police
Department and/or the County 911 Center or any other central receiving station.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to activate an alarm system for
the purpose of summoning police personnel when no burglary, robbery or other
crime causing danger to life or property is in progress or is being attempted
on the premises.
   (C)   A permit may be suspended for:
      (1)   False statement in the application; and/or
      (2)   Violation of any of the sections dealing with the responsibilities
of the alarm user.
(Ord. passed 3-2-2010) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING ALARM PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Permit holder.
      (1)   The permit holder should be the person charged with the
responsibility of maintaining the premises and the operation of the alarm
system. This person will also be held responsible should service fees, civil
penalties or fines be assessed.
      (2)   For a residential alarm, the permit holder shall be the head of the
household or any resident responsible adult. For a business alarm, the permit
holder shall be the owner, manager, security director, building manager or one
who is the responsible adult.
   (B)   Contact person. The first person in this category should be the person
most readily available to answer the alarm, should the Police Department
require someone. This person must have access to the building and the alarm
device, be prepared to inactivate or repair any malfunctioning alarm, and
provide security to the building. For the homeowner, this should be a close
neighbor, friend or relative, or the alarm company representative, if the alarm
company is willing to send someone with those qualifications. The person
designated must be able to reach the location with 30 minutes after being
requested by the Police Department.
   (C)   Alternate contact person. The second person designated as a contact
person should meet the same requirements as the first. He or she will be
contacted should the first contact person not be available. There must be a
minimum of two persons listed on the permit application as a contact person.
   (D)   Non-transferrable permit. An alarm registration/permit cannot be
transferred to another alarm user. The alarm user shall inform the Police
Department within three days of any change that alters any information listed
on the application. No fee will be assessed for such changes.
   (E)   Available to Police Department. The person responsible for the
maintenance of the alarm must be the permit holder. A 24-hour, seven-day
telephone number must be kept on file with the Police Department.
   (F)   Information confidential. All information provided to the town on
alarm permit applications is confidential information and is not available to
any other agency or individual except as may be required by law or court order.
(Ord. passed 3-2-2010)
§ 96.05 COMPLIANCE.
   Burglar alarm systems existing on the effective date of this chapter shall
have 60 days to comply with this chapter, except that automatic telephone
dialing systems shall be discontinued within 14 days.
(Ord. passed 3-2-2010)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Excessive false alarms, i.e., are alarms when no burglary, robbery or
other crime is in progress, or is being attempted on the premises. It is hereby
found and determined that three or more false alarms within a 12-month period
is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance and shall be unlawful.
   (B)   Civil penalties for false alarms within any 12-month period may be
assessed against an alarm user. Refer to the chart located in the Clerk’s
office.
(Ord. passed 3-2-2010)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOL
      
111.   ADULT BUSINESSES
      
112.   MASSAGE AND HEALTH SALONS
      
113.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOL
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Closing hours for sale
   
110.02   Drinking in public places
   
110.03   Sale of alcoholic beverages before noon
Consumption and Possession of Malt Beverages and Unfortified Wine
   
110.15   Definitions
   
110.16   Consumption on the public streets and on municipal property
   
110.17   Possession of open containers on the public streets and on municipal
property prohibited
   
110.18   Possession during special events prohibited
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 CLOSING HOURS FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful to sell malt beverages, unfortified wine and fortified
wine for on-premises consumption between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to establishments having
state brown-bagging or mixed beverage permits.
(1991 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. passed 4-6-1982; Ord. passed 4-3-1990; Meeting minutes
of 8-5-2009) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.02 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall consume, serve or drink wine, beer, whiskey or alcoholic
beverages of any kind on or in the public streets, boulevards, alleys, parks,
sidewalks, public grounds or public buildings within the town.
(1991 Code, § 3-2) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BEFORE NOON.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87, any establishment located
in the corporate limits of the city and holding an ABC permit issued pursuant
to G.S. 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit beginning
at 10 a.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. 2017-02, passed 9-14-2017)
CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF MALT BEVERAGES AND UNFORTIFIED WINE
§ 110.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MALT BEVERAGE. Beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter and any other brewed or
fermented beverage or alcohol consumable containing at least 0.5%, and not more
than 6% alcohol by volume.
(G.S. § 18B-101(9))
   OPEN CONTAINER. A container whose seal has been broken or a container other
than the manufacturer’s unopened original container.
(G.S. § 18B-300(c))
   PUBLIC STREET. Highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley, bridge or
other way within and/or under the control of the town and open to public use,
including the sidewalks of any such street.
   UNFORTIFIED WINE. Wine or alcohol consumable that has an alcoholic content
produced only by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet or
dextrose sugar, and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17% alcohol
by volume.
(G.S. § 18B-101(15))
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995)
§ 110.16 CONSUMPTION ON THE PUBLIC STREETS AND ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public
streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or
outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied or controlled by the town
including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant
thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational areas,
tennis courts and other athletic fields.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.17 POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS ON THE PUBLIC STREETS AND ON MUNICIPAL
PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine
on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any
property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned,
occupied or controlled by the town including, but not limited to, public
buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public
parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts and other athletic
fields.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.18 POSSESSION DURING SPECIAL EVENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverages and/or
unfortified wine on public streets, alleys or parking lots which are
temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of §§
110.15 through
110.18 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with G.S. § 14-
4.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995)
CHAPTER 111: ADULT BUSINESSES
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   Patronage of adult establishment by minors, employment of minors and
the like
   
111.04   Restrictions as to adult establishments
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE. A bookstore/video store:
      (1)   Which receives a majority of its gross income during any calendar
month from the sale or rental of publications (including videos, books,
magazines and other periodicals) which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section; or
      (2)   Having a preponderance of its publications, books, magazines,
videos and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined by this section.
   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. An adult bookstore/video store, adult motion picture
theater, adult mini motion picture theater or adult live entertainment
business, excluding massage parlors.
   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. Any performance of or providing of a service on a
fee basis, i.e., for compensation in any form, involving the actual presence of
real people which exhibits specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined in this section.
   ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. Any establishment or business wherein
adult live entertainment is shown for observation by patrons.
   ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with viewing booths
designed to hold patrons which is used for presenting motion pictures or video
tapes, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for
observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building or premises “used “for
presenting motion pictures or video tapes, a preponderance of which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined by this section, for observation by patrons therein. ADULT MOTION
PICTURE THEATER does not include any adult mini motion picture theater as
defined by this section.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED DEVICES. Without limitation, any artificial or simulated
specified anatomical area or other device or paraphernalia that is designed
principally for specified sexual activities, but shall not mean any
contraceptive device.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      (1)   Human genitals, pubic region;
      (2)   Buttock;
      (3)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
      (4)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus or sodomy; or
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts.
(Ord. passed 2-16-1993)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person desiring to open or operate an adult establishment shall obtain a
license by filing an application addressed to the Town Council, prior to
commencement of the adult establishment.
   (A)   Application procedures. The application shall be in writing and shall
set forth the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant; and, if such applicant is a
corporation, the address of such corporation and its officers, directors and
shareholders;
      (2)   Qualifications and experience of the applicant, which must be
plainly stated, in writing;
      (3)   Application fee: each applicant shall pay a fee of $50 which must
be tendered at the time the application is filed;
      (4)   Qualifications of applicant: an applicant for a license required by
this chapter, prior to making an application for such a license, must:
         (a)   Submit proof of good moral character, and in the case of
applicants who are corporations, such corporation must be created in or
domesticated by the laws of this state, and affidavits of good character shall
be submitted on all officers, directors and shareholders if there are less than
11 shareholders; and
         (b)   Submit to the Town Police Department:
            1.   The full name, address, physical deception, age, driver’s
license number and Social Security number of all persons currently a part of
the owners, officers, directors or shareholders (if less than 11 shareholders)
of or employed by the adult establishment at the time of application. The term
CURRENTLY EMPLOYED includes all persons who manage, operate or work in the
adult establishment and all persons working for the adult establishment even if
such persons would otherwise be considered independent contractors; and
            2.   Within five days of any change of ownership in or officers,
directors and any shareholders (if there are less than 11) of such business or
of the hiring or contracting with any person to become an employee, the
applicant shall also provide all information listed above concerning all
persons hired or contracted for after the date of application and all new
owners, officers, directors or shareholders (if there are less than 11
shareholders).
   (B)   Consideration of the application.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall investigate all applicants seeking an
adult establishment business license and employees, owners, directors or
shareholders (if less than 11 shareholders) of the adult establishment prior to
the approval of the application.
      (2)   Upon the completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall
make a recommendation to the Town Council as to whether the license should be
granted. The Town Council shall vote on whether to approve or deny each
application.
      (3)   Applicants may be denied a license if anyone (employee, owner,
officer, directors or shareholders of a corporation which has less than 11
shareholders) required to be investigated has been convicted of a felony, or of
a crime involving prostitution, assignation or a related offense, if the five
years immediately preceding the date of the license application or is found not
to be of good moral character.
   (C)   License.
      (1)   License; issuance. If the applicant for a license as required by
this chapter is submitted in proper form and is approved by the Town Council,
the Town Clerk shall issue a business license to such applicant. Once issued,
the license remains in effect with no renewal required so long as all
provisions of this chapter are met.
      (2)   License; denial of issuance. If an applicant is refused a license
by the Town Council, the applicant shall have an opportunity to review his or
her application with the Town Council or its designee in order to determine the
reason(s) for denial.
      (3)   License; reasons for revocation.
         (a)   Any person required to be investigated is convicted of any of
the offenses enumerated above in division (B)(3);
         (b)   An adult establishment continues to employ an existing employee
who is convicted of any of the offenses enumerated above in division (B)(3);
         (c)   The adult establishment hires a person in violation of any
requirement of this chapter, if such hiring was known or should have been known
by the adult establishment to be a violation;
         (d)   The adult establishment employs minors for the performance of
adult live entertainment or permits minors to patronize the adult
establishment;
         (e)   Violation of any alcohol control or licensing law; and
         (f)   Any other requirement of this chapter is not met.
   (D)   License; revocation procedure; recommendation by the Chief of Police.
      (1)   Whenever the Chief of Police shall have good cause to believe there
exists grounds for revocation of any license under this chapter, he or she
shall submit a written recommendation of revocation to the Town Council and, by
registered mail, forward a copy of the recommendation to the licensee.
      (2)   Good cause shall be any violation of any requirement of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-16-1993) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 PATRONAGE OF ADULT ESTABLISHMENT BY MINORS, EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS AND
THE LIKE.
   (A)   Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21
years of age to patronize any adult establishment.
   (B)   Duty of the owner/operator of the adult establishment. It shall be the
duty of the owner/operator of any such adult establishment to determine the age
of the persons patronizing such establishment.
   (C)   Hiring minors. It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator of any such
adult establishment to hire a minor.
   (D)   Exploitation of minors. It shall be unlawful to display or sell any
photograph, moving picture or video tape depicting anyone under 18 years of age
in any specified sexual activity or showing specified anatomical areas.
   (E)   Violations. A violation of this section shall be grounds for
revocation of the license of such establishment. Such revocation shall not
exclude any and all other remedies, penalties or fines.
(Ord. passed 2-16-1993) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 RESTRICTIONS AS TO ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall permit any building, premises, structure or other
facility that contains any adult establishment to contain any other kind of
adult establishment. No person shall permit any building, premises, structure
or other facility in which sexually oriented devices are sold, distributed,
exhibited, or contained to contain any adult establishment.
   (B)   No person shall permit any viewing booth in an adult mini movie
picture theater to be occupied by more than one person at any time,
(Ord. passed 2-16-1993) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Each day on which any violation of this chapter shall continue shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation and offense. Each offense shall be
punishable by a fine of $200 or imprisonment for 30 days or both, and shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty of $500 per day to be collected by the
town in a civil action if the offender does not pay the civil penalty within
ten days of receiving a notice of the levy of the penalty by the Town Council.
In addition, this chapter may be enforced by injunction or abatement by an
action brought in the General Court of Justice as provided by G.S. § 160A-175.
(Ord. passed 2-16-1993)
CHAPTER 112: MASSAGE AND HEALTH SALONS
Section
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Purpose and scope
   
112.03   Hours of operation
   
112.04   Patronage of massage parlors by minors
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. A person who applies manual or mechanical massage or
similar treatment to the human trunk or limbs.
(1991 Code, § 9-21) (Ord. passed 4-24-1984)
§ 112.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   To protect the general health, safety and welfare, the following
licensing provisions are ordained for the privilege of carrying on the
business, trade or profession of masseur or masseuse and for the operation or
carrying on of the business, trade or profession commonly known as a massage
parlor, health salon, physical culture studio, club or establishment, or
similar establishments wherein physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy or other
physical treatment of the human body is carried on or practiced.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a regularly
established and licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, medical clinic or
licensed physical therapist, nor to the office or clinic operated by a duly
qualified and licensed medical practitioner or chiropractor in connection with
his or her practice of medicine or chiropractic; provided, however, that such
office or clinic is regularly used by such medical practitioner or chiropractor
as his or her principal location for his or her practice of medicine or
chiropractic.
(1991 Code, § 9-22) (Ord. passed 4-24-1984)
§ 112.03 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No masseur or masseuse or any person or party engaging in any of the
businesses licensed by this chapter shall engage in such business, trade,
profession, occupation or calling, except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.; nor shall any operator of a massage parlor or establishment or
business set out in this chapter operate the same except between such hours.
(1991 Code, § 9-23) (Ord. passed 4-24-1984) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 PATRONAGE OF MASSAGE PARLORS BY MINORS.
   (A)   Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to patronize any massage parlor or similar establishment licensed
pursuant to this chapter, unless such person carries with him or her at the
time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given,
signed by a regularly licensed physician.
   (B)   Duty of operator. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such
massage parlor or similar establishment licensed pursuant to this chapter to
determine the age of the person patronizing such establishment and a violation
of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such
establishment.
(1991 Code, § 9-24) (Ord. passed 4-24-1984) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Violations of §
112.03 shall be considered under this code as an offense and persons found
guilty of such violations shall be punishable as provided in §
10.99, in addition to the revocation of license.
(1991 Code, § 9-23) (Ord. passed 4-24-1984)
CHAPTER 113: VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definition
Certificate of Convenience and Necessity
   
113.15   Required
   
113.16   Application; proof of insurance
   
113.17   Issuance
   
113.18   Franchise; term
   
113.19   Determination
   
113.20   Hearings
   
113.21   Burden of proof
   
113.22   Failure to begin operations
   
113.23   Transfer
   
113.24   Revocation
   
113.25   Substitution of vehicles
   
113.26   Parking on public streets or public property
   
113.27   Payment of license fees
   
113.28   Permanent location
   
113.29   Adequate equipment and personnel
   
113.30   Inspection of vehicles for hire
Drivers
   
113.45   Driver’s permit
   
113.46   Records to be maintained
   
113.47   Inspection of records and reports
   
113.48   Proper treatment of taxicab passengers
   
113.49   Display of certain information inside vehicles for hire
   
113.50   Markings for taxicabs
   
113.51   Revocation
   
113.52   Appeals
General Regulations
   
113.65   Aid to investigation
   
113.66   Obtaining service intending not to pay
   
113.67   Restriction on waiting on public streets
   
113.68   Restriction on non-permitted vehicles and drivers
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. When used in this chapter, shall mean any motor vehicle seating
nine or fewer passengers operated upon any street or highway on call or on
demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between
such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passengers so
being transported, and shall not include motor vehicles or motor vehicle
carriers exempted from municipal regulations under the state statutes or under
the statutes of the United States.
(1991 Code, § 18-26) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
§ 113.15 REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or employ, assist or
enable others to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the town or
between the town and any unincorporated place within five miles of the town
without having first applied for and secured from the Town Council a
certificate of convenience and necessity as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   A person operating a taxicab as an employee of one holding a duly
issued certificate of convenience and necessity shall be subject to the
provisions of §§
113.45 through
113.52 and to other applicable provisions of this chapter, but need not hold a
certificate of convenience and necessity.
(1991 Code, § 18-46) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975; Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see
§
113.99
§ 113.16 APPLICATION; PROOF OF INSURANCE.
   Every person desiring to operate a taxicab from one place to another within
the town’s corporate limits or from a place within the town to any other place
which is unincorporated and lies within five miles of the town limits or from a
place which is unincorporated and lies within five miles of the town limits
shall file on forms supplied by the Town Clerk an application for a certificate
of convenience and necessity. Such application shall be accompanied with proof
of liability insurance issued by a company licensed to do business in the state
with the limits specified in G.S. § 20-280.
(1991 Code, § 18-47) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975; Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.17 ISSUANCE.
   The Town Council shall have power and it shall be its duty to order certain
certificates required by this subchapter issued, or to refuse to issue certain
certificates, or to issue certificates for a partial exercise only of the
privileges sought, and may attach to the exercise of the rights granted by such
certificate such terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience
and necessity may require.
(1991 Code, § 18-48) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.18 FRANCHISE; TERM.
   A certificate issued under this subchapter shall constitute a franchise from
the town for the operation of taxicabs within the town, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, for one year, unless a shorter period of time is
specified in the certificate. Applications for renewal shall be filed annually
and hearings conducted as herein provided.
(1991 Code, § 18-49) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.19 DETERMINATION.
   (A)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require
the franchising of taxicabs, the Town Council shall, among other things, take
into consideration the following factors:
      (1)   Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require such
proposed or additional taxicab service within the town;
      (2)   The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of
the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory;
      (3)   The number and condition of equipment;
      (4)   The schedule of proposed rates to be charged;
      (5)   The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for increased
service, if any;
      (6)   Whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public, both
vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved;
      (7)   Whether or not adequate provision has been made for off-street
parking of taxicabs;
      (8)   The experience of the applicant in the taxicab business;
      (9)   The character and reputation of the applicant;
      (10)   Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and
advisable; and
      (11)   (a)   Whether or not the applicant:
            1.   Has been convicted of a felony against this state or
conviction of any offense against another state which would have been a felony
if committed in this state;
            2.   Has violated any federal or state law relating to the use,
possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
            3.   Is addicted to or habitually uses alcoholic beverages or
narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
            4.   Has violated any federal or state law relating to
prostitution;
            5.   Is not a citizen of the United States of America; or
            6.   Has habitually violated traffic laws or ordinances.
         (b)   A finding that any of the provisions of this division (A)(11)
are true shall automatically disqualify the applicant from receiving a
certificate of convenience or necessity.
   (B)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a
certificate of convenience and necessity, the Town Council, or a committee
thereof, shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts, and may, if
it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the Chief of
Police or any other officer or employee of the town.
(1991 Code, § 18-50) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975; Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.20 HEARINGS.
   Each application for a certificate of convenience and necessity under this
subchapter shall be scheduled for a hearing not later than 20 days after the
same is filed and the applicant shall be notified by the Clerk by mail
addressed to the business address set forth in the application of the date and
time of such hearing, such notification to be sent at least ten days before the
date set for the hearing. The Clerk shall also, within the same time, notify
all persons who at that time hold certificates of convenience and necessity for
the operation of taxicabs within the town of the date and time of such hearing,
and the name of the applicant. In addition, the Clerk shall cause to be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the town
at least ten days before such hearing, a notice setting forth the name of the
applicant and the date and time of the hearing. The cost of such publication
shall be paid by the applicant.
(1991 Code, § 18-51) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.21 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence
of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicabs specified
in his or her application, and all other facts required for the granting of a
certificate.
(1991 Code, § 18-52) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.22 FAILURE TO BEGIN OPERATIONS.
   If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and the applicant shall fail to
begin operations within 60 days after the date of the certificate, the
certificate shall become null and void.
(1991 Code, § 18-53) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.23 TRANSFER.
   A certificate shall not be transferable without the consent of the Town
Council. Application for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same manner
as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. The
proceeding upon such application for a transfer shall be the same as those
described for the issuance of a certificate, except that the question of public
convenience and necessity need not be proved.
(1991 Code, § 18-54) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.24 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Town Council may at any time, after a public hearing, revoke any
certificate issued by authority of this subchapter for any one or more of the
following causes:
      (1)   Failure to operate the taxicabs specified in the certificate in
such a manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently;
      (2)   Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair;
      (3)   Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by law;
      (4)   Failure to pay the municipal taxes or license fees imposed upon
taxicabs;
      (5)   Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic
and safety ordinances, or state or federal laws relating to alcoholic
beverages, narcotic drugs or prostitution;
      (6)   Failure to report accidents;
      (7)   Willful failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or
other ordinances or state laws relating to the operation of taxicabs; or
      (8)   Any other matter which would have prevented the issuance of the
permit as provided in §
113.19.
   (B)   No certificate shall be revoked until the owner has had at least five
days’ notice given by the Clerk by personal service or registered mail of the
charges against him or her, and of the time and place of a hearing on such
charges to be held by the Town Council. If after the hearing it is found that
the owner is guilty of one or more of the offenses listed herein, the Town
Council shall have the power to revoke the certificate, or to condition a
revocation upon compliance with its order within any time fixed by it.
(1991 Code, § 18-55) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975; Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.25 SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLES.
   The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by appropriate
endorsement thereon by the Clerk, substitute another vehicle or other vehicles
for the vehicle or vehicles for which the certificate was granted. In such
instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to such
substitute vehicle or vehicles.
(1991 Code, § 18-56) (Ord. passed 8-5-1975)
§ 113.26 PARKING ON PUBLIC STREETS OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   The operator of a taxi may not park on a public street nor on public
property for the purpose of waiting to receive a call for service, and may not
pick up nor discharge passengers and luggage on a public street except to stop
only for a brief moment required so to do.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.27 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES.
   No owner shall operate any taxicab in the town without first having paid to
the town a license fee in the sum of $15 per fiscal year or part thereof for
each vehicle to be operated in the town as a taxicab. The fee is separate from
the fee required for the issuance of a driver’s permit.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.28 PERMANENT LOCATION.
   Every holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity shall have a
permanent location of the business within Beaufort, Morehead City, Atlantic
Beach, Emerald Isle, Pine Knoll Shores, Indian Beach, Cape Carteret, Havelock
or Newport, and shall have on file with the Chief of Police of the Town of
Newport an address and a telephone number where he or a person responsible for
the operation of the business can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
The holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity shall also have the
name, address and telephone number of every driver and employee of the business
and furnish the same to the Chief of Police or his or her designee upon demand.
If the location or phone number is changed, the Chief of Police shall be given
notice in writing stating the new location or phone number or both within ten
days of such change.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.29 ADEQUATE EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL.
   The holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity shall have a number
of operators and number of taxicabs sufficient to answer a call for service
within the town within 30 minutes of receiving such call.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.30 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of convenience and
necessity and from time to time thereafter, and the Chief of Police or his or
her designee shall require evidence of an inspection or cause to be made an
inspection of vehicles for hire licensed under this subchapter. Evidence of the
inspection of a motor vehicle shall be in the form of a copy of a safety
inspection certificate completed by a certified state inspection station. Such
certificate shall be provided at the time of and prior to the issuance or
renewal of a license.
      (2)   All vehicles for hire shall:
         (a)   Have and maintain properly functioning road lamps, tail lights,
directional signals, brakes and rearview mirrors;
         (b)   Be maintained in a safe mechanical condition with all safety
equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the vehicle is in
service;
         (c)   Be maintained in a clean, litter-free and sanitary condition.
The exterior of a vehicle shall be washed at least weekly. The interior of a
vehicle shall be vacuumed and cleaned at least weekly. All upholstery shall be
maintained so it is free of tears, stains, dirt and trash;
         (d)   Be not more than ten years old and/or mileage exceeding 250,000
miles unless that vehicle is declared a unique vehicle. Vehicles currently in
service that exceed ten years in age and/or 250,000 miles in mileage must be
approved on an annual basis by the Chief of Police or his or her designee;
         (e)   Be free of significant rust, dents, scratches, chips and
abrasions;
         (f)   Have a properly maintained exhaust system; and
         (g)   Be free of broken or cracked windows or mirrors.
   (B)   The operator shall every week inspect every vehicle he or she operates
for compliance with this section. If after issuance of a license, any vehicle
for hire shall be found by the Chief of Police or his or her designee not to
comply with the requirements of this section or to be unsafe or unfit for
operation, notice shall be given to the holder of the operator’s license, and
such vehicle shall not thereafter be operated as a vehicle for hire until it
has been put in a safe condition for such operation and in compliance with this
section. Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve any owner or operator of
any vehicle from all or any duties imposed by law nor relieve such owner or
operator from liability resulting from the unfitness of such vehicle or the
negligent operation thereof.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
DRIVERS
§ 113.45 DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle for hire within the town nor
between the town and any unincorporated place within five miles of the town
until such person shall have been granted a permit by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee to do so. Each application for a permit shall contain the
name, age and address of the applicant, as well as a statement of whether the
applicant has been convicted of a felony in North Carolina or a crime in
another state which if committed in North Carolina would be a felony, a
violation of any state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of
intoxicating liquors, any federal or state statute relating to prostitution or
any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession or sale of
controlled substances, whether such applicant is a citizen of the United
States, whether such applicant is an habitual user of intoxicating liquors or
controlled substances, whether the applicant has been an habitual violator of
traffic laws and ordinances, and whether the applicant is a registered sex
offender. As provided in G.S. § 160A-304, an applicant shall be fingerprinted
and photographed and shall sign a form consenting to the use of the applicant’s
identifying information and fingerprints for the purposes of conducting a state
criminal history records check through the North Carolina Department of
Justice, Division of Criminal Information Network, and a national criminal
history records check through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The
application shall be accompanied by the fee as required by the fee schedule and
an additional amount to be determined by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee to cover the cost of the fingerprint check. All fees are
nonrefundable. All identifying information and information obtained from the
criminal history records check shall be confidential and shall not be a public
record under G.S. Ch. 132. This information shall be disseminated only to Town
Police Department personnel and the Chief of Police or his or her designee to
the extent necessary to enforce this section. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall refuse to issue a permit to anyone who has been convicted of
committing a felony or violating any law designated in this section or to
anyone who is a habitual user of intoxicating liquors or controlled substances,
a habitual violator of traffic laws and ordinances, a registered sex offender,
or is not a citizen of the United States unless a legal resident with a valid
green card.
      (2)   A criminal records check shall be performed of all taxicab driver
applicants.
      (3)   Each applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall make application
on a form provided by the Police Department. The application shall contain the
applicant’s physical condition, former employers, and driver license number and
state of issue and another information required on the application. The
application shall be signed and notarized by the applicant.
   (B)   Each applicant or holder of a taxicab permit shall:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age, and eligible to work in the United
States;
      (2)   Have possessed a driver license for the past 12 months issued by
any state of the United States;
      (3)   Have not committed an offense of driving while subject to an
impairing substance or with an alcohol concentration of 0.08, or more, within
five years;
      (4)   Not have committed a felony unless his or her citizenship has been
restored;
      (5)   Not have committed an offense relating to prostitution or
controlled substances within five years; and
      (6)   Not have been convicted of more than two motor vehicle moving
violations in the past 12 months.
   (C)   A taxicab driver applicant must not be physically or mentally
incapable of operating a taxicab. Upon request by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee, the applicant must submit a written opinion from a physician
stating that the applicant is physically capable and/or mentally competent to
operate a taxicab.
   (D)   The applicant shall not make a material false or misleading statement
on the application for a taxicab driver permit. An applicant cannot submit more
than one application in any 90-day period.
   (E)   An applicant or taxicab driver shall have a valid North Carolina
driver’s license. Upon revocation of a driver’s license by the North Carolina
Division of Motor Vehicles or a court, a taxicab driver permit shall become
automatically immediately revoked.
   (F)   Applicants for initial and renewal driver’s permits and permittees
shall submit to and pass controlled substance examinations at such times and
places determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. In addition,
upon reasonable suspicion or after an accident involving any such driver, the
driver may be required to pass a controlled substance examination. The
applicants and drivers shall bear the cost of such examinations. Such
examinations shall be conducted by a nationally recognized laboratory, and the
person being examined shall comply with all directions of the laboratory.
   (G)   Each driver’s permit issued by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee under this section shall indicate the name, age and residence of the
permittee and a copy of the photograph of the permittee shall be attached
thereto. Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall, at all times, while driving
the same upon the public streets of the city, carry the driver’s permit issued
to him or her under this section. All drivers’ permits shall be valid for one
year following the date of issuance.
   (H)   No permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be
transferable. Every such permit shall be subject to cancellation by the Chief
of Police or his or her designee for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or any state or local law governing and regulating the operation
of vehicles for hire. A driver’s permit shall be issued only to the owner or
lessee of the vehicle or an employee of such owner or lessee. A lessee shall
not be required to hold a vehicle for hire license in addition to a driver’s
permit.
   (I)   The fee for a driver’s permit shall be in the amount of $15 and shall
be due annually prior to the issue or renewal of the permit. Costs as provided
in division (A) above must also be paid prior to the issue or renewal of a
permit.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.46 RECORDS TO BE MAINTAINED.
   (A)   Every operator shall maintain the following records for each vehicle
for hire:
      (1)   For on-demand vehicles for hire, a daily manifest of calls received
from persons requesting transportation. For all vehicles for hire, a daily
schedule or manifest of the trips made each day including the time, place of
origin and destination and drop-off location of each trip and the number of
passengers and amount of fare for each trip;
      (2)   A continuous record of the mileage at the beginning and ending of
each month during the license period and a report of the dates and reasons for
any vehicle being out-of-service during the month;
      (3)   Copies of all state safety inspection certificates, if applicable;
      (4)   Records of the dates of inspection and maintenance of the vehicle
including the types and results of inspections and any maintenance performed;
      (5)   Records of the inspection and maintenance of taximeters, if
applicable;
      (6)   A list of all drivers of the vehicles for hire; and
      (7)   Copies of insurance policies and changes to insurance.
   (B)   Such records shall be maintained for a period of two years, except
that drivers’ manifests shall be maintained for 180 days.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.47 INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the right to
inspect the records of an operator of a vehicle for hire at any time during
normal business hours of the operation. In addition, the holder of a
certificate of convenience and necessity (herein “holder”) operator shall
provide reports to the Chief of Police or his or her designee as follows:
      (1)   On the first day of the month during each month of the license
period, the holder shall provide the beginning and ending mileage of the
vehicle for the previous month and a summary of inspections and maintenance
activities;
      (2)   A report of the termination of employment of any driver for any
reason within 15 days of the date thereof;
      (3)   A copy of the state safety inspection certificate within 15 days of
the annual inspection of each vehicle, if applicable;
      (4)   A summary of any changes in the insurance coverages for a vehicle
for hire as required by §
113.16;
      (5)   A report of the revocation of the North Carolina driver’s license
of any operator or any driver or any conviction of the operator or any driver
of any of the offenses described in §
113.51 within five days thereof; and
      (6)   A report of any changes in the persons having a beneficial interest
in the business within five days thereof.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee may require such reports to
be made on forms approved and developed by the town. The failure to provide any
of the reports set forth above shall be grounds for revocation of an operator’s
license. In addition, each failure shall subject the operator to the penalties
set forth in the town code.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.48 PROPER TREATMENT OF TAXICAB PASSENGERS.
   No taxicab driver may:
   (A)   Deceive or attempt to deceive a passenger or prospective passenger as
to his or her destination, shortest route to his or her destination or rate and
fare to be charged;
   (B)   Take a longer route to the destination designated by the passenger
than necessary, unless requested to do so by the passenger;
   (C)   Permit any person, other than the original passenger, to occupy or
ride in the taxicab without the consent of the original passenger; or
   (D)   Fail to comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of a passenger
as to speed and routes to be taken.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.49 DISPLAY OF CERTAIN INFORMATION INSIDE VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle for hire, as well as the owner thereof,
shall be responsible for ensuring that the following items are displayed within
the vehicle so as to be visible, legible and readable to passengers:
      (1)   The driver’s permit;
      (2)   A photograph of the driver, of a size designated by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. A duplicate copy thereof shall also be furnished
to the Chief of Police or his or her designee;
      (3)   The driver’s name; and
      (4)   A schedule of fares, in accordance with this subchapter. Every
taxicab operated within the town or operated between the town and points
unincorporated within a radius of five miles of the town shall have at all
times prominently posted and displayed in the taxicab, so as to be visible,
legible and readable to the passengers therein, the rates and fares for the use
of such cab.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle for hire shall, upon the request of any
passenger, give to such passenger the correct name and address of such driver
and such other information as will identify the vehicle, driver and owner
thereof.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.50 MARKINGS FOR TAXICABS.
   Every taxicab operated within the town shall have the name of the owner
thereof and the number assigned by the Chief of Police or his or her designee
legibly painted on each side of the taxicab and on the rear. The lettering
shall be painted upon the cab at the locations prescribed by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee and be at least two and one-half inches high and
spaced at least one inch apart. If the taxicab is being operated by a lessee,
the name of the lessee shall be prominently displayed on or inside such
taxicab. The numbering and painting of letters and names as provided in this
section shall be considered a condition precedent to the operation of any
taxicab within the town, and no such taxicab shall be operated in taxicab
service or for hire until the same has been marked, numbered and lettered as
required by this section.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.51 REVOCATION.
   The Chief of Police may revoke any driver’s permit if the person holding
such permit violates any of the requirements imposed by this subchapter upon
such drivers, including, but not limited to: failing to maintain the records or
make the reports required by the provisions of this subchapter; failing to give
proper treatment to taxicab passengers as required by §
113.48; failing to display the information required by §
113.49; failing to maintain the markings on the taxicab required by §
113.50; or is convicted of a felony, or a violation of any federal or state
statute relating to the use, or possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or
narcotic barbiturate drugs, or conviction of a third violation of traffic laws
or ordinances, or a violation of any state or federal statute relating to
prostitution, or becomes addicted to or is a habitual user of alcoholic
beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs, or has made any false statement in
the application for a driver’s permit. When a taxicab driver permit is revoked,
the holder shall cease operation of taxicabs immediately and surrender the
permit to the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.52 APPEALS.
   Any person refused a driver’s permit or renewal thereof or whose driver’s
permit has been revoked, or whose vehicle operating privilege has been revoked
may appeal that revocation to the Town Manager. Such appeals must be filed in
writing with the Town Clerk not more than seven days following notice of the
refusal or revocation of the permit. The Town Manager shall here the appeal
within 30 days of the date of it being filed with the Town Clerk, and the Town
Manager shall render a decision within seven days after the date of such
hearing. At such hearing, the rules of evidence as practiced in the courts of
the state shall not apply. The appellant may be represented by counsel at such
hearing. If the appellant wishes to be so represented, he or she shall notify
the Town Clerk at least three days before the date set for the hearing. The
appellant may present witnesses and evidence relevant to the appeal. The
decision of the Town Manger shall be final.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 113.65 AID TO INVESTIGATION.
   The holder of any certificate of convenience and necessity and the driver
and operator of any vehicle who holds a permit from the town, upon being
contacted by the Chief of Police or his or her designee investigating any
accident, complaint or alleged violation of the provision of this chapter shall
quickly respond to any inquiries made by the Chief of Police or his or her
designee and report to the Police Department office of the town within 30
minutes after being requested to do so. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee may allow additional time in his or her discretion if the holder of
the certificate of convenience and necessity or the driver with a permit has a
legitimate reason, in the opinion of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, as to why he or she cannot be at the Police Department within 30
minutes.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.66 OBTAINING SERVICE INTENDING NOT TO PAY.
   Any passenger who engages a vehicle for hire and fails to pay the proper
fare for such trip with intent to cheat or defraud shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.67 RESTRICTION ON WAITING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   A taxi may not discharge a passenger and wait for the passenger to return to
the taxi for more than five minutes when the taxi is stopped on a public street
or on public property.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.68 RESTRICTION ON NON-PERMITTED VEHICLES AND DRIVERS.
   No operator of a vehicle for hire shall provide transportation or other
service when the trip originates within the town unless the owner or operator
of the taxi has a certificate of convenience and necessity from the town and
the driver has a driver’s permit from the town. Taxicabs operated under a
certificate of convenience and necessity or drivers having a driver’s permit
issued by some jurisdiction other than the town may come into the town with a
trip that originated outside of the town and discharge the passengers and the
luggage or cargo. However, except as hereinafter provided, that driver or that
taxi may not come back to pick up that person discharged or luggage, boxes or
any other item unless the taxi is being operated under a certificate of
convenience and necessity, and the driver has a driver’s permit, from the town.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit operators of a vehicle for hire being
operated under a certificate of convenience and necessity issued by an
authority located more than 30 miles from the town from answering a call from
someone in the town for transport to the jurisdiction issuing the certificate
of convenience and necessity or from returning to the town to pick up a
passenger, luggage or cargo within 24 hours after dropping off the passenger,
luggage or cargo.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Anyone who violates §
113.66, upon conviction, shall be fined not to exceed $100.
(Ord. passed 12-1-2009)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Discharge of weapons
   
130.02   Fires
   
130.03   Curfew of children
Posting of Signs Prohibiting Carrying of Concealed Weapons on
Certain Municipal Property
   
130.20   Posting of signs required
   
130.21   Location of signs
   
130.22   Effective date
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   Rules and procedures.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, pellet
gun or any device capable of propelling a projectile within the town limits,
except:
         (a)   A law enforcement officer, and any state or federal law
enforcement officer and any military personnel while in the performance of
their duty;
         (b)   Any person in justifiable self defense; and
         (c)   For hunting or target practice purposes in the following areas
with the permission of the property owner or within state or federal game areas
as established by the state or the United States of America:
            1.   Croatan National Forest;
            2.   Weyerhaeuser timber property, (such as hunting clubs); and
            3.   Private property of ten or more acres.
         (d)   For a “turkey shoot” which must be conducted under the auspice
of a non- profit, non-commercial sponsor. These events shall be subject to the
provisions of (A)(2) and (3)(b) and (3)(c) and to the town Special Events
Policies. Only shotguns may be used when loaded with shotgun shells with not
less than #6 bird shot.
      (2)   Discharge of firearms, pellet guns or any device capable of
propelling a projectile otherwise permitted shall be prohibited in areas within
350 feet of any residential dwelling or any occupied building, public or
private school, park, or facility, and street right-of-way.
      (3)   The discharge of any weapon, firearm or device capable of
propelling a projectile for ceremonial or public festival purposes or use of a
device to cause a loud report such as those used to start a sports event, race
or other competition may be permitted if the following steps are followed:
         (a)   Group/individual sponsoring a ceremony or festival intending to
discharge a weapon shall provide current certification, if available, from the
National Civil War Artillery Association (or similar organization) for having
obtained competence in safety and training standards;
         (b)   The town is provided with a certificate of insurance (unless it
is done by United States armed services personnel while performing their duty);
and
         (c)   Ten days prior notification is given to Police and Fire
Department detailing time and place.
      (4)   Any pyrotechnical display or discharge shall be permitted in
accordance with the State Fire Code and state and federal statutes and
regulations which appertain, as appropriate, by other state or federal
officials with jurisdiction. The display or discharge must be done without
endangering the public health and safety. The town Police and Fire Department
must be given written notice at least ten days before the event.
      (5)   No person participating in the conduct of a “turkey shoot” or a
pyrotechnical display or weapon or firearm discharge shall consume alcoholic
beverages during the event nor shall any person who would be considered
intoxicated if driving a motor vehicle on the highways or the public streets.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   The Town Customer Service Coordinator shall coordinate issuing the
permit(s) in division (A)(1)(c) above, if the Police Chief, Fire Chief and
Chief Building Inspector find that the public health and safety will not be
endangered by the time, place and character of the weapons or firearm
discharge. Before issuing a permit, the Customer Service Coordinator may in the
interest of public safety require safety steps, devices or facilities such as,
but not limited to, a berm, in addition to those planned by an event sponsor or
promoter.
      (2)   The Town Customer Service Coordinator shall coordinate issuing or
denying the permit(s) in divisions (A), if recommended by the Police Chief,
Fire Chief and Chief Building Inspector, and if the activity is to be done in
accord with the requirements of the State Fire Code and other applicable laws
and regulations. Such permit shall be in addition to any other required permit
or permission from any other authority with jurisdiction.
(1991 Code, § 10-2) (Ord. passed 5-1-1951; Ord. passed 9-10-2015; Ord. 2017-01,
passed 7-13-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 FIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to burn any trash or refuse in any public place in the
town without the permission of the Fire Official.
(1991 Code, § 10-3) (Ord. passed 5-7-1947) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 CURFEW OF CHILDREN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person of less than 16 years of age to be on or
upon any public street, alley, highway, right-of-way or thoroughfare from 11:00
p.m. on each Friday and Saturday night of every week until 6:00 a.m. the
following morning, and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on all other nights and
6:00 a.m. the following morning; provided, however, that this section shall not
be applicable to such persons accompanied by and under the direction or control
of a parent, guardian or person in loco parentis to such youth, provided such
parent, guardian or person standing in loco parentis is at least 21 years of
age, and provided further that this section shall not be applicable to youths
under 16 years of age engaged in some lawful occupation or business in which
such youth may properly be employed under the laws of the state and the United
States of America.
(1991 Code, § 10-4) (Ord. passed 8-6-1974) Penalty, see §
10.99
POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING CARRYING OF CONCEALED
WEAPONS ON CERTAIN MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
§ 130.20 POSTING OF SIGNS REQUIRED.
   The Town Manager or a designee is hereby authorized and instructed to post
conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each
building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied,
managed or controlled by the town, as well as appurtenant premises to such
buildings indicating that carrying a concealed weapon is prohibited therein.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995)
§ 130.21 LOCATION OF SIGNS.
   Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each entrance
by which the general public can access the building. The Town Manager or a
designee shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate
location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995)
§ 130.22 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective on and after December 1, 1995.
(Ord. passed 11-21-1995)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
151.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
      
152.    RESERVED FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION
      
153.   ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
Cross-reference:
   Health Nuisances, see §§
91.001 through
91.010
   Junked or Abandoned Vehicles, see §§
91.075 through
91.079
   Junked, Wrecked, Abandoned Property, see §§
91.040,
91.041
   Junkyards, see §§
91.055 through
91.061
   Maintenance of Cemetery Lots, see §
93.01
   Noise, see §§
91.025,
91.026
   Nuisance Vehicles, see §§
91.090 through
91.092
   Nuisances, see
Chapter 91
Editor’s note:
   Chapters 152, 153 and 154 are in Volume II of the code of ordinances
CHAPTER 150: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Statement of Purpose; Objectives
   
150.001   Statutory authorization
   
150.002   Findings of fact
   
150.003   Statement of purpose
   
150.004   Objectives
Definitions
   
150.015   Definitions
General Provisions
   
150.030   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
150.031   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
150.032   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
150.033   Compliance
   
150.034   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
150.035   Interpretation
   
150.036   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
150.050   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
150.051   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
150.052   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
150.053   Corrective procedures
   
150.054   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
150.065   General standards
   
150.066   Specific standards
   
150.067   [Reserved]
   
150.068   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
150.069   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations, but
without established floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
150.070   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
   
150.071   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO)
   
150.072   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AH)
Legal Status Provisions
   
150.080   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
150.081   Effect upon outstanding building permits
 
   
150.999   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT;
STATEMENT OF  PURPOSE; OBJECTIVES
§ 150.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in G.S. Ch. 143,
Art. 21, Part 6; G.S. Ch. 153A, Art. 6; Ch. 160A, Art. 8; and Ch. 160D, Art. 7,
9 and 11, delegated to local governmental units the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the Town of Newport Town Council does ordain as follows.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Newport
are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life, property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood-prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood-prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters, or that may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.004 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and bridges)
that are located in flood-prone areas;
   (F)   Minimize damage to private and public property due to flooding;
   (G)   Make flood insurance available to the community through the National
Flood Insurance Program;
   (H)   Maintain the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains;
   (I)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas; and
   (J)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
DEFINITIONS
§ 150.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental
to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are
common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify
as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be located on the same
parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change
in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the
channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification that may
alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine
flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO or AH on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM), with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state or other source using
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) approved engineering methodologies.
When combined with the FREEBOARD, this elevation establishes the REGULATORY
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction under specific
lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or the supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ACT (CAMA). North Carolina's Coastal Area Management
Act, which, along with the Dredge and Fill Law and the Federal Coastal Zone
Management Act, is managed through the North Carolina Department of
Environmental Quality (NCDEQ), Division of Coastal Management (DCM).
   COASTAL A ZONE (CAZ). An area within the special flood hazard area, landward
of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V zones. In a Coastal A
Zone, the principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm
surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood
conditions, the potential for wave heights shall be greater than or equal to
one and one-half feet. Coastal A Zones are not normally designated on FIRMs.
(see LIMITED OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA)).
   DESIGN FLOOD. See REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any activity defined as development that will
necessitate a floodplain development permit. This includes buildings,
structures and non-structural items, including, but not limited to, fill,
bulkheads, piers, pools, docks, landings, ramps and erosion control/
stabilization measures.
   DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM). The official digital map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), on which
both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community are delineated.
    DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste, or any constituent part of the solid
waste, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building that has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a special flood hazard area, which
may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING BUILDING and/or EXISTING STRUCTURE. Any building and/or structure
for which the "start of construction" commenced before the town entered the
NFIP dated May 15, 1978.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the town entered the NFIP dated May 15, 1978.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways are
delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in
conjunction with the flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the FEMA, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have been
defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
FEMA, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community are delineated. (See also DFIRM.)
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazard areas, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood insurance risk zones and other flood data in a community issued by FEMA.
If published, the FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY report includes flood insurance rate
maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs).
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building product (material, component or
system) capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (a minimum of 72
hours) with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-
cost, cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant
to alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is
not FLOOD-RESISTANT. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant
lumbers are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that
restrict evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but
dimensionally unstable, are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain
water excessively after submergence are not FLOOD-RESISTANT. Please refer to
Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and
available from the FEMA. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are
acceptable flood-resistant materials.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power. This term describes federal,
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate risk of flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse, including the area
above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact that a
proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to
have on the floodway boundaries and flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge. The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified, North
Carolina-licensed engineer, using standard engineering methods and models.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the BFE to account for the many unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The BFE plus the FREEBOARD establishes the
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility that cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Ch. 130A, Art. 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the United States Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program"; or
      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a "Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program".
      CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) PROGRAMS are approved by the United
States Department of the Interior, in cooperation with the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation
Officer, as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended in 1980.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance
study. Letters of map change include:
      (1)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP
requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood
hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or
flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a "letter of map revision" may be issued by FEMA to revise the
effective FIRM;
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An official amendment, by letter,
to an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA is based on
technical data showing that a property had been inadvertently mapped as being
in the floodplain, but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood
elevation. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area;
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features; and
      (4)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that
a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is,
therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to
qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in
accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations.
   LIGHT DUTY TRUCK. Any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular
weight rating or less, which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or
less with a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet of less as defined in
40 CFR 86.082-2 and is:
      (1)   Designed primarily for the purposes of transportation of property
or is a derivation of such a vehicle;
      (2)   Designed primarily for the transportation of persons and has a
capacity of more than 12 persons; or
      (3)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA). The boundary line given by FEMA on
coastal map studies marking the extents of Coastal A Zones (CAZ).
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The lowest elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building or deck support, after completion
of the building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable, non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, built
on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME
does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale.
   MAP REPOSITORY. The location of the official flood hazard data to be applied
for floodplain management. It is a central location in which flood data is
stored and managed. In North Carolina, FEMA has recognized that the application
of digital flood hazard data products carry the same authority as hard copy
products. Therefore, the NCEM's Floodplain Mapping Program websites house
current and historical flood hazard data. For effective flood hazard data, the
NC FRIS website (http://FRIS.NC.GOV/FRIS) is the MAP REPOSITORY; and for
historical flood hazard data, the FloodNC website (http://FLOODNC.GOV/NCFLOOD)
is the MAP REPOSITORY.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE can be
established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by
age of building (actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of the original version of this chapter, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA (NEA). The channel of a river or other watercourse,
including the area above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as
designated in the flood insurance study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after May 15, 1978.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before May 15, 1978.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or PUBLIC NUISANCE. Anything injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or that unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle that is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less, when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck;
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use;
and
      (5)   Fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor for structures within all special flood hazard areas.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The BASE FLOOD ELEVATION plus the
FREEBOARD. In "special flood hazard areas" where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot freeboard.
In "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been established, this
elevation shall be at least one foot above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, including, but not limited to,
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SHEAR WALL. Walls used for structural support, but not structurally joined
or enclosed at the end (except by breakaway walls). Shear walls are parallel or
nearly parallel to the flow of water.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill or any
other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in §
150.031.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year
period whereby the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term
includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community
health, sanitary or safety code specifications that have been identified by the
community code enforcement official, and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure, and the alteration is approved by a variance issued
pursuant to § 154.054.
   TECHNICAL BULLETIN AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEET. A FEMA publication that
provides guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP,
which are contained in Title 44 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations at
Section 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by
state and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP
regulations and by members of the development community, such as design
professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing
bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create
regulations; rather, they provide specific guidance for complying with the
minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
   TEMPERATURE-CONTROLLED. Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in §§
150.050 through
150.054 and
150.065,
150.066,
150.068 through
150.072, is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation
is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to NAVD 1988, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.030 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter will apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extraterritorial jurisdictions (ETJs), of the Town of
Newport, North Carolina.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.031 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating
Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its FIS dated June 19, 2020 for Carteret County and associated DFIRM panels,
including any digital data developed as part of the FIS, which are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter, and all revisions thereto after
January 1, 2021. Future revisions to the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not
change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional authority of the town are
also adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. Subsequent
letter of map revisions (LOMRs) and/or physical map revisions (PMRs) must be
adopted within three months.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.032 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit will be required, in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas as determined in §
150.031.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.033 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.034 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and any
other section of the Town of Newport's Code of Ordinances conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.035 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
North Carolina General Statutes.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.036 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas, or uses permitted within such areas,
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter will not create
liability on the part of the town, or by any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter, or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 150.050 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Planning and Inspections Director, hereinafter referred to as the
"Floodplain Administrator" or their designee, is hereby appointed to administer
and implement the provisions of this chapter. In instances where the Floodplain
Administrator receives assistance from others to complete tasks to administer
and implement this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator will be responsible
for the coordination and community's overall compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program and the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.051 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit must be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. To apply for a floodplain
development permit, the following items must be presented to the Floodplain
Administrator:
      (1)   A plot plan, drawn to scale, which must include, but will not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance, existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area, as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
150.031, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
150.031;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
150.031;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE), where provided, as set forth in
§§
150.031,
150.052 or
150.068;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the coastal barrier
resource system (CBRS) area or otherwise protected areas (OPAs), if applicable.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any nonresidential
structure in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any proposed utility
systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34),
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which will include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation, perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
150.066(D)(3), when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE,
AH, AO, and A99.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state, and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
150.066(F) and (G) are met;
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse, and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit must include,
but will not be limited to:
      (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (e.g., house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etc.).
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
150.031;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development will
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, unless
the requirements of §
150.070 have been met;
      (7)   The flood openings requirements if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99;
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable (i.e.,
parking, building access and limited storage only); and
      (9)   A statement, that all materials below BFE/RFPE must be flood-
resistant materials.
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required after
the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment
of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. Any work done within the seven day
calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (b)   A final finished construction elevation certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-33) is required after construction is completed, and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance. It will be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator will review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review must be corrected by the permit
holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance.
In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected
as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections will be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy. The finished construction elevation certificate certifier
must provide at least two photographs showing the front and rear of the
building taken within 90 days from the date of certification. The photographs
must be taken with views confirming the building description and diagram number
provided in division (C)(1)(a). To the extent possible, these photographs
should show the entire building including foundation. If the building has
split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two additional photographs
showing side views of the building. In addition, when applicable, provide a
photograph of the foundation showing a representative example of the flood
openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and measure at least three
inches by three inches. Digital photographs are acceptable.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.
         (a)   If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory
flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to NAVD 1988.
Floodproofing certification must be prepared by or under the direct supervision
of a professional engineer or architect, and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator must review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the
inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be
corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections will be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the
certified design will be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
         (b)   A final finished construction floodproofing certificate (FEMA
Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection
and maintenance plan are required prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy. It will be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to NAVD 1988.
The floodproofing certificate will be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect, and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator will review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by the
review must be corrected by the applicant prior to the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections will be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified
design will be cause to deny a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zones A, AE, AH, AO or A99,
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of §
150.066(C)(2).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse, and the effects to properties located both
upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed
watercourse alteration or relocation, must all be submitted by the permit
applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zones A, AE, AH, AO or A99, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting the requirements of §
150.066(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting the requirements of §
150.066(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures, which have footprints of 150 square feet
or less, or are minimal investments of $5,000 or less, meeting the requirements
of §
150.066(H).
   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building
Official, will:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, and that compliance
with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the North Carolina
Building Code and this chapter is required.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.052 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator will perform, but will not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas, to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. 1334;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of
Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA;
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse, so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
150.070 are met;
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of the reference
level (including basement) of all attendant utilities of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
150.051(C);
   (G)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) to which the
new or substantially improved structures and all utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with §
150.051(C);
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of all public
utilities in accordance with §
150.051(C);
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered, professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §
150.051(C) and §
150.066(B);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary will be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter;
   (K)   When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions
of §
150.031, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to §
150.068(B)(3), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (L)   When BFE data is provided without floodway nor non-encroachment area
data, in accordance with the provisions of §
150.031, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state or other source in order
to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended;
   (N)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator will
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that it is
being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of
the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
town's jurisdiction, at any reasonable hour, for the purposes of inspection or
other enforcement action;
   (O)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building, or part
thereof, is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order must be in writing and directed to the
person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order must state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (P)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits will be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
   (Q)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the town's jurisdiction. The Floodplain Administrator, and each member
of his or her inspections department, will have a right, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the town's jurisdiction, at
any reasonable hour, for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement
action;
   (R)   Follow through with the corrective procedures of §
150.053;
   (S)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests;
   (T)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
historical and effective FIS report, historical and effective FIRM and other
official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of §
150.031, including any revisions thereto, including letters of map change
issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs; and
   (U)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.053 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it will be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant must immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in the
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property fails to take prompt corrective action, the Floodplain
Administrator will give the owner written notice, by certified or registered
mail to the owner's last known address, or by personal service, stating that:
      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner will be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel, and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building, or to remove fill, as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator finds that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she will make an
order, in writing, to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or property, he or she may order that corrective action
be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk, within ten
days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the
order of the Floodplain Administrator will be final. The local governing body
shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time, and may affirm, modify and
affirm, or revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal
has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, he or she will be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant
to G.S. § 143-215.58, and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.054 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment, as established by the Town of Newport,
hereinafter referred to as the "Appeal Board", will hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures, upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
150.015, provided provisions of §
150.054(I)(2), (3) and (5) have been satisfied, and the facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood, and
create no additional threats to public safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board must consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, as defined
in §
150.015, as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including the maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report, addressing each of the above factors, will be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice, specifying the difference between the BFE and the elevation to which
the structure is to be built, and that such construction below the BFE
increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to
construct a structure below the BFE may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance, up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. The notification
will be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain the records of all appeal
actions, and report any variances to FEMA and the State of North Carolina upon
request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances will not be issued when the variance will make a
structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances will not be issued within any designated floodway or non-
encroachment area, if the variance would result in any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances will only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances will only be issued prior to development permit approval.
      (5)   Variances will only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, will not create a nuisance, will not cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities located in special flood hazard areas, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community;
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area;
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws; and
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30
calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 150.065 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure;
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements must be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements;
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; and
   (D)   All new electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning,
and other service equipment shall be located at or above the RFPE, or designed
and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during the occurrence of the base flood. These include, but are not
limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, water heaters,
and electric outlets/switches.
      (1)   Replacements that are part of a substantial improvement,
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and
other service equipment must also meet the above provisions.
      (2)   Replacements that are for maintenance and not part of a substantial
improvement may be installed at the original location, provided the addition
and/or improvements only comply with the standards for new construction
consistent with the code and the requirements for the original structure.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter will prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter, and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction or replacement
meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (I)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities will not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
150.054(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use, or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility, may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
150.051(C).
   (J)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals must be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals must have
public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals will have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals must have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (N)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure must meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (O)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest BFE will apply.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.066 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where BFE data has been provided, as set
forth in §
150.031 or §
150.053, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
150.065, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) will have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
150.015.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
must have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
150.015. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation, in lieu of elevation, provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight,
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation
will be in accordance with §
150.071(B)(2). A registered, professional engineer or architect must certify
that the floodproofing standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such
certification must be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in
§
150.051(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New or replacement manufactured homes must be elevated so that the
reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
150.015.
      (2)   Manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, either
by a certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes, adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is
above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (D) below.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. A fully enclosed area of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor or below the
lowest horizontal structural member in VE Zones:
      (1)   Must not be designed or used for human habitation, but must only be
used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door), limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of the enclosed area must not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Must be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      (3)   Must include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings will be no higher than
one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures, when the
addition and/or improvements, in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure, are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages, and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure; and
         (b)   A substantial improvement, with modifications/rehabilitations/
improvements to the existing structure or the common wall is structurally
modified more than installing a doorway, both the existing structure and the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
      (2)   Additions to pre-FIRM or post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement, with no modifications/rehabilitations/improvements to
the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall, will
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures, when the
addition and/or improvements, in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure, are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction consistent with the
code and the requirements for the original structure; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a one-year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, must comply with
the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the one-
year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement
does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the Building
Official, and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed on sites within a
special flood hazard must either:
      (1)   Temporary placement.
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational
vehicle is READY FOR HIGHWAY USE if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and has no
permanently attached additions.)
      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement must meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be
placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria must be met;
         (a)   Accessory structures must not be used for human habitation
(including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures must not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures must be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures must be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures must be firmly anchored in accordance with
§
150.065(A);
         (f)   All service facilities, such as electrical must be installed in
accordance with §
150.065(D); and
         (g)   Flood openings, to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces, must be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of division (D)(3) above.
      (2)   An accessory structure, which has a footprint of 150 square feet or
less, or is an minimal investment of $3,000 or less, and satisfies the criteria
outlined in division (H)(1) above, and is not required to meet the elevation or
floodproofing standards of division (B) above. Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with §
150.051(C).
   (I)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met.
      (1)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy, assuming the tank is empty;
      (2)   Aboveground tanks, elevated. Aboveground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation,
on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting
structures must meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard
area;
      (3)   Aboveground tanks, not elevated. Aboveground tanks that do not meet
the elevation requirements of §
150.066(B) maybe permitted in flood hazard areas, provided the tanks are
designed, constructed, installed and anchored to resist all flood-related and
other loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design
flood, and without release of contents in the floodwaters, or infiltration by
floodwaters into the tanks. Tanks shall be designed, constructed, installed and
anchored to resist the potential buoyant and other flood forces acting on an
empty tank during design flood conditions.
      (4)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and
vents must be:
         (a)   At or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
   (J)   Other development.
      (1)   Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential to
block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire-mesh fences,
shall meet the limitations of §
150.070.
      (2)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways and
NEAs. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of
fill in regulated floodways will meet the limitations of §
150.070.
      (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways and NEAs.
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water
crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one
side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated
floodways, must meet the limitations of §
150.070.
      (4)   Commercial storage facilities are not considered "limited storage"
as noted in this chapter, and will be protected to regulatory flood protection
elevation as required for commercial structures.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.067 [RESERVED]
§ 150.068 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
150.031, where no BFE data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions,
in addition to the provisions of §
150.065, will apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or new development will be permitted within a distance of 20
feet, each side from the top of the bank, or five times the width of the
stream, whichever is greater, unless certification, with supporting technical
data, by a registered, professional engineer is provided, demonstrating that
such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
will be determined, based on the following criteria:
      (1)   When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction
and substantial improvements within such areas must also comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter, and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with the standards in §§
150.065 and
150.066.
      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a federal,
state or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within
floodway and non-encroachment areas must also comply with the requirements of
§§
150.066 and
150.070.
      (3)   All subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and other development
proposals must provide BFE data if the development is greater than five acres,
or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such BFE data must be adopted
by reference in accordance with §
150.031 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When BFE data is not available from a federal, state or other
source as outlined above, the reference level must be elevated or floodproofed
(nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, as
defined §
150.015. All other applicable provisions of §
150.066 also apply.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.069 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS, BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source, but neither floodways nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements will apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   The standards of §§
150.065 and
150.066; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or
other development, will be permitted, unless certification, with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer, is provided,
demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.070 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in §
150.031. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles.
   (B)   In addition to the standards outlined in §§
150.065 and
150.066, the following provisions shall apply to all development within such
areas:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice, and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six
months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development must comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Manufactured homes may be permitted, provided the following
provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
150.066(C); and
         (b)   The encroachment standards of division (B)(1) above.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.071 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
150.031 are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet,
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate.
   (B)   In addition to the standards outlined in §§
150.065 and
150.066, all new construction and substantial improvements must meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of 12 inches, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in division (B)(1) above so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that
level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water, and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is
required in accordance with §§
150.051(C) and
150.066(B).
      (3)   Adequate drainage paths must be provided around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.072 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AH).
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
150.031 are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas are subject
to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding (usually areas of
ponding), where average depths are one to three feet. Base flood elevations are
derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
   (B)   In addition to the standards outlined in §§
150.065 and
150.066, all new construction and substantial improvements must meet the
following requirement: adequate drainage paths must be provided around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-11-2020)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 150.080 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The date of the Town of Newport's initial flood damage prevention
ordinance is January 5, 1988.
   (B)   This chapter comes forward, in part, by the re-enactment of some of
the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted January 5,
1988, as amended.
      (1)   It is not the intention to repeal, but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption such existing provisions, so that all
rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced.
      (2)   The enactment of this chapter will not affect any action, suit or
proceeding instituted or pending.
      (3)   All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the Town
of Newport enacted on January 5, 1988, as amended, which are not reenacted
herein are repealed.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.081 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING BUILDING PERMITS.
   Nothing contained herein will require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of any development, or any part thereof, for which a
floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator,
or his or her authorized agents, before the time of passage of this chapter;
provided, however, that when construction has not begun under such outstanding
permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of issuance of the
outstanding permit, construction or use must be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants or variance or special constitute a Class I
misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.58. Any person who violates this chapter
or fails to comply with any of its requirements will, up conviction thereof, be
fined not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each
day such violation continues will be considered a separate offense. Nothing
herein contained will prevent the Town of Newport from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 7-15-2003; Ord. 2019-09, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-02, passed 6-
11-2020)
CHAPTER 151: MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Definitions
   
151.002   Finding; purpose
   
151.003   Standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling units
   
151.004   Standards for structural condition
   
151.005   Standards applicable to roominghouses; exceptions
   
151.006   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
Administration
   
151.020   Powers and duties of Building Inspector
   
151.021   Inspections
   
151.022   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing
   
151.023   Procedure after hearing
   
151.024   Failure to comply with order
   
151.025   Appeals from orders of Inspector
   
151.026   Petition to superior court by owner
   
151.027   Methods of service of complaints and orders
   
151.028   [Reserved]
   
151.029   Costs, a lien on premises
   
151.030   Alternative remedies
   
151.031   Zoning Board of Adjustment to hear appeals
   
151.032   Conflict with other provisions
Basic Plumbing, Heating and Electrical Equipment and Facilities
   
151.045   Plumbing system
   
151.046   Heating system
   
151.047   Electrical system
Space, Use Ventilation and Location
   
151.060   Ventilation; generally
   
151.061   Ventilation; habitable rooms
   
151.062   Ventilation; bathroom and water closet rooms
   
151.063   Room sizes
   
151.064   Ceiling height
   
151.065   Floor area calculation
   
151.066   Cellar
   
151.067   Basements
Safety and Sanitary Maintenance
   
151.080   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs
   
151.081   Interior floors, walls and ceilings
   
151.082   Windows and doors
   
151.083   Stairs, porches and appurtenances
   
151.084   Bathroom floors
   
151.085   Supplied facilities
   
151.086   Drainage
   
151.087   Noxious weeds
   
151.088   Egress
Control of Insects, Rodents and Infestation
   
151.100   Screens
   
151.101   Rodent control
   
151.102   Infestation
   
151.103   Rubbish storage and disposal
   
151.104   Garbage storage and disposal
 
   
151.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASEMENT. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.
      CELLAR. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly or wholly
underground having an adequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
      DETERIORATED. That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Inspector.
      DILAPIDATED. That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter except at a cost in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Inspector.
      DWELLING. Any building, structure or part thereof which is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or habitation by human
occupants, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or
usually enjoyed therewith. Temporary housing shall not be regarded as a
DWELLING. The term shall include within its meaning the terms roominghouse and
rooming unit.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their
food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Inspector.
      GARBAGE. The organic waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.
      INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector.
      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
      OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:
         (a)   Shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;
         (b)   Shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit
or rooming unit; or
         (c)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit, as OWNER or agent of the actual OWNER, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the actual OWNER. Any such person thus representing the actual OWNER shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were
the OWNER.
      PARTY OR PARTIES IN INTEREST. All persons who have interests of record in
a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and any persons who are in possession
thereof.
      PLUMBING. Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes; gas burning equipment; water pipes; mechanical garbage
disposal units (mechanical sink grinders); sewage disposal pipes; water
closets; sinks; installed dishwashers; lavatories; bathtubs; shower baths;
installed clothes washing machines; catch basins; drains; vents; and any other
similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas
lines.
      PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The town housing authority, if any, or any officer who
is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the town or of
the county or the state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other
activities concerning dwellings in the town.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
      ROOMINGHOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three
or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father,
or brother of the owner or operator.
      RUBBISH. Nonorganic waste materials. The term shall include paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust.
      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of,
the owner or operator.
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
      UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. That conditions exist in a dwelling, dwelling
unit, roominghouse or rooming unit which violate or do not comply with one or
more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the requirements
established by this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMINGHOUSE, ROOMING
UNIT, PREMISES are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words, “or any part thereof”.
(1991 Code, § 8-21) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.002 FINDING; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1201, it is hereby declared that there exist
in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation;
defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other calamities; lack of
ventilation, light and sanitary facilities; and other conditions rendering such
dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and detrimental to the health and
safety, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town.
   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the town as authorized by G.S. §§ 160D-1203 et seq., it is the purpose of this
chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued
occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation within the town as
expressly authorized by G.S. § 160D-1205.
(1991 Code, § 8-22) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.003 STANDARDS OF FITNESS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held
out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of §§
151.004,
151.045 through
151.047,
151.060 through
151.067,
151.080 through
151.088 and
151.100 through
151.104.
   (B)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy or use of permit to be used as a human habitation, any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not comply with all of the minimum standards of
fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of §§
151.004,
151.045 through
151.047,
151.060 through
151.067,
151.080 through
151.088 and
151.100 through
151.104.
(1991 Code, § 8-24) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982 ; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.004 STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL CONDITION.
   The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for
structural condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or
other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall not be
rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which might
admit rodents.
   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports
shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall
be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse.
   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be
provided.
   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall
be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable household
methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a
manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between
various spaces.
   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weathertight and watertight.
   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to
constitute a fire hazard.
   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the
ground.
(1991 Code, § 8-25) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982 ; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.005 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ROOMINGHOUSES; EXCEPTIONS.
   All of the provisions of this chapter, and all of the minimum standards and
requirements of this chapter, shall be applicable to roominghouses, and to
every person who operates a roominghouse, or who occupies or lets to another
for occupancy and any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except as provided in
divisions (A) through (D) below.
   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water
closet, lavatory-basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved
water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each four rooms within a roominghouse wherever these facilities are shared. All
such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall
be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more
than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water
at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
   (C)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every roominghouse shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and
for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the roominghouse. He or she
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the roominghouse
is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
   (D)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower required by division (A) above shall be located within
the roominghouse and with a room or rooms which afford privacy, are separate
from the habitable rooms, are accessible from a common hall and are accessible
without going outside the roominghouse or through any other room therein.
(1991 Code, § 8-26) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982 ; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.006 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he or she occupies and controls.
   (C)   Rubbish and garbage.
      (1)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all
his or her rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
the supplied storage facilities.
      (2)   In all cases, the owner shall be responsible for the availability
of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.
   (D)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation of same.
   (E)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any
part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
(1991 Code, § 8-27) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982 ; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.020 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce
the provisions of this chapter and to exercise the duties and powers herein
prescribed. The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings
and dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which dwellings
and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this chapter with respect to the repair closing
or demolition of such dwellings and dwelling units;
      (2)   To take such action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation
of housing which is deteriorated;
      (3)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
chapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed;
      (4)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (5)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections; provided, such entries shall be made in accordance with §
151.021 and state law, and shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (6)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he or she deems necessary to assist in carrying out the purposes
of this chapter, and to delegate any of his or her functions and powers to such
officers, agents and employees; and
      (7)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or by the
Town Council.
(1991 Code, § 8-46) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982 ; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.021 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units, roominghouses, rooming units and the premises associated
therewith. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse
or rooming unit or the person in charge thereof shall give the Inspector free
access to such dwelling and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purposes of such inspection, examination and survey.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming
unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to
any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(1991 Code, § 8-47) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance authorized as to repair, closing, and demolition; order of public
officer, see § 160D-1203(2)
§ 151.022 PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION; NOTICE; HEARING.
   Whenever a petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by
at least five residents of the town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit
is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector, upon
inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation he
or she, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and
containing a notice that an administrative hearing will be held before the
Inspector at a place therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall
have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons
signing a petition relating to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may
attend such hearing and give evidence. The rules of evidence relevant in courts
of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Inspector. If
any person desires to be represented by an attorney at law, he or she shall
notify the Building Inspector not less than five days before the scheduled
hearing that such an attorney at law will be present on behalf of such person,
and the Inspector may request the Town Attorney to be present under such
circumstances.
(1991 Code, § 8-48) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance authorized as to repair, closing, and demolition; order of public
officer, see § 160D-1203(2)
§ 151.023 PROCEDURE AFTER HEARING.
   (A)   After notice and hearing, the Inspector shall state in writing his or
her determination of whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated.
   (B)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
deteriorated, but can be repaired at a reasonable cost, he or she shall state
in writing his or her findings of fact in support of such determination, and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing
and requiring the owner to repair, alter or improve such dwelling or dwelling
unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this
chapter within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days. The order may
require that the property be vacated and closed if continued occupancy during
the time allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm,
taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or
improvements; the current state of the property; and any additional risks due
to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with
physical or mental disabilities. The order shall state that the failure to make
timely repairs as directed in the order shall make the dwelling subject to the
issuance of an unfit for human habitation order.
   (C)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling is dilapidated, and that
repairs cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the
dwelling, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact to
support such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner either to repair,
alter or improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or else to vacate and remove
or demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.
(1991 Code, § 8-49) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance authorized as to repair, closing, and demolition; order of public
officer, see § 160D-1203(3)
§ 151.024 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or
improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the Inspector may cause the
dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed, and
the Inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so
closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
Class 1 misdemeanor. The duties of the Inspector set forth in this division
shall not be exercised until the Town Council shall have by ordinance ordered
the Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter with
respect to the particular property or properties that the Inspector shall have
found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall
be described in the ordinance. This subchapter shall be recorded in the Office
of the Register of Deeds in the county where the property or properties are
located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor
index (see G.S. § 160D-1203(4)).
   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, the Inspector may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished.
The duties of the Inspector set forth in this division shall not be exercised
until the governing board shall have by ordinance ordered the public officer to
proceed to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter with respect to the
particular property or properties that the Inspector shall have found to be
unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be described
in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a
dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring
it into conformity with the housing code. This subchapter shall be recorded in
the Office of the Register of Deeds in the county where the property or
properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner
in the grantor index.
   (C)   (1)   If the dwelling has been vacated and closed for a period of one
year pursuant to an ordinance adopted pursuant to division (A) of this section
or after the Inspector issues an order or proceedings have commenced under the
substandard housing regulations regarding a dwelling to be repaired or vacated
and closed as provided in this division, then the Town Council may find that
the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the
dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the
continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical
to the health, safety, and welfare of the Town of Newport in that the dwelling
would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be
a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal
activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of
property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a
dwelling that might otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent
shortage of decent and affordable housing in this state, then in such
circumstances, the Town Council may, after the expiration of such one-year
period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth
the following:
         (a)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
         (b)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
      (2)   This subchapter shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of
Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be
indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner
fails to comply with this subchapter, the Inspector shall effectuate the
purpose of the ordinance (see G.S. § 160D-1203(6).
(1991 Code, § 8-50) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.025 APPEALS FROM ORDERS OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector is a quasi-
judicial matter and may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any
officer, board, or commission of the Town of Newport. Any appeal from the
Inspector shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or
service of the order by filing with the Inspector and with the Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal that shall specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of
the Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, the
decision remains in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a
decision of the Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the
appeal has the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the
Board, unless the Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal
is filed with the Inspector, that because of facts stated in the certificate, a
copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant, a suspension of the
requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case the
requirement is not suspended except by a restraining order, which may be
granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to the
Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to
G.S. § 160D-1208(a).
   (B)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals,
shall file due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within
a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. If
by attorney, the Board may request the presence of the Town Attorney. The Board
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order
appealed from, and may make such decision and order as in its opinion ought to
be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers of the
Inspector, but the concurring vote of the majority of the members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Inspector.
The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, to adapt the application of
this chapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
   (C)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings
in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the
Board, but not otherwise.
(1991 Code, § 8-51) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.026 PETITION TO SUPERIOR COURT BY OWNER.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a decision
rendered by the Board may petition the superior court for an injunction
restraining the Inspector from carrying out the order or decision and the court
may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the Inspector
pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30
days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall
be had by the court on a petition within 20 days and shall be given preference
over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine
the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice
may require. It is not necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a
temporary injunction under this section.
(1991 Code, § 8-52) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Remedies, see § 160D-1208(d)
§ 151.027 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the whereabouts of
such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Inspector in
the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall make an affidavit to
that effect, and the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be
made by publishing the same at least once not later than the time at which
personal service would be required under the provisions of this chapter, in a
newspaper having general circulation in the town. Where service is made by
publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
(1991 Code, § 8-53) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.028 [RESERVED]
§ 151.029 COSTS, A LIEN ON PREMISES.
   As provided by G.S. § 160D-1203(7), the cost of any repairs, alterations or
improvements, of vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to be
made or done by the Inspector pursuant to §
151.028 shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. Such lien shall be filed, having priority, and be collected in the
same manner as the lien for special assessments established by G.S. Ch. 160A,
Art. 10.
(1991 Code, § 8-55) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982; Ord. 2021-01, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 151.030 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
chapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and §
10.99 of this code of ordinances, and the enforcement of any remedy provided
herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies
provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.
(1991 Code, § 8-56) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982)
§ 151.031 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.
   (A)   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the
Inspector pursuant to §
151.025 shall be heard and determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. As the
appeals body, the Board shall have the power to fix the times and places of its
meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and
regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. The
Board shall perform the duties prescribed by §
151.025 and shall keep an accurate journal of all its proceedings.
   (B)   If the Zoning Board of Adjustment consists of more than five members,
the Chairperson shall designate five members to hear appeals under this
chapter.
(1991 Code, § 8-57) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982)
§ 151.032 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is found
to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the
town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
residents of the town shall prevail.
(1991 Code, § 8-58) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982)
BASIC PLUMBING, HEATING AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
§ 151.045 PLUMBING SYSTEM.
   (A)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to
a public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.
   (B)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and adequate supply of both cold water
and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
   (C)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the State Plumbing
Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working
order.
   (D)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling
unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or
shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user.
(1991 Code, § 8-76) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.046 HEATING SYSTEM.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities for providing heat in
accordance with the following.
   (A)   Central and electric heating systems. Every central or electric
heating system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to which it is
connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured at a point three feet
above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
   (B)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system
is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with
sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, gas vents or other facilities to which
heating appliances may be connected to heat all habitable rooms with a minimum
temperature of 70°F measured three feet above the floor during ordinary winter
conditions.
(1991 Code, § 8-77) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.047 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights
and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacle, connected in such manner as
determined by the State Electrical Code. There shall be installed in every
bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each such
habitable room shall contain at least three floor- or wall-type electric
convenience receptacles.
   (B)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not
sufficient.
   (C)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in
a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed in accordance
with the State Electrical Code.
(1991 Code, § 8-78) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
SPACE, USE VENTILATION AND LOCATION
§ 151.060 VENTILATION; GENERALLY.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between
stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window or any room and
such light-obstructing structures are located less than five feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever
the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room,
the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total
floor area of such room.
(1991 Code, § 8-96) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.061 VENTILATION; HABITABLE ROOMS.
   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can
easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room.
The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size
as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation.
(1991 Code, § 8-97) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.062 VENTILATION; BATHROOM AND WATER CLOSET ROOMS.
   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight
shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms
equipped with an approved ventilation system.
(1991 Code, § 8-98) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.063 ROOM SIZES.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in
each habitable room as required by the State Residential Building Code.
   (B)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
   (C)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
(1991 Code, § 8-99) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.064 CEILING HEIGHT.
   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six inches.
(1991 Code, § 8-100) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.065 FLOOR AREA CALCULATION.
   Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area. However,
closet area and wall area within the dwelling unit may count for not more than
10% of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area for the purpose of determining maximum
permissible occupancy.
(1991 Code, § 8-101) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.066 CELLAR.
   No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
(1991 Code, § 8-102) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.067 BASEMENTS.
   No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
   (A)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
   (B)   The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling height
are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and
   (C)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window or windows
face a stairwell, window well or accessway.
(1991 Code, § 8-103) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
SAFETY AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE
§ 151.080 EXTERIOR FOUNDATION, WALLS AND ROOFS.
   Every foundation wall, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be
substantially weathertight and rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair; shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be safe to
use and capable of supporting the load which normal use would cause to be
placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other
protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the
weather.
(1991 Code, § 8-121) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.081 INTERIOR FLOORS, WALLS AND CEILINGS.
   Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use would cause to be placed
thereon.
(1991 Code, § 8-122) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.082 WINDOWS AND DOORS.
   Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be
substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent proof and shall be kept in
sound working condition and good repair.
(1991 Code, § 8-123) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.083 STAIRS, PORCHES AND APPURTENANCES.
   Every outside and inside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be
safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use would cause to
be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(1991 Code, § 8-124) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.084 BATHROOM FLOORS.
   Every bathroom floor surface and water closet compartment floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so that it will be reasonably impervious to
water and will permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(1991 Code, § 8-125) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.085 SUPPLIED FACILITIES.
   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working
condition.
(1991 Code, § 8-126) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.086 DRAINAGE.
   Every yard shall be properly graded in order to obtain thorough drainage and
to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
(1991 Code, § 8-127) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.087 NOXIOUS WEEDS.
   Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be kept free of species of
weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to health.
(1991 Code, § 8-128) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.088 EGRESS.
   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of egress as
required by the State Residential Building Code.
(1991 Code, § 8-129) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATION
§ 151.100 SCREENS.
   In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other
insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space
shall be equipped with screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other
device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for
ventilation, shall likewise be equipped with screens.
(1991 Code, § 8-146) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.101 RODENT CONTROL.
   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation,
and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be equipped with screens or such other approved device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
(1991 Code, § 8-147) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.102 INFESTATION.
   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
(1991 Code, § 8-148) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.103 RUBBISH STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
   Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved
containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by this code or town
ordinances, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling or
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
(1991 Code, § 8-149) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.104 GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
   Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved
garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal
unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit, or an approved outside
garbage can as required by this code or town ordinances.
(1991 Code, § 8-150) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and
close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector duly made
and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order. Each
day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such order
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §§
151.022 through
151.026, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its
vacation and closing. Each day that such occupancy continues after such
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
   (D)   In addition to the penalty established by division (C) above, and the
remedies provided by other provisions of this chapter, this chapter may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(1991 Code, § 8-23) (Ord. passed 8-3-1982)
CHAPTER 152:  RESERVED FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION
CHAPTER 153: ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
   
153.01   Adopted by reference
§ 153.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Zoning and Development Ordinance is adopted and incorporated by
reference as part of this
Chapter 153 as fully as if set out at length herein. Please see
Appendix A of this
Chapter 153 for the Zoning and Development Ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-13-2019; Ord. 2019-02, passed 6-
13-2019; Ord. 2019-03, passed 6-13-2019; Ord. 2019-04, passed 6-13-2019; Ord.
2019-07, passed 9-12-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 6-11-2020; Ord. 2020-03, passed
8-13-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021; Ord. 2023-02, passed 6-8-2023)
APPENDIX A: ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
1-1   Title
   
1-2   Authorization
   
1-3   Effective date
   
1-4   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
1-4.1   Bona-fide farm exemption (G.S. § 160D-903(c))
   
1-5   Purpose and intent
   
1-6   Consistency with all adopted plans and policies
   
1-6.1   Implementation of plan
   
1-6.2   Amendments to this Ordinance and the Core CAMA Land Use Plan
   
1-7   General rules of interpretation
   
1-7.1   Literal interpretation
   
1-7.2   Rules of language and construction
   
1-8   Conflict provisions
   
1-8.1   Conflict with state or federal regulations
   
1-8.2   Conflict with local regulations
   
1-8.3   Conflict with private agreements and contracts
   
1-9   Official zoning map
   
1-10   Transitional provisions
   
1-10.1   Effect on valid building permits and vested rights
   
1-10.2   Other approvals granted prior to the effective date
   
1-10.3   Applications in process prior to the effective date
   
1-10.4   Violations continue
   
1-11   Severability
Article II: Administration
   
2-1   General
   
2-1.1   Administrative bodies
   
2-1.2   Organization
   
2-2   Town Council
   
2-2.1   Organization
   
2-2.2   Powers and duties
   
2-3   Planning Board
   
2-3.1   Authority and establishment
   
2-3.2   Membership
   
2-3.3   Quorum
   
2-3.4   Terms
   
2-3.5   Powers and duties
   
2-3.6   Voting
   
2-4   Board of Adjustment
   
2-4.1   Authority and establishment
   
2-4.2   Membership
   
2-4.3   Quorum
   
2-4.4   Powers and duties
   
2-4.5   Voting
   
2-5   Ordinance Administrator
   
2-5.1   Appointment
   
2-5.2   Powers and duties
   
2-5.3   Technical Review Committee
   
2-6   Summary of review and approval authority
Article III: Review and Approval Procedures
   
3-1   Purpose and intent
   
3-2   No construction to commence without a permit
   
3-2.1   Inspections of work in progress
   
3-2.2   Expiration of building permits
   
3-3   Common review procedures
   
3-3.1   Authority to file application
   
3-3.2   Application content
   
3-3.3   Fees
   
3-3.4   Submission and review schedule
   
3-3.5   Application submission
   
3-3.6   Determination of completeness
   
3-3.7   Final approval by the Ordinance Administrator
   
3-3.8   Preparation of staff report
   
3-3.9   Public hearings
   
3-3.10   Public notification
   
3-3.11   Conditions of approval
   
3-3.12   Deferral of application
   
3-3.13   Changes to application after notice of public hearing
   
3-3.14   Withdrawal of application
   
3-3.15   Notification for decision to applicant
   
3-3.16   Lapse of approval
   
3-3.17   Examination of application and supporting documents
   
3-4   Standards, procedures, and requirements for development applications
   
3-4.1   Zoning map amendment
   
3-4.2   Conditional Zoning District classification
   
3-4.3   Unified Development Ordinance text amendment
   
3-4.4   Special use permit
   
3-4.5   Variance
   
3-4.6   Appeals of administrative decisions
   
3-4.7   Site-specific vesting plans
   
3-4.8   Conceptual site plan
   
3-4.9   Site plan
   
3-4.10   Land development permit
   
3-4.11   Certificate of compliance
   
3-4.12   Subdivisions
Article IV: Enforcement
   
4-1   Purpose and intent
   
4-2   Compliance required
   
4-3   Violations
   
4-3.1   Violations generally
   
4-3.2   Specific violation
   
4-4   Responsible persons
   
4-5   Enforcement generally
   
4-5.1   Responsible persons
   
4-5.2   Complaints regarding violations
   
4-5.3   Enforcement procedures
   
4-6   Remedies and penalties (G.S. § 160D-404(c))
   
4-6.1   Civil penalty
   
4-6.2   Stop work order
   
4-6.3   Revocation of permit
   
4-6.4   Injunction
   
4-6.5   Order of abatement
   
4-6.6   Equitable remedy
   
4-6.7   Criminal penalties
   
4-6.8   Execution of court decisions
   
4-6.9   Deny or withhold permits
   
4-7   Cumulative penalties
   
4-8   Continuing violations
Article V: Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
   
5-1   Intent
   
5-2   Repairs and maintenance
   
5-3   Nonconforming structures
   
5-4   Continuance and change of nonconforming use
   
5-5   Nonconforming signs
   
5-6   Reserved for future codification
   
5-7   Nonconforming lots
   
5-8   Extension or enlargement of nonconforming situations
   
5-9   Completion of nonconforming projects
Article VI: Zoning Districts
   
6-1   Establishment and designation of zoning districts
   
6-2   Conditional zoning districts
   
6-2.1   Purpose and intent
   
6-2.2   Designation
   
6-2.3   Allowed uses
   
6-2.4   Standards
   
6-2.5   Parallel conditional zoning districts established
   
6-2.6   Planned Unit Development District
Article VII: District Regulations
   
7-0   Residential, commercial and industrial districts
   
7-1a   R-20 Residential Agricultural District
   
7-1b   R-20A Residential Single-Family District
   
7-1c   R-20MH Residential Single-Family, Manufactured Home (Mobile Home)
District
   
7-2   R-15 Residential Single-Family District
   
7-3   R-8 and R-10 High Density Residential Districts
   
7-4   R-15D Residential Townhouse District
   
7-5   Reserved for future codification
   
7-6   Reserved for future codification
   
7-7   Commercial and Industrial Districts
   
7-7.1   RO Residential Office District
   
7-7.2   NB-1 Neighborhood Business District
   
7-7.3   CD Commercial Downtown District
   
7-7.4   CH Commercial Highway District
   
7-7.5   LI Light Industrial District
   
7-7.6   IW Industrial Warehouse District
Article VIII: Accessory Uses
   
8-1   Home occupations
   
8-2   Accessory structures
   
8-2.1   Size of accessory structures
   
8-2.2   Location of accessory structures
   
8-3   Swimming pools
   
8-4   Stables and kennels
   
8-5   Animals prohibited as accessory uses
   
8-6   Companion unit
   
8-7   Yard or garage sales
   
8-8   Fallout shelters
   
8-9   Photovoltaic systems (solar panels) and other solar devices
   
8-10   Other innovative energy systems
Article IX: Provisions for Special Uses
   
9-1   General restrictions
   
9-2   Additional restrictions and revocation of permits
   
9-3   Uses which may be permitted
   
9-3.1   Cemetery
   
9-3.2   Golf course
   
9-3.3   Convalescent, nursing home, rest or care home
   
9-3.4   Child day care
   
9-3.5   Condominium
   
9-3.6   Manufactured home parks (mobile home park)
   
9-3.6.1   Park development standards
   
9-3.6.2   Manufactured home lot development standards
   
9-3.6.2.1   Lot size
   
9-3.6.2.2   Setback requirements
   
9-3.6.3   Other standards
   
9-3.6.4   Signs
   
9-3.7   Lodges
   
9-3.8   Public utility buildings and uses
   
9-3.9   Schools
   
9-3.10   Landing strips for aircraft and heliports
   
9-3.11   Drive-in theaters
   
9-3.12   Family care home
   
9-3.13   Land application of sewage affluent
   
9-3.14   Mining, borrow pits
   
9-3.14.1   Special requirements
   
9-3.14.2   Factors relating to approval
   
9-4   Adult entertainment establishments
   
9-4.1   Anti-skid row regulations
   
9-4.2   Principal permitted uses
   
9-4.3   Proximity restrictions
   
9-4.4   Application to existing establishments
   
9-5   Recreational vehicle parks
   
9-5.1   Definitions
   
9-5.2   Procedure
   
9-5.3   Application requirements
   
9-5.4   Approval procedure
   
9-5.5   Compliance
   
9-5.6   Operation permit
   
9-5.6.1   Periodic inspection
   
9-5.7   Location and general requirements
   
9-5.8   Development standards
   
9-5.9   Rules
   
9-6   Tall structures
   
9-6.1   Wind energy facilities (special use)
   
9-6.1a   Application and administrative requirements
   
9-6.1b   Minimum setback requirements
   
9-6.1c   Local environmental issues
   
9-6.1d   Liability insurance
   
9-6.1e   Real property value protection requirement
   
9-6.1f   Security and safety of WEFs
   
9-6.1g   Reservation of authority to inspect WEFs
   
9-7   Wireless telecommunications services (WTS) development requirements
   
9-7.1   Board of Adjustment review/approval
   
9-7.2   Development standard
   
9-7.2.1   Setbacks
   
9-7.2.2   Fencing
   
9-7.2.3   Buffer and screening
   
9-7.2.4   Lights
   
9-7.2.5   Signs, outdoor advertising
   
9-7.2.6   Removal of abandoned or damaged towers
   
9-7.3   Exceptions to Board of Adjustment review/approval
   
9-8   Outdoor entertainment development standards
   
9-8.1   Miniature golf course development standards
   
9-8.2   Amusement park rides and theme parks
   
9-8.3   Large scale recreational facilities
   
9-9   Solar farm facilities (special use)
   
9-9.1   Development standards
   
9-9.2   Gates, locks and other safety requirements
   
9-9.3   Setback
   
9-9.4   Evergreen vegetative buffer
Article X: Temporary Structures
   
10-1   Purpose
   
10-2   Temporary structures permitted
   
10-2.1   The use of open land for meeting or recreation
   
10-2.2   Emergency relief from the terms of this ordinance
Article XI: General and Special Provisions, Exceptions and Modifications
   
11-1   Walls and fences
   
11-1.1   Hazardous locations
   
11-2   Structures excluded from height limitations
   
11-3   Substandard lots of record
   
11-3.1   Adjoining lots
   
11-3.2   Lots not meeting size requirements
   
11-3.3   Side yard requirements
   
11-4   Reserved for future codification
   
11-5   Sedimentation and storm water management
   
11-6   Outdoor merchandise display
   
11-7   Habitable trailers
Article XII: Landscaping and Buffering
   
12-1   Landscaping and buffering
   
12-1.1   Administrative and general requirements
   
12-1.2   Application and permitting
   
12-1.3   Visibility at intersections
   
12-1.4   Landscape restrictions and limitations
   
12-1.4.1   Restrictions
   
12-1.4.2   Prohibited plants
   
12-1.5   Requirement conflicts
   
12-1.6   Waiver of screening requirements and other exceptions
   
12-1.7   Landscaping installation
   
12-1.8   Erosion and sedimentation control criteria
   
12-1.9   Maintenance responsibility
   
12-2   Buffers and screening
   
12-2.1   Increase in buffering
   
12-3   Minimum required landscaping
   
12-3.1   Where landscape materials are required
   
12-3.2   Existing developed sites
   
12-4   Residential landscaping other than multi-family or PUD development
   
12-5   Commercial, industrial and other structures landscaping
   
12-5.1   Parking lots
   
12-5.2   Street frontage requirements
   
12-5.3   Shrubs, berms, walls and fences
   
12-5.3.1   Shrubs
   
12-5.3.2   Berms
   
12-5.3.3   Walls and fences
   
12-5.4   Building foundation perimeter planting
   
12-5.4.1   Shrubs
   
12-5.5   Out of doors display areas
   
12-5.5.1   Interior coverage requirements
   
12-5.5.2   Trees
   
12-5.5.3   Plantings which may not count toward meeting interior coverage
requirements
   
12-5.5.4   Street frontage requirements
   
12-5.5.5   Exceptions for the street frontage requirements
   
12-5.5.6   Trees
   
12-5.5.7   Shrubs, berms, walls and fences
   
12-5.6   Dumpsters and trash receptacles area
   
12-5.6.1   Solid fence or wall
   
12-5.6.2   Plants
   
12-5.7   Loading docks
   
12-5.7.1   Solid fence or wall
   
12-5.7.2   Evergreen plants
   
12-6   Freestanding sign landscaping
Article XIII: Off-Street Parking and Access Requirements
   
13-1   General provisions
   
13-2   Prohibition of reduction in size and number of spaces
   
13-3   Required bicycle spaces
   
13-4   Accessible handicapped provisions
   
13-5   Minimum off-street parking table
   
13-6   Off-street loading and unloading
   
13-6.1   Spaces appropriate to function
   
13-6.2   Design of loading spaces
   
13-7   Parking design criteria
   
13-8   Development and maintenance of parking spaces
Article XIV: Signs
   
14-0   Definitions
   
14-1   Purpose and intent
   
14-2   General provisions
   
14-2.1   Sign program
   
14-2.2   Traffic safety
   
14-2.3   Sign safety
   
14-3   Administration, filing procedure and permits
   
14-3.1   Administration
   
14-3.2   Filing procedure
   
14-4   Maintenance
   
14-5   Prohibited signs
   
14-5.1   Setback requirements
   
14-6   Illumination
   
14-7   Nonconforming signs
   
14-8   Temporary signs
   
14-8.1   Temporary signs which do not require a permit
   
14-8.2   Roadside “pick your own” signs
   
14-8.3   Signs on vehicles
   
14-8.4   Public interest signs permitted in all districts
   
14-9   Temporary signs, in other than residential zones, which require a permit
   
14-10   Permanent signs which require a permit
   
14-11   On-premises permanent freestanding signs
   
14-11.1   Commercial zone along two lane, 35 and 45 mph roads
   
14-11.2   Commercial zone along a 55 mph road
   
14-11.3   Shopping centers
   
14-11.4   Industrial park sign
   
14-11.5   Special use sign
Article XV: General Provisions
   
15-1   Interpretation and application
   
15-2   Zoning affects all land and buildings
   
15-3   Only one principal use upon any lot
   
15-4   Reduction or change in lot size
   
15-4.1   Townhouse
   
15-5   Maintenance of open spaces, projections into required yards
   
15-6   Street access
   
15-7   Lots with multiple frontages
   
15-8   Uses prohibited
Article XVI: Subdivisions
   
16-1   General provisions
   
16-2   Specific requirements
   
16-2.1   Alleys
   
16-2.2   Blocks
   
16-2.3   Buffer strips
   
16-2.4   Building setback lines
   
16-2.5   Cul-de-sac
   
16-2.6   Easements
   
16-2.7   Road grades
   
16-2.8   Horizontal curves
   
16-2.9   Road intersections
   
16-2.10   Lots
   
16-2.11   Pedestrian walkways
   
16-2.12   Rights-of-way and pavement widths
   
16-2.13   Streets
   
16-3   General provisions
   
16-4   Requirements
   
16-4.1   Permanent survey reference markers
   
16-4.2   Permanent concrete monuments
   
16-4.3   Steel or iron markers
   
16-4.4   Electrical and telephone services
   
16-4.5   Open space reservation for parks, playgrounds or recreational
   
16-4.5.1   Private ownership of parks and recreation areas
   
16-4.5.2   Duly recorded instruments
   
16-4.5.3   Area devoted to parks and recreation
   
16-4.5.4   Formula for area set aside
   
16-4.5.5   Criteria for evaluating suitability
   
16-4.5.6   Fees in lieu of land set aside
   
16-4.6   Paving and street improvement
   
16-4.7   Sewage disposal
   
16-4.8   Sidewalks
   
16-4.9   Street lights
   
16-4.10   Street name markers
   
16-4.11   Trees and preservation of natural environment
   
16-4.12   Surface water drainage and sedimentation controls
   
16-4.13   Water supply
   
16-4.14   House numbers
   
16-4.15   Other requirements
   
16-5   No service or permit until final plat approval
   
16-6   Compliance with the land development and thoroughfare plans, school
sites
   
16-7   Town costs when oversize facilities are required
   
16-8   Penalty
   
16-8.1   Transfer or sell illegal subdivision, Class 2 Misdemeanor (G.S. §
160D-807)
   
16-8.2   Building permits denied
   
Appendix A-1: Definitions
   
Appendix A-2: Subdivision plat standards
   
Appendix A-3: Required certificates
   
Appendix A-4: Jurisdiction
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1 TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known as the Newport Unified Development Ordinance
and may be referred to as the "UDO" or the "Zoning Ordinance." The Official
Zoning Map of Newport, North Carolina may be referred to as the "Zoning Map"
and is hereby incorporated into and made part of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-2 AUTHORIZATION.
   This ordinance consolidates the Town of Newport's land use regulatory
authority as authorized by the North Carolina General Statutes, and is adopted
pursuant to the authority granted to the Town of Newport by G.S. Chapter 160D
and any special legislation enacted for the Town by the North Carolina General
Assembly.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-3 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall become effective on June 15, 2021.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-4 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the use and development of
all land within the corporate limits of the Town of Newport, North Carolina and
within the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as identified on the Town of
Newport's Official Zoning Map.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-4.1 BONA-FIDE FARM EXEMPTION (G.S. § 160D-903(c)).
   The building area and setback requirements of this ordinance shall not apply
to bona fide farms, as defined by the North Carolina General Statutes, located
in any district outside of the corporate limits of the Town of Newport. In case
of conversion to nonagricultural uses, however, a certificate of compliance
must be procured as prescribed in §
3-4.11, and the new use must comply with all of the regulations for the
district in which it is located.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-5 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Newport and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. The intent of this ordinance is specifically to:
   a.   Implement the land use goals and objectives of the Core CAMA Land Use
Plan and ensure consistency with other adopted plans that affect the town.
   b.   Promote sustainable development that ensures the prudent use of
existing resources, conserves valuable resources for future generations, and
reduces waste and climate impacts.
   c.   Maintain economically vibrant and attractive commercial areas.
   d.   Protect the quality of established residential neighborhoods.
   e.   Support development that generates new jobs and tax revenues in order
to maintain a consistent level of municipal services and improve quality of
life for Newport residents.
   f.   Protect life and property from harm by regulating development in areas
where natural hazards exist.
   g.   Provide for a range of housing opportunities for the citizens of
Newport.
   h.   Ensure adequate infrastructure is constructed to support future
development.
   i.   Coordinate land use and development decisions with transportation
improvements to reduce congestion and ensure the safety of roads in Newport.
   j.   Allow residents to become active participants in the public realm of
their community.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-6 CONSISTENCY WITH ALL ADOPTED PLANS AND POLICIES.
   In accordance with G.S. §§ 160D-501, 160D-604 and 160D-605, all development
plans and subdivision master plans shall be in conformance with all adopted
plans and policies, which includes comprehensive plans, transportation plans,
and any other plan adopted by the Newport Town Council.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-6.1 IMPLEMENTATION OF PLAN.
   This ordinance is intended to apply the goals, policies, and implementing
actions of the Core CAMA Land Use Plan along with any plans, policies, and
resolutions incorporated by reference into that document.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-6.2 AMENDMENTS TO THIS ORDINANCE AND THE CORE CAMA LAND USE PLAN.
   Any amendments to, or actions pursuant to, this ordinance must be consistent
with the Core CAMA Land Use Plan. The Land Use Plan may be amended, and this
ordinance, along with the Official Zoning Map, should reflect those changes.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-7 GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
§ 1-7.1 LITERAL INTERPRETATION.
   The language of this ordinance must be read and interpreted literally.
Regulations contained within this ordinance are no more or less strict than
stated.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-7.2 RULES OF LANGUAGE AND CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purposes of interpreting the general language and sentence
construction of this ordinance, the following rules of construction apply
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   a.   Meaning of words. Words listed in
Appendix A-1, Definitions, have specific meaning assigned, unless the context
expressly indicates another meaning. Words that are not defined are given their
common meaning.
   b.   Tense. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The
reverse is also true.
   c.   Singular and plural. Words used in the singular include the plural. The
reverse is also true.
   d.   Mandatory terms. The words "shall", "will", "must", and "may not" are
mandatory or compulsory in nature, implying an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision.
   e.   Gender. Words used in the male gender include the female gender. The
reverse is also true.
   f.   Days. Any reference to "days" means calendar days unless otherwise
specified.
   g.   Reference. Any reference to an article, section, or paragraph means an
article, section, or paragraph of this ordinance, unless otherwise specified.
   h.   Tables, figures, and illustrations. Tables, figures, and illustrations
are provided for reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any
provision of this ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this ordinance and any table, figure, or
illustration, the text shall govern.
   i.   Current versions and citations. All references to other town, state, or
federal regulations in this ordinance are intended to be references to the most
current versions and citations, unless otherwise expressly indicated. When
referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other
regulations, requirements for compliance are no longer in effect.
   j.   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of
items or examples that use "including", "such as", or similar terms are
intended to provide examples only. They may not be construed as exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
   k.   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a
specific officer or employee of the Town of Newport to perform an act or duty,
that provision will be interpreted as authorizing the officer or employee to
delegate that responsibility to others over whom they have authority.
Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this ordinance or
other regulations expressly prohibit such delegation.
   l.   Calculations and rounding. Unless otherwise specified within this
ordinance, all calculations that result in a fraction of a whole number must be
rounded up to the next whole number.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-8 CONFLICT PROVISIONS.
§ 1-8.1 CONFLICT WITH STATE OR FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   If any provisions of this ordinance are inconsistent with those of the state
or federal government, the more restrictive provisions shall govern unless the
state or federal regulation is intended to preempt the local regulation. The
more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or more
stringent controls. Regardless of any other provision of this ordinance, no
land may be developed or used, and no structure may be erected or maintained in
violation of any state or federal regulation.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-8.2 CONFLICT WITH LOCAL REGULATIONS.
   If the provisions of this ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if
they conflict with provisions in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the
Town of Newport, the more restrictive provision will govern. The more
restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or more
stringent controls. The provisions of G.S. § 160D-706 shall control over any
provisions or definitions within this UDO to the contrary.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-8.3 CONFLICT WITH PRIVATE AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS.
   This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easement, covenant, deed restriction, agreement, or
permit previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. The Town or Newport has no
responsibility for monitoring or enforcing private agreements or contracts.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-9 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The Official Zoning Map designates the location and boundaries of the zoning
districts established by this ordinance. The Official Zoning Map and prior
zoning maps shall be kept on file in paper or digital format with the Town
Clerk, and is available for public inspection during normal business hours. The
original official version of the map shall be certified by the Town Clerk, and
shall bear the town seal. It shall be the final authority as to the status of
the current zoning district classification of land within the town's
jurisdiction, and shall only be amended in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance. When zoning district boundaries are based on maps a regulation
text or zoning map may reference a specific officially adopted map or may
incorporate by reference, the most recent officially adopted version of such
maps shall be maintained for public inspection (G.S. § 160D-105).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-10 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
§ 1-10.1 EFFECT ON VALID BUILDING PERMITS AND VESTED RIGHTS.
   Unless the property owner consents, this ordinance does not apply to the
completion of the development of buildings or uses for which either:
   a.   Building permits have been issued pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1110 prior to
June 15, 2021, so long as the permits remain valid and unexpired pursuant to
G.S. § 160D-1111 and unrevoked pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1115.
   b.   A vested right has been established and is valid and unexpired pursuant
to G.S. § 160D-108.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-10.2 OTHER APPROVALS GRANTED PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Variances, special use permits, conditional use permits, subdivision plats,
site plans, and other similar development approvals that are valid on June 14,
2021 will remain valid until their expiration date, if applicable. Development
may be completed in accordance with such approvals even if such building,
development, or structure does not fully comply with the provisions of this
ordinance. If development is not commenced and diligently pursued in the time
allowed under the original approval or any extension granted, then the
building, development, or structure must meet the standards of this ordinance
in effect that the time of resubmittal.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-10.3 APPLICATIONS IN PROCESS PRIOR TO THE EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Applications for building permits, variances, special use permits,
conditional use permits, subdivision plats, site plan approvals, and other
similar development approvals that were submitted in complete form and are
pending approval on June 15, 2021 must be reviewed wholly under the terms of
this ordinance in effect on June 14, 2021. Any resubmittal for an expired
approval must meet the standards of this ordinance in effect at that time.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-10.4 VIOLATIONS CONTINUE.
   Violations of the previous ordinance which are in violation of this
ordinance will continue to be a violation and will be subject to penalties and
enforcement action under Article IV, Enforcement. The adoption of this
ordinance does not affect nor prevent any pending or future action to abate
violations of previous ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 1-11 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared the intention of the Council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable. If
any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is declared unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment
or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the
remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this
ordinance, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation
into this ordinance of such unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
ARTICLE II: ADMINISTRATION
§ 2-1 GENERAL.
§ 2-1.1 ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.
   The following elected and appointed bodies, as well as town staff members,
shall have powers and responsibilities in administering this ordinance and for
reviewing and making decisions on applications for development approval,
appeals, and amendments to the ordinance:
   a.   Town Council;
   b.   Planning Board;
   c.   Board of Adjustment; and
   d.   Ordinance Administrator.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-1.2 ORGANIZATION.
   With the exception of the Town Council, each of the boards provided for by
this ordinance must adopt rules and maintain records in conformance with the
following:
   a.   Oaths. All members appointed to boards shall, before entering their
duties, qualify by taking an oath of office as required by G.S. § 160A-61.
   b.   Rules of conduct. A board must adopt rules necessary to conduct its
affairs and to establish board organization, procedures and the conduct of its
meetings and post those rules to the town's website (G.S. § 160D-308).
   c.   Conformance of rules. The rules adopted by a board must be in
accordance with state law and the provisions of this ordinance.
   d.   Election and terms of officers. Each board shall elect a Chairperson
and Vice Chairperson from its membership. These officers shall serve for a term
of one year, or until the expiration of the term of their appointment to the
board on which they serve.
   e.   Record of meetings. Each board must keep accurate minutes of its
proceedings and the actions taken in its meetings. When holding quasi-judicial
hearings, the Board of Adjustment shall keep a full transcript of the meeting
and maintain a record of all evidence presented in the course of the hearing.
   f.   Temporary disqualification (G.S. § 160D-109).
      (1)   A Town Council member shall not vote on any legislative decision
regarding a development regulation adopted pursuant to this UDO, including but
not limited to, a Zoning Map or Unified Development Ordinance amendment where
the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a
direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
      (2)   A Town Council member shall not vote on any Zoning Map or Unified
Development Ordinance amendment if the landowner of the property subject to a
rezoning petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom
the member has a close familial, business, or other associational relationship.
      (3)   Members of appointed boards shall not vote on any advisory or
legislative decision regarding a development regulation where the outcome of
the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial,
and readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
      (4)   An appointed board member shall not vote on any zoning amendment if
the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the applicant
for a text amendment is a person with whom the member has a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship.
      (5)   The Ordinance Administrator shall not make a final decision on an
administrative decision required by this ordinance if the outcome of that
decision would have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial
impact on the Ordinance Administrator or if the applicant or other person
subject to that decision is a person with whom the Ordinance Administrator has
a close familial, business, or other associational relationship. If the
Ordinance Administrator has a conflict of interest, the decision shall be
assigned to the Town Manager.
      (6)   No staff member shall be financially interested or employed by a
business that is financially interested in a development subject to regulation
under this ordinance unless the staff member is the owner of the land or
building involved. No staff member or other individual or an employee of a
company contracting with the Town of Newport to provide staff support shall
engage in any work that is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the
interest of the town, as determined by the town.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-2 TOWN COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1 ORGANIZATION.
   Unless specifically modified in this ordinance, the Town Council must
conform to the rules and procedures that it utilizes during the conduct of its
regular business.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-2.2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In the application and enforcement of this ordinance, the Town Council has
the following duties:
   a.   Final approval authority. The Town Council is the approving authority
for the following:
      (1)   Zoning map amendments (§
3-4.1);
      (2)   Unified Development Ordinance text amendments (§
3-4.3);
      (3)   Conditional zoning district classifications (§
3-4.2);
      (4)   Preliminary plat - major subdivision (§
3-4.12(f));
      (5)   Final plat - major subdivision (§
3-4.12(g)); and
      (6)   Site-specific vesting plans (§
3-4.7)
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-3 PLANNING BOARD.
§ 2-3.1 AUTHORITY AND ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Town of Newport's Planning Board is hereby established pursuant to the
authority of G.S. § 160D-301.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-3.2 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Planning Board shall consist of eight members. The Newport Town Council
shall appoint four members from within the town limits, and the Carteret County
Board of Commissioners shall appoint four members from the extraterritorial
jurisdiction. The population estimates for this calculation shall be updated no
less frequently than after each decennial census (G.S. § 160D-307).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-3.3 QUORUM.
   Four or more members of the Planning Board shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-3.4 TERMS.
   All members shall serve three-year terms. Membership terms shall continue to
be staggered.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-3.5 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In the application and enforcement of this ordinance, the Planning Board has
the following powers and duties:
   a.   Review and recommendation. The Planning Board has review and
recommendation responsibility for the following:
      (1)   Zoning map amendments (§
3-4.1);
      (2)   Unified Development Ordinance text amendments (§
3-4.3);
      (3)   Conditional zoning district classifications (§
3-4.2);
      (4)   Preliminary plat - major subdivision (§
3-4.12(f)); and
      (5)   Site-specific vesting plans (§
3-4.7).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-3.6 VOTING.
   The concurring affirmative vote of a majority of the members present and
qualified to vote is required to make a recommendation or any other decision in
favor of an applicant. Tie votes must be considered recommendations for
disapproval. All members have equal rights, privileges, and duties in all
matters whether such matters are within the corporate limits of the town or in
the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-4 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 2-4.1 AUTHORITY AND ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Town of Newport's Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to
the authority of G.S. § 160D-302.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-4.2 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of eight members. The Newport Town
Council shall appoint four members from within the town limits, and the
Carteret County Board of Commissioners shall appoint four members from the
extraterritorial jurisdiction. The population estimates for this calculation
shall be updated no less frequently than after each decennial census (§ G.S.
160D-307).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-4.3 QUORUM.
   Four or more members of the Board of Adjustment shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-4.4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In the application and enforcement of this ordinance, the Board of
Adjustment has the following powers and duties:
   a.   Final approving authority. The Board of Adjustment is the final
approving authority for the following:
      (1)   Variances (§
3-4.5); and
      (2)   Special use permits (§
3-4.4).
   b.   Appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on the following
appeals:
      (1)   Appeals of denials of site plan (§
3-4.9);
      (2)   Appeals of denials of minor subdivision approval (§
3-4.12(e));
      (3)   Appeals of denials of land development permit approval (§
3-4.10); and
      (4)   Appeals of administrative decisions (§
3-4.6).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-4.5 VOTING.
   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the voting members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance from the provisions of this
ordinance. A simple majority vote of the voting members of the Board of
Adjustment is required to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of any administrative official charged with the enforcement of
this ordinance, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it
is required to pass under this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-5 ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-5.1 APPOINTMENT.
   The Planning & Inspections Director shall be the Ordinance Administrator.
The Town Council shall appoint an Ordinance Administrator who shall be charged
with the administering and enforcing of the provisions of this ordinance. The
Ordinance Administrator may delegate any authority or duties as prescribed in
order to ensure the efficient administration of the ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-5.2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In the application and enforcement of this ordinance, the Ordinance
Administrator has the following powers and duties:
   a.   Reviews and recommendation. The Ordinance Administrator has review and
recommendation responsibility for the following:
      (1)   Zoning map amendments (§
3-4.1);
      (2)   Unified Development Ordinance text amendments (§
3-4.3);
      (3)   Conditional zoning district classifications (§
3-4.2);
      (4)   Conceptual site plan - conditional zoning district classification
(§
3-4.8);
      (5)   Conceptual site plan - special use permit (§
3-4.8);
      (6)   Subdivision sketch plats (§
3-4.12(d));
      (7)   Major subdivision preliminary plats (§
3-4.12(f));
      (8)   Major subdivision final plats (§
3-4.12(g)); and
      (9)   Site-specific vesting plan (§
3-4).
   b.   Final approval. The Ordinance Administrator has final approval for the
following:
      (1)   Site plan (§
3-4.9);
      (2)   Minor subdivision plats (§
3-4.12(e));
      (3)   Land development permits (§
3-4.10); and
      (4)   Certificates of compliance (§
3-4.11).
   c.   Additional duties.
      (1)   Establish application content requirements and a submission
schedule for review of applications and appeals.
      (2)   Maintain the Official Zoning Map and related materials.
      (3)   Enforce the regulations contained within this ordinance.
      (4)   Maintain the official copy of the Unified Development Ordinance and
ensure that it is updated upon the approval of a text amendment.
      (5)   Maintain a record of all permits and approvals.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-5.3 TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   In carrying out any of the duties specified by subsections (A) and (B)
above, the Ordinance Administrator may convene a Technical Review Committee
(TRC) composed of representatives of agencies with expertise on, or regulatory
authority over, an aspect of the development proposal. The composition of the
TRC shall be at the discretion of the Ordinance Administrator, and may either
be a standing or ad hoc committee based upon the scope or type of review. The
TRC shall provide advice and technical information to the Ordinance
Administrator regarding the development proposals in order to ensure a full and
coordinated review of development proposals.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 2-6 SUMMARY OF REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   
Table 2-1 below summarizes review and approval authority under this ordinance.
TABLE 2-1: REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY
                 Review/Decision-Making Body
Application Type Ordinance     Planning Board Board of Adjustment Town Council
                 Administrator
TABLE 2-1: REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY
                   Review/Decision-Making Body
Application Type   Ordinance     Planning Board Board of   Town Council
                   Administrator                Adjustment
Unified
Development        R             R                        D
Ordinance text
amendment
Zoning Map         R             R                        D
amendment
Conditional zoning R             R                        D
classification
Major subdivision  R             R                        D
preliminary plat
Major subdivision  R                                     D
final plat
Minor subdivision  D                           A           
Variance                                      D           
Floodplain                                    D           
variance
 
TABLE 2-1: REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY
                 Review/Decision-Making Body
Application Type Ordinance     Planning Board Board of Adjustment Town Council
                 Administrator
TABLE 2-1: REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY
                   Review/Decision-Making Body
Application Type   Ordinance     Planning Board Board of   Town Council
                   Administrator                Adjustment
Special use permit                              D
Land development   D                            A
permit
Site plan          D                            A
Sketch plat -      R
major subdivision
Conceptual site
plan - site        R
development plan
Conceptual site
plan - conditional R
zoning
classification
Conceptual site
plan - special use R
permit
Administrative                                  D
appeal
Site-specific      R             R                         D
vesting plan
R=Review/Recommendation      D=Decision      A=Appeal of Decision
 
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
ARTICLE III: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
§ 3-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   In order to establish an orderly process to develop land within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Newport consistent with standard development
practices and terminology, it is the purpose of this article to provide a clear
and comprehensible development process that is fair and equitable to all
interests, including the applicants, affected neighbors, town staff and related
agencies, and the Town Council.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-2 NO CONSTRUCTION TO COMMENCE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   No land shall be used or occupied, no use shall be established, and no
structures shall be erected, modified, moved, extended, or enlarged, nor shall
any excavation or filling of any lot be initiated until the Ordinance
Administrator has issued an appropriate permit, which will certify that the
proposed work is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-2.1 INSPECTIONS OF WORK IN PROGRESS.
   Administrative staff may inspect work undertaken pursuant to a development
approval to assure that the work is being done in accordance with applicable
state and local laws and of the terms of the approval. In exercising this
power, staff are authorized to enter any premises within the jurisdiction of
the local government at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection or
other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials; provided,
however, that the appropriate consent has been given for inspection of areas
not open to the public or that an appropriate inspection warrant has been
secured (G.S. § 160D-403(e), § 160D-402(b)).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-2.2 EXPIRATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   A building permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall expire by
limitation six months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the
permit has not been commenced. If, after commencement, the work is discontinued
for a period of 12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No
work authorized by any building permit that has expired shall thereafter be
performed until a new permit has been secured (NCGS 160D-1111).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3 COMMON REVIEW PROCEDURES.
§ 3-3.1 AUTHORITY TO FILE APPLICATION.
   Applications for development approval under this ordinance in accordance
with §
3-3.5 "Application Submission" shall be submitted by the landowner or a person
acting on the behalf of the landowner with their authorization and consent.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.2 APPLICATION CONTENT.
   The Ordinance Administrator shall establish the requirements for the general
form and content of applications required by this ordinance. These shall be in
addition to any specific application content requirements established by this
ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.3 FEES.
   As warranted, the Town Council shall adopt a schedule of fees for
application and processing as specified in this ordinance as a part of the Town
of Newport's annual budgeting process.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.4 SUBMISSION AND REVIEW SCHEDULE.
   The Ordinance Administrator shall establish a submission and review
schedule, including time frames for review, for development applications. This
schedule may be amended and updated as determined necessary.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.5 APPLICATION SUBMISSION.
   All applications shall be submitted to the Ordinance Administrator on such
forms and in such numbers as have been established for that type of development
application. Applications which do not meet the requirements of §
3-3.6 "Determination of Completeness" shall be considered incomplete, and their
review deferred until such time that all requirements of that section have been
fulfilled.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.6 DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS.
   a.   Review of completeness. Upon the receipt of an application, the
Ordinance Administrator shall review the application for completeness. A
complete application is one that:
      (1)   Contains all information and materials established by the Ordinance
Administrator, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, for the particular
type of development application;
      (2)   Is in the form established by the Ordinance Administrator for the
particular type of development application;
      (3)   Includes information in sufficient detail to evaluate the
application to determine whether it complies with the appropriate standards of
this ordinance; and
      (4)   Is accompanied by the fee established for the particular type of
application.
   b.   Incomplete applications. If an application is determined to be
incomplete, the Ordinance Administrator shall notify the applicant of the
deficiencies within ten business days following submittal. Upon receiving the
notification, the applicant may correct deficiencies and resubmit the
application for review.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.7 FINAL APPROVAL BY THE ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   When an application that is subject to final approval by the Ordinance
Administrator is submitted and determined to be complete, they shall review the
application and approve or deny it based on the standards of this ordinance.
The Ordinance Administrator must notify the applicant of their decision within
the time period set forth in the submission and review schedule.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.8 PREPARATION OF STAFF REPORT.
   When an application that must be considered by a reviewing and/or decision-
making body is submitted and determined to be complete, the Ordinance
Administrator shall review the application and prepare a written staff report.
      (1)   The staff report shall be addressed to the appropriate body, and
state whether the application complies with all appropriate standards of this
ordinance and all other applicable policy documents.
      (2)   The Ordinance Administrator may include a recommendation for
approval or denial of the application in the staff report. Proposed conditions
of approval may also be included in the report if the Ordinance Administrator
determines that such conditions may be necessary to mitigate any potentially
adverse impacts of the proposed development.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.9 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The Ordinance Administrator shall be responsible for scheduling public
hearings for all applications for which one is required. The hearing may be
scheduled for either a regular meeting or a special called meeting of the
decision-making body that is responsible for holding the hearing. Hearings
shall be scheduled in a manner that will allow sufficient time for public
notice to be given in accordance with statutory requirements. Public hearing
requirements are outlined in
Table 3-1.
TABLE 3-1: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS
Application Type Decision-Making Body
                 Town Council Board of Adjustment
TABLE 3-1: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS
Application Type                             Decision-Making Body
                                             Town Council Board of Adjustment
Appeal of administrative decision                         X
Conditional district rezoning                X
Floodplain variance                                       X
Special use permit                                        X
Unified Development Ordinance text amendment X
Variance                                                  X
Zoning Map amendment                         X
 
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.10 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
   A.   Content. All public notices required by this ordinance shall comply
with G.S. §§ 160D-406, 160D-601, or 160D-602. Additionally, all notices, except
posted notices, shall:
      (1)   Identify the time, date, and location of the meeting or public
hearing;
      (2)   Identify the property involved by the street address, if
applicable, and the legal description and/or the parcel identification number
(PIN);
      (3)   Describe the nature and scope of the purposed action;
      (4)   Indicate that interested parties may appear at public hearings
where they may speak on the matter; and
      (5)   Indicate how further information may be attained.
   b.   Published notice. When the provisions of this ordinance require that
notice of a public hearing be published pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-406, 160D-601,
or 160D-602, the Ordinance Administrator shall publish a notice of the public
hearing once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper having
general circulation in the town. The notice shall be published the first time
not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date scheduled for the
hearing. In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included
but the day of the hearing shall be included.
   c.   Mailed notice.
      (1)   When the provisions of this ordinance require that mailed notice be
provided pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-406, 160D-601, or 160D-602, the Ordinance
Administrator shall prepare a notice of the public hearing and deliver the
notice via first class mail to the owners of affected parcels of land and the
owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land. Properties are
"abutting" even if separated by a street, railroad, or other transportation
corridor.
      (2)   Mailed notices must be deposited in the mail at least ten but not
more than 25 days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (3)   The Ordinance Administrator shall certify to the Town Council that
actual notice has been provided, and such certificate shall be deemed
conclusive in the absence of fraud.
      (4)   Mailed notice shall not be required when an application to amend
the Official Zoning Map includes more than 50 different parcels, owned by at
least 50 different property owners, and the Town of Newport publishes a notice,
occupying at least one-half of a newspaper page, in a newspaper of general
circulation once a week for two consecutive weeks, beginning at least ten but
not more than 25 days prior to the public hearing date. The advertisement shall
only be effective for property owners who reside in the area of general
circulation of the newspaper that publishes the notice. Property owners who
reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address
listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall
be notified according to the provisions of subsection (1) and (2) above (see
G.S. § 160D-602(b))
   d.   Posted notice.
      (1)   When the provisions of this ordinance require that notice be posted
pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-406(b) or 160D-602(c), the Ordinance Administrator
shall post the notice on the subject property at least ten but not more than 25
days prior to the public hearing date. When multiple parcels are included
within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is
not required, but the Ordinance Administrator shall post sufficient notices to
provide reasonable notice to interested persons.
      (2)   If no part of the subject property is visible from a public right-
of-way, the notice shall be posted along the nearest street in the public
right-of-way in such a manner as to ensure consistency with the intent of this
subsection.
   e.   Notice to military bases. If the adoption or modification would result
in changes to the Official Zoning Map or would change or affect the permitted
uses of land located five miles or less from the perimeter boundary of a
military base, the Ordinance Administrator shall provide written notice of the
proposed changes by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the commander
of the military base not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the
date fixed for the hearing. If the commander of the military base provides
comments or analysis regarding the compatibility of the proposed development
regulation or amendment with military operations at the base, the Town Council
shall take the comments and analysis into consideration before making a final
determination on the ordinance (see G.S. § 160D-601(b)).
   f.   Constructive notice.
      (1)   Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or
invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a bona fide attempt has been
made to comply with the applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in
notices may include but are not limited to errors in legal descriptions or
typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede the communication of the
notice to affected persons.
      (2)   Failure of an affected party to receive written notice shall not
invalidate subsequent action.
      (3)   If questions arise at the public hearing regarding the adequacy of
the notice, the decision-making body shall direct the Ordinance Administrator
to make a formal finding as to whether there was substantial compliance with
the notice requirements of this ordinance. Such findings shall be made
available to the decision-making body prior to further action being taken on
the request.
   g.   Summary of notification requirements. The following table summarizes
the public notification requirements for development applications.
Table 3-2: Summary of Notification Requirements
Application Type Notice Type
                 Published Notice Mailed Notice Posted Notice
Table 3-2: Summary of Notification Requirements
Application Type                   Notice Type
                                   Published Notice Mailed Notice Posted Notice
Appeal of administrative decision  X                              
Conditional zoning district                        X             X
classification
Core CAMA Land Use Plan Amendment  X                             X
Establishment of vested rights                     X             X
Special use permit                                 X             X
Unified Development Ordinance text X                              
amendment
Variance                                           X             X
Zoning Map amendment                               X             X
 
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.11 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   a.   General. When a decision-making body may, according to the express
terms of this ordinance, approve a development application with conditions,
such body may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions or restrictions on
the approval. The conditions may ensure compliance with the general goals and
policies of this ordinance, or with particular standards of this ordinance to
prevent or mitigate adverse effects from the proposed development of
surrounding area.
   b.   Limitations.
      (1)   The restrictions and conditions imposed must be directly related,
in both type and scope, to the impact that the proposed development would have
on the public and surrounding area.
      (2)   All conditions imposed shall be expressly set forth in the motion
by the decision-making body to approve the development application.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.12 DEFERRAL OF APPLICATION.
   a.   Request prior to publication of notice. An applicant may request that a
decision-making body's consideration of an application be deferred by
submitting a written request for deferral to the Ordinance Administrator prior
to the publication of notice for the public hearing. The Ordinance
Administrator may grant such request for sufficient cause. The date of the new
public hearing at which the application will be heard shall be set at the time
the deferral is granted.
   b.   Request after publication of notice. If a request for deferral of
consideration of an application by a decision-making body is submitted after
any required notice has been published, the request for deferral shall be
placed on the public hearing agenda and acted upon by the decision-making body.
The decision-making body may grant such requests for sufficient cause. The date
of the new public hearing at which the application will be heard shall be set
at the time the deferral is granted. If a deferral is granted, the application
may be subject to additional application fees to defray the costs of
advertising the public hearing, if any. Any additional fees must be paid prior
to the advertisement of the new public hearing notice.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.13 CHANGES TO APPLICATION AFTER NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   a.   Clerical errors. In order to address clerical errors of an application,
minor additions, deletions, or corrections may be submitted to the Ordinance
Administrator for review.
   b.   Major changes. No substantive change to an application related to use,
density, intensity, street layout, access, open space configuration, or other
major element shall be made after notification of a public hearing. Major
changes by the applicant, after notification of a public hearing, require that
the original application be withdrawn and a new application be submitted along
with any required fees.
   c.   Conditions of approval. Proposed changes in conditions of approval may
be considered by any decision-making body without referral back to the
Ordinance Administrator or other recommending body.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.14 WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION.
   a.   Submission of request. Any request for withdrawal of an application
subject to a public hearing shall be submitted, in writing, to the Ordinance
Administrator, or shall be made through a verbal request during the public
hearing of the application.
   b.   Prior to notice of public hearing. The Ordinance Administrator must
approve a request for withdrawal of an application if it has been submitted
prior to public notification of the application.
   c.   Subsequent to notice of public hearing. The request for withdrawal of
an application shall be placed on the public hearing agenda and acted upon by
the decision-making body if it has been submitted after public notification of
the application.
   d.   Fees. Fees will not be refunded for withdrawn applications.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.15 NOTIFICATION FOR DECISION TO APPLICANT.
   Within 15 days of time after a decision on an application has been made, the
Ordinance Administrator shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing.
The notification shall become a part of the public record.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.16 LAPSE OF APPROVAL.
   Lapse of approval, otherwise referred to as "expiration," shall occur as
provided by this ordinance for the various types of development applications.
In the event this ordinance does not provide for such lapse and no lapse period
is imposed as part of an approval by the decision-making body, lapse shall
occur if development is not commenced, a subsequent permit authorized by that
approval has not been issued, and an extension has not been obtained within two
years.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-3.17 EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION AND SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS.
   At any time, upon reasonable request, during normal business hours, any
person may examine an application, a finalized staff report, and any related
materials to the application, which includes comments from the public in
support of and in opposition to the application. These files must be kept in
the office of the Ordinance Administrator.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4 STANDARDS, PROCEDURES, AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS.
   This section includes the review procedures, standards, and related
information for each of the development application procedures as summarized in
Table 2-1, Review and Decision-Making Approval Authority.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.1 ZONING MAP AMENDMENT.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for a uniform
process to amend the Official Zoning Map.
   b.   Authority. The Town Council may adopt an ordinance amending the
Official Zoning Map upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
   c.   Initiation. An application to amend the Official Zoning Map may be
initiated by the Town Council, the Planning Board, the Ordinance Administrator,
any resident of Newport, or any other interested party. However, no amendment
to the Official Zoning Map that down-zones property shall be initiated nor is
it enforceable without the written consent of all property owners whose
property is the subject of the down-zoning amendment, unless the down-zoning
amendment is initiated by the local government (G.S. § 160D-601(d)).
   d.   Conditional Zoning District classification distinction.
      (1)   Applications for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map that are
accompanied by applicant sponsored conditions or limitations shall be
considered as a Conditional Zoning District Classification, and shall be
reviewed in accordance with § 3-4.2, Conditional Zoning District
Classification.
      (2)   In no case shall an application for an amendment to the Official
Zoning Map be converted into an application for a Conditional Zoning District
classification, nor shall an application for a Conditional Zoning District
classification be converted into an application for an amendment to the
Official Zoning Map. If such a conversion is desired, a new application with
any applicable fees must be submitted.
   e.   Procedures.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. Prior to the submission of
the application to the Planning Board, the Ordinance Administrator shall review
the application and make a written report, which shall be presented to the
Planning Board during the meeting at which it considers the application.
      (3)   Review and recommendation by the Planning Board. Following the
review by the Ordinance Administrator, the application shall be forwarded to
the Planning Board for its review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall
consider the application, relevant supporting materials, the Ordinance
Administrator's report and recommendation (if given), and any comments provided
by the general public during its meeting. The Planning Board shall provide a
written statement summarizing the amendment's consistency with the Core CAMA
Land Use Plan and any other relevant plans having applicability to the proposed
amendment in accordance with G.S. § 160D-604(d). If no written report is
received from the Planning Board within 30 days of referral of the application,
the Town Council may act on the amendment without the Planning Board report
(G.S. § 160D-604(b)).
      (4)   Action by the Town Council. Following the receipt of a
recommendation from the Planning Board, the Town Council shall conduct a public
hearing to review and consider the application, the relevant supporting
materials, the Ordinance Administrator's report and recommendation (if given),
the recommendation of the Planning Board, and any comments provided during the
public hearing. Following the close of the public hearing, the Town Council
shall take one of the following actions:
         i.   Approve the application for amendment to the Official Zoning Map
as submitted;
         ii.   Approve the application for amendment to the Official Zoning Map
with a reduction in size of the area requested in the application;
         iii.   Approve the application for amendment to the Official Zoning
Map with a more restrictive base zoning district than proposed;
         iv.   Deny the application for amendment to the Official Zoning Map;
or
         v.   Remand the application back to the Planning Board for further
consideration.
      (5)   Statement of plan consistency and additional reasonableness
statement (G.S. § 160D-605). When adopting or rejecting any Zoning Map
amendment, the Town Council shall approve a brief statement describing whether
its action is consistent or inconsistent with the Core CAMA Land Use Plan. The
requirement for a plan consistency statement may also be met by a clear
indication in the minutes of the Town Council that at the time of action on the
amendment the Town Council was aware of and considered the Planning Board's
recommendations and any relevant portions of the Core CAMA Land Use Plan. If a
zoning map amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under G.S. § 160D-
602(b), the Town Council's statement describing plan consistency may address
the overall rezoning and describe how the analysis and policies in the relevant
adopted plans were considered in the action taken. If a plan is deemed amended
by virtue of adoption of a zoning amendment that is inconsistent with the plan,
that amendment shall be noted in the plan; however, the plan amendment shall
not become effective until completion of the review and approval process
required by G.S. § 113A-110. Furthermore, a statement analyzing the
reasonableness of the proposed Zoning Map Amendment shall be approved by the
Town Council. This statement of reasonableness may consider, among other
factors:
         i.   The size, physical conditions, and other attributes of the area
proposed to be rezoned;
         ii.   The benefits and detriments to the landowners, the neighbors,
and the surrounding community;
         iii.   The relationship between the current actual and permissible
development on the tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be
permissible under the proposed amendment;
         iv.   Why the action taken is in the public interest; and
         v.   Any changed conditions warranting the amendment. If a zoning map
amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under G.S. § 160D-602(b), the
governing board statement on reasonableness may address the overall rezoning.
         vi.   The statement of reasonableness and the plan consistency
statement may be approved as a single statement.
   f.   Zoning Map amendment standards. Amending the Official Zoning Map is a
matter committed to the legislative discretion of the Town Council. In
determining whether to approve or deny a proposed amendment, the Town Council
shall consider and weigh the relevance of the following factors:
      (1)   The proposed rezoning corrects an error or meets the challenge of
some changing condition, trend, or fact.
      (2)   The proposed rezoning is compatible with the Town of Newport's Core
CAMA Land Use Plan and accompanying future land use plan map.
      (3)   The proposed rezoning and the range of uses permitted in the
requested zoning district are compatible with the surrounding zoning patterns
and land uses.
      (4)   The Town of Newport will be able to provide sufficient public
safety services, meet transportation and utility demands to the subject
property, while maintaining a sufficient level of service to existing
developments.
      (5)   The proposed rezoning will not impair or injure the health, safety
and general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.2 CONDITIONAL ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION.
   a.   Purpose. A Conditional Zoning District classification (CD) allows
particular land uses to be established only in accordance with specific
standards and conditions adopted as part of the establishment of the district.
In cases where the standards of a base zoning district are inadequate to ensure
the compatibility of a proposed development with the immediate area, the
landowner may apply for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map to a CD. CDs
are subject to additional conditions or restrictions above and beyond the
standards of the parallel base zoning district as a means of ensuring the
compatibility of the proposed development with the use and development of the
neighboring area.
   b.   Initiation. An application for a CD may only be initiated by the
current owner(s) or contract purchaser(s), of the property for which the CD is
designated in accordance with §
3-3.1, Authority to File Application.
   c.   Procedures. Approval of a CD shall require an amendment to the Official
Zoning Map using the same procedures established in §
3-4.1, Zoning Map Amendment. This must be accompanied by the submission of
applicant sponsored conditions, which limit the scope of the development
proposal, and a conceptual site plan that is reviewed in accordance with §
3-4.8, Conceptual Site Plan.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. Prior to the submission of
the application to the Planning Board, the Ordinance Administrator shall review
the application and accompanying conceptual site plan and make a written
report, which shall be presented to the Planning Board during the meeting at
which it considers the application.
      (3)   Review and recommendation by the Planning Board. Following the
review by the Ordinance Administrator, the application and conceptual site plan
shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for its review and recommendation. The
Planning Board shall consider the application, the conceptual site plan,
relevant supporting materials, the Ordinance Administrator's report and
recommendation (if given), and any comments provided by the general public
during its meeting. The Planning Board shall provide a written statement
summarizing the CDs consistency with the Core CAMA Land Use Plan and any other
relevant plans having applicability to the proposed CD in accordance with G.S.
§ 160D-604(d). If no written report is received from the Planning Board within
30 days of referral of the application, the Town Council may act on the
amendment without the Planning Board report (see G.S. § 160D-604(b)).
      (4)   Action by the Town Council. Following the receipt of a
recommendation from the Planning Board, the Town Council shall conduct a public
hearing to review and consider the application, the conceptual site plan, the
relevant supporting materials, the Ordinance Administrator's report and
recommendation (if given), the recommendation of the Planning Board, and any
comments provided during the public hearing. Following the close of the public
hearing, the Town Council shall, by a simple majority vote of all members
present and qualified to vote, either approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the application.
   b.   Fair and reasonable conditions.
      (1)   No use shall be authorized within a CD except those uses proposed
by the applicant and approved by the Town Council. In no case shall any
prohibited use within a parallel base zoning district be allowed in a
corresponding conditional district.
      (2)   No condition shall be less restrictive than the parallel base
zoning district or any applicable overlay district standards.
      (3)   No condition shall be included that specifies the ownership status,
race, religion, or other character of the occupants of dwelling units, the
minimum value of improvements, or any other exclusionary device.
      (4)   No changes in the conceptual site plan or proposed conditions that
are less restrictive than those in the application (e.g. smaller setbacks, more
dwelling units, greater height, more access points, new users, fewer
improvements, etc.) shall be proposed by the applicant following public
notification. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the application of new or
more restrictive conditions after public notification, provided such conditions
are received by the Ordinance Administrator, in writing, signed by all owners
of the property at least ten business days prior to the final decision on the
application by the Town Council.
      (5)   In addition to any conditions proposed by the applicant, the Town
Council may attach any additional conditions in accordance with §
3-3.11, Conditions of Approval. The Town Council shall not attach a condition
that requires a landowner to waive a vested right.
      (6)   Conditions and site-specific standards imposed in a CD shall be
limited to those that address the conformance of the development and use of the
site or the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or
use of the site in accordance with G.S. § 160D-703(b).
   c.   Effect of approval. Lands subject to a CD shall also be subject to the
approved conceptual site plan and approved conditions, and may only be used or
developed in conformance to those approved plans and conditions. The approved
conceptual site plan and conditions shall constitute the standards for the
approved CD, and are binding on the land as an amendment to this ordinance and
Official Zoning Map. The petitioner must sign the conditions for them to be
enforced.
   d.   Designation. A Conditional Zoning District classification shall bear
the same designation as the parallel base zoning district, but shall also
include the suffix "CD".
   e.   Substantial changes. To be permitted, any substantial change to a
conceptual site plan or approved conditions, as noted below, shall be reviewed
by the Planning Board and approved by the Town Council as an amended CD. The
following changes to a conceptual site plan or approved conditions shall
require approval by Town Council:
      (1)   Land being added or removed from the CD;
      (2)   Modification of special performance criteria, design standards, or
other requirements specified by the enacting ordinance;
      (3)   A change in land use or development type beyond that permitted by
the approved conceptual site plan;
      (4)   When there is introduction of a new vehicular access point to an
existing street not previously designated for access;
      (5)   When there is an increase in the total number of residential
dwelling units originally authorized by the approved conceptual site plan; and
      (6)   When the gross floor area of nonresidential use is increased more
than five percent beyond the gross floor area on the approved conceptual site
plan.
   f.   Minor deviations. Minor deviations to a conceptual site plan or
approved conditions, which have no substantial impact on the basic development
concept of the CD may be approved administratively at the discretion of the
Ordinance Administrator. However, if in the judgment of the Ordinance
Administrator, the requested changes alter the basic development concept of the
CD, the Ordinance Administrator may require approval by the Town Council.
   g.   Recordation. The Town of Newport shall, at the applicant's expense,
record the CD in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County within
30 days of its issuance.
   h.   Rescission of Conditional Districts. The applicant shall secure a valid
building permit within two years from date of approval of the CD unless
otherwise specified. If a valid building permit has not been issued by that
time, the Ordinance Administrator shall notify the applicant of such finding.
Within 60 days of notification, the Ordinance Administrator shall make a
recommendation concerning the rescission of the CD to the Town Council. The
Town Council may grant a single extension of up to one year upon submittal by
the applicant of sufficient justification for the extension and following a
public hearing on the matter. The Town Council may also rescind the CD pursuant
to a Zoning Map amendment.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.3 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENT.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for a uniform
process to amend the text of the Unified Development Ordinance.
   b.   Authority. The Town Council may adopt an ordinance amending the text of
the Unified Development Ordinance upon compliance with the provisions of this
section.
   c.   Initiation. An application to amend the text of the Unified Development
Ordinance may be initiated by the Town Council, the Planning Board, the
Ordinance Administrator, any resident of Newport, or any other interested
party.
   d.   Procedures.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. Prior to the submission of
the application to the Planning Board, the Ordinance Administrator shall review
the application and make a written report, which shall be presented to the
Planning Board during the meeting at which it considers the application.
      (3)   Review and recommendation by the Planning Board. Following the
review by the Ordinance Administrator, the application shall be forwarded to
the Planning Board for its review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall
consider the application, relevant supporting materials, the Ordinance
Administrator's report and recommendation (if given), and any comments provided
by the general public during its meeting. The Planning Board shall provide a
written statement summarizing the amendment's consistency with the Core CAMA
Land Use Plan and any other relevant plans having applicability to the proposed
amendment in accordance with G.S. § 160D-604(d). If no written report is
received from the Planning Board within 30 days of referral of the application,
the Town Council may act on the amendment without the Planning Board report
(G.S. § 160D-604(b)).
      (4)   Action by the Town Council. Following the receipt of a
recommendation from the Planning Board, the Town Council shall conduct a public
hearing to review and consider the application, the relevant supporting
materials, the Ordinance Administrator's report and recommendation (if given),
the recommendation of the Planning Board, and any comments provided during the
public hearing. Following the close of the public hearing, the Town Council
shall take one of the following actions:
         i.    Approve the application for amendment to the Unified Development
Ordinance as submitted;
         ii.    Approve a revised amendment;
         iii.    Deny the application for amendment to the Unified Development
Ordinance; or
         iv.    Remand the application back to the Planning Board for further
consideration.
      (5)   Statement of plan consistency and additional reasonableness
statement (G.S. § 160D-605). When adopting or rejecting any amendment, the Town
Council shall approve a brief statement describing whether its action is
consistent or inconsistent with the Core CAMA Land Use Plan. The requirement
for a plan consistency statement may also be met by a clear indication in the
minutes of the Town Council that at the time of action on the amendment the
Town Council was aware of and considered the Planning Board's recommendations
and any relevant portions of the Core CAMA Land Use Plan. If a plan is deemed
amended by virtue of adoption of a zoning amendment that is inconsistent with
the plan, that amendment shall be noted in the plan; however, the plan
amendment shall not become effective until completion of the review and
approval process required by G.S. § 113A-110.
   e.   Unified Development Ordinance text amendment standards. Amending the
text of the Unified Development Ordinance is a matter committed to the
legislative discretion of the Town Council. In determining whether to approve
or deny a proposed amendment, the Town Council shall consider and weigh the
relevance of the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the proposed amendment corrects an ambiguity or error or
meets the challenge of some changing condition, trend or fact;
      (2)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the Core CAMA
Land Use Plan and associated future land use plan map; and
      (3)   Whether the proposed amendment will impair or injure the health,
safety and general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.4 SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   a.   Purpose. Special uses are uses that are generally compatible with the
other uses permitted in a zoning district, but require individual review of
their location, design, configuration, density and intensity of use, and may
require the imposition of conditions to ensure the appropriateness of the use
at a particular location.
   b.   Authority. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to review and make
decisions regarding applications for special use permits in accordance with
this section. Only those uses identified as special uses in Article VII,
District Regulations are authorized to be considered as special uses under this
section. The designation of a use as a special use does not constitute an
authorization that such use shall be approved through a special use permit in
accordance with this section. Rather, each proposed special use shall be
evaluated by the Board of Adjustment for compliance with the standards set
forth in this section.
   c.   Initiation. An application for a special use permit may only be
initiated by the current owner(s) or contract purchaser(s), of the property for
which the special use permit is designated in accordance with §
3-3.1, Authority to File Application.
   d.   Procedures. Approval of a special use permit shall require a conceptual
site plan that is reviewed in accordance with §
3-4.8, Conceptual Site Plan.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. Prior to the submission of
the application to the Board of Adjustment, the Ordinance Administrator shall
review the application and accompanying conceptual site plan and make a written
report, which shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment during its public
hearing on the application.
      (3)   Action by the Board of Adjustment. Following public notification
and the scheduling of a public hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall conduct a
quasi-judicial public hearing on the application. At the hearing, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider the application, the relevant supporting materials,
the conceptual site plan, and all other competent and relevant evidence
presented at the hearing. Following the close of the hearing, the Board of
Adjustment shall, by a simple majority vote of all members present and
qualified to vote, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application
based on the standards in this section. All decisions by the Board of
Adjustment shall be reduced to writing, reflect the Board's determination of
contested facts and their application to the applicable standards, and be
approved by the Board and signed by the chairperson or other duly authorized
member of the Board.
   e.   Special use permit standards.
      (1)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or
general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the site.
      (2)   The proposed use is in compliance with all standards in this
ordinance.
      (3)   The proposed use is compatible with the character of the
surrounding area and the uses permitted in the zoning district(s) of the
surrounding area.
      (4)   The proposed use is configured in a manner which minimizes any
possible adverse effects on the surrounding area.
      (5)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the value of adjacent
or nearby property.
      (6)   The proposed use will be in full compliance with all other relevant
local, state and federal laws and regulations.
   f.   Conditions. In approving a special use permit, the Board of Adjustment
may impose additional conditions on the permit approval in accordance with G.S.
§ 160D-705(c). All additional conditions imposed must be accepted by the
applicant.
   g.   Effect of approval. Issuance of a special use permit shall authorize
only the particular land use that is approved in the permit. All subsequent
development and use of the property must be in accordance with the approved
special use permit and in conformance with the approved conceptual site plan.
Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the establishment of a different use
of land provided such use is established in accordance with the requirements in
this ordinance. All conditions must be consented to in writing by a landowner
or permit applicant.
   h.   Recordation. The Town of Newport shall, at the applicant's expense,
record the special use permit in the Office of the Register of Deeds of
Carteret County within 30 days of its issuance.
   i.   Subsequent development. Development authorized by the special use
permit shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other
permits required by this ordinance. A special use permit does not ensure that
the use shall receive subsequent approval for other applications for permit
approval unless the relevant and applicable portions of this ordinance are met.
   j.   Expiration. The Board of Adjustment may prescribe a time limit within
which development activity shall begin and/or be completed under the special
use permit. Failure to begin or complete such development activity within the
time limit specified shall void the special use permit. Unless specified by the
Board of Adjustment, a special use permit shall automatically expire two years
from the date of its issuance if development authorized by the permit has not
commenced.
   k.   Substantial changes. To be permitted, any substantial change to a
conceptual site plan or approved conditions, as noted below, shall be approved
by the Board of Adjustment as a new special use permit. The following changes
to a conceptual site plan or approved conditions shall require approval by the
Board of Adjustment:
      (1)   Land being added or removed from the special use permit;
      (2)   Modification of special performance criteria, design standards, or
other requirements specified by the enacting ordinance;
      (3)   A change in land use or development type beyond that permitted by
the approved conceptual site plan;
      (4)   When there is introduction of a new vehicular access point to an
existing street not previously designated for access; and
      (5)   When the gross floor area of nonresidential use is increased more
than five percent beyond the gross floor area on the approved conceptual site
plan.
   l.   Minor deviations. Minor deviations to a conceptual site plan or
approved conditions, which have no substantial impact on the basic development
concept of the special use permit may be approved administratively at the
discretion of the Ordinance Administrator. However, if in the judgment of the
Ordinance Administrator, the requested changes alter the basic development
concept of the special use permit, the Ordinance Administrator may require
approval by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.5 VARIANCE.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to allow certain deviations from
the standards of this ordinance when unnecessary hardships would result from
carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance.
   b.   Authority. The Board of Adjustment is authorized to review and make
decisions regarding applications for variances in accordance with this section.
   c.   Initiation. An application for a variance may only be initiated by the
current owner(s) or contract purchaser(s), of the property for which the
variance is designated in accordance with §
3-3.1, Authority to File Application.
   d.   Procedures.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. Prior to the submission of
the application to the Board of Adjustment, the Ordinance Administrator shall
review the application and make a written report, which shall be presented to
the Board of Adjustment during its public hearing on the application.
      (3)   Action by the Board of Adjustment. Following public notification
and the scheduling of a public hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall conduct a
quasi-judicial public hearing on the application. At the hearing, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider the application, the relevant supporting materials,
and the sworn testimony given at the hearing. Within 30 days following the
close of the hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall, by a concurring four-
fifths vote of all members present and qualified to vote, approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application based on the standards in this section
(G.S. § 160D-406(i)). All decisions by the Board of Adjustment shall be reduced
to writing, reflect the Board's determination of contested facts and their
application to the applicable standards, and be approved by the Board and
signed by the chairperson or other duly authorized member of the Board.
   e.   Variance standards (G.S. § 160D-705(d)). The Board of Adjustment shall
vary any of the provisions of this ordinance upon a showing of all of the
following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the regulation. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence
of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property;
      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance. A variance may be granted when necessary and appropriate
to make a reasonable accommodation under the Federal Fair Housing Act for a
person with a disability;
      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship; and
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the regulation, such that public safety is secured and substantial
justice is achieved.
   f.   Conditions. No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance.
Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided that the
conditions are reasonably related to the variance in accordance with G.S. §
160D-705.
   g.   Recordation. The Town of Newport shall, at the applicant's expense,
record the written decision on the variance in the office of the Register of
Deeds of Carteret County within 30 days of its issuance.
   h.   Subsequent development. Development authorized by the variance shall
not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits required
by this ordinance. A variance does not ensure that the use shall receive
subsequent approval for other applications for permit approval unless the
relevant and applicable portions of this ordinance are met.
   i.   Variance runs with the land. A variance is not a personal right, but
runs with the land for which the variance has been granted. As such, the
provisions of an approved variance shall continue with the transfer of
ownership of land.
   j.   Minor deviation. A minor deviation to a conceptual site plan or
approved conditions shall not be considered as an amendment, and shall be
approved by the Ordinance Administrator. A minor deviation shall be limited to
technical considerations which could not be reasonably anticipated during the
approval process, or any other change which has no material effect on the
character of the approved development or any if its approved conditions. Minor
deviations include, but are not limited to, small shifts in the location of
structures, parking areas, landscaping, utilities, driveways and other site
features in order to accommodate the existence of circumstances found during
construction that could not have been anticipated as the conceptual site plan
was developed. Changes that materially affect the basic configuration or intent
of the conceptual site plan or approved conditions are not considered to be
minor deviations, and shall be amendments that may only be considered in
accordance with the procedure for a special use permit application.
   k.   Appeals. Any appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall
be to the Superior Court for Carteret County by petition for a writ of
certiorari. Any petition to the Superior Court shall be filed with the Clerk of
Court within 30 days after the date the decision of the Board of Adjustment is
filed with the Town Clerk, or after the date a written copy of the decision is
delivered (via personal delivery or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested) to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for
such copy with the Board of Adjustment at the public hearing, whichever is
later.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.6 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   a.   Right of appeal. Any aggrieved party affected by a decision or
interpretation of the Ordinance Administrator or other administrative official
may appeal such decision or interpretation to the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   b.   Procedure.
      (1)   Initiation. The owner or other party has 30 days from receipt of
the written notice of the determination within which to file an appeal. Any
other person with standing to appeal has 30 days from receipt from any source
of actual or constructive notice of the determination within which to file an
appeal. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, notice given pursuant to
G.S. § 160D-403(b) by first-class mail is deemed received on the third business
day following deposit of the notice for mailing with the United States Postal
Service.
      (2)   Contents of appeal. The written notice of appeal shall specify the
grounds for the appeal, a statement of the improper decision or interpretation,
the date of that decision or interpretation, and all supporting materials
related to the decision.
      (3)   Record. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the Town
Clerk shall transmit all the papers, documents, and other materials relating to
the decision or interpretation appealed to the Board of Adjustment. These
materials shall constitute the record of the appeal.
      (4)   Schedule of notice and hearing.
         i.   Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Town Clerk shall schedule
a public hearing, and provide public notification in accordance with the
standards in §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
         ii.   The Board of Adjustment shall hear the appeal at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, based upon established scheduling policy, or as
soon as is reasonably possible.
      (5)   Hearing and decision by Board of Adjustment. At the hearing, the
person making the appeal may appear in person, by agent, or attorney, and shall
state the grounds for the appeal and identify any materials or evidence from
the record to support the appeal. The official who made the decision or the
person currently occupying that position, if the decision maker is no longer
employed by the town, shall be present at the evidentiary hearing as a witness.
The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in a notice
of appeal. If any party or the town would be unduly prejudiced by the
presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board shall
continue the hearing. The Ordinance Administrator shall be given an opportunity
to respond, as well as any other Town of Newport staff or other person the
Board of Adjustment deems necessary. In making its determination, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider the application, the relevant support materials, and
the testimony given at the public hearing. Within 30 days following the close
of the hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall, by a simple majority vote of all
members present and qualified to vote, approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the application based on the standards in this section. All decisions by
the Board of Adjustment shall be reduced to writing, reflect the Board's
determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable
standards, and be approved by the Board and signed by the chairperson or other
duly authorized member of the Board (see § G.S. § 160D-406(e)).
   c.   Effect of appeal. An appeal of a notice of violation or other
enforcement order stays enforcement of the action appealed from and accrual of
any fines assessed unless the official who made the decision certifies to the
Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that, because of the
facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property or, because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would
seriously interfere with enforcement of the development regulation. In that
case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining
order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not
stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited
hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the
appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a development approval or otherwise
affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent with the development
regulation shall not stay the further review of an application for development
approvals to use such property; in these situations, the appellant or Town of
Newport may request and the Board of Adjustment may grant a stay of a final
decision of development approval applications, including building permits
affected by the issue being appealed.
   d.   Appeal of decision. Any appeal from the decision of the Board of
Adjustment shall be to the Superior Court for Carteret County by petition for a
writ of certiorari. Any such petition to the Superior Court shall be filed with
the Clerk of Court no later than 30 days after the date the decision of the
Board of Adjustment is filed with the Town Clerk, or after the date a written
copy of the decision is delivered (via personal delivery or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested) to every aggrieved party who has
filed a written request for such copy with the Board of Adjustment at the
public hearing, whichever is later.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.7 SITE-SPECIFIC VESTING PLANS.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of
G.S. § 160D-108(c)(3) for the establishment of a statutory vested right upon
the approval of a site-specific vesting plan.
   b.   Phased development. A multi-phased development, long term projects of
at least 25 acres, is vested for the entire development with the land
development regulations then in place at the time a site plan approval is
granted for the initial phase of the multi-phased development. A right which
has been vested as provided for in this subsection remains vested for a period
of seven years from the time a site plan approval is granted for the initial
phase of the multi-phased development.
   c.   Applicability. Vested rights shall only be available to the property
owner(s) with a legally established and approved site-specific vesting plan.
For the purposes of this ordinance, a site-specific vesting plan shall include
the following:
      (1)   Development subject to an approved special use permit;
      (2)   Development subject to a preliminary subdivision plat;
      (3)   Development subject to a site development plan; or
      (4)   Land subject to a Conditional Zoning District classification.
   d.   Procedures. If a site-specific vesting plan is based on an approval
required by this ordinance, the Town of Newport shall provide whatever notice
and hearing is required for that underlying approval. If the site-specific
vesting plan is not based on such an approval, a legislative hearing with
notice as required by §
3-3.10, Public Notification shall be held. Following the close of the hearing,
the deciding board shall, by a simple majority vote of all members present and
qualified to vote, approve a vested right for a site-specific vesting plan for
a period exceeding two years, but not exceeding five years, approve a vested
right for a site-specific vesting plan for a period exceeding two years, but
not exceeding five years with conditions, or deny a vested right.
   e.   Exceptions. A vested right, once established, under this ordinance,
precludes any zoning action by the Town of Newport that would change, alter,
impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the
property as set forth in an approved vested right, except when any of the
following conditions are present:
      (1)   The written consent of the affected landowner;
      (2)   Findings made, after notice and an evidentiary hearing, that
natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if
uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and
welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the approved vested
right;
      (3)   The extent to which the affected landowner receives compensation
for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including,
but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all
architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consulting fees incurred
after approval by the decision-making body, together with interest as is
provided in G.S. § 160D-106. Compensation shall not include any diminution in
the value of the property that is caused by such action;
      (4)   Findings made, after notice and an evidentiary hearing, that the
landowner or the landowner's representative intentionally supplied inaccurate
information or made material misrepresentations that made a difference in the
approval by decision-making body of the vested right; or
      (5)   The enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or
regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the approved vested
right, in which case the local government may modify the affected provisions,
upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect
on the plan, after notice and an evidentiary hearing.
   f.   Conditions. The decision-making body may approve a site-specific
vesting plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Such conditional approval shall
result in a vested right, although failure to abide by its terms and conditions
will result in a forfeiture of vested rights. The decision-making body shall
not attach a condition that requires a landowner to waive a vested right.
   g.   Approval. A site-specific vesting plan shall be deemed approved upon
the effective date of the decision-making body's decision approving the plan or
such other date as determined by such body upon approval.
   h.   Vested rights runs with the land. A vested right, obtained under this
ordinance, is not a personal right, but runs with the land for which the vested
right has been granted. As such, the provisions of an approved vested right
shall continue with the transfer of ownership of land.
   i.   Minor deviation. A minor deviation to a conceptual site plan or
approved conditions shall not be considered as an amendment, and shall be
approved by the Ordinance Administrator. A minor deviation shall be limited to
technical considerations which could not be reasonably anticipated during the
approval process, or any other change which has no material effect on the
character of the approved development or any if its approved conditions. Minor
deviations include, but are not limited to, small shifts in the location of
structures, parking areas, landscaping, utilities, driveways and other site
features in order to accommodate the existence of circumstances found during
construction that could not have been anticipated as the conceptual site plan
was developed. Changes that materially affect the basic configuration or intent
of the conceptual site plan or approved conditions are not considered to be
minor deviations, and shall be amendments that may only be considered in
accordance with the procedure for a special use permit application
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.8 CONCEPTUAL SITE PLAN.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for
the review of a conceptual site plan by the Ordinance Administrator prior to
the submittal of an application for site development plan approval or as part
of an application for a conditional zoning district classification or special
use permit. The intent of the conceptual site plan procedure is to allow the
Town of Newport to consider the general design and configuration of a
development proposal, and any applicant sponsored conditions, for general
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance prior to the consideration
of a conditional zoning district classification or a special use permit by the
decision-making bodies, or the preparation of highly technical and detailed
engineered drawings required for a site development plan approval.
   b.   Applicability. Submittal of a conceptual site plan shall be required
prior to the consideration of approval of a conditional zoning district
classification or special use permit, and may be submitted prior to a site
development plan.
   c.   Conceptual site plan types distinguished.
      (1)   Conceptual site plans associated with an application for site
development plan approval shall be reviewed by the Ordinance Administrator, who
shall provide written comments on the conceptual site plan to the applicant.
Once an applicant receives comments on a submitted conceptual site plan, they
may then proceed with the preparation of the site development plan.
      (2)   Conceptual site plans associated with an application for a
Conditional Zoning District classification or special use permit shall be
considered as an applicant sponsored condition of approval and are further
distinguished by the following:
         i.   In the case of a Conditional Zoning District classification, the
Ordinance Administrator shall provide his recommendation on the conceptual site
plan to the Planning Board, which shall consider the conceptual site plan in
making its own recommendation to the Town Council. Following a recommendation
from the Planning Board, the Town Council may approve, approve with conditions,
or deny approval of a conceptual site plan associated with the application for
Conditional Zoning District classification.
         ii.   In the case of a special use permit, the Ordinance Administrator
shall review the conceptual site plan for conformance to the ordinance and
forward any comments to the Board of Adjustment, which shall consider the
conceptual site plan as it makes its decision on approving, conditionally
approving or denying approval of the special use permit.
   d.   Procedures.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Conceptual site plan - site development plan. The Ordinance
Administrator shall review the conceptual site plan for compliance with the
applicable standards set forth in the ordinance and §
3-4.8(E), Conceptual Site Plan Standards. Following the review, the Ordinance
Administrator shall submit his comments in writing to the applicant, who may
then begin the preparation of the site development plan.
      (3)   Conceptual site plan - Conditional Zoning District classification.
         i.   Review and recommendation by the Ordinance Administrator. The
Ordinance Administrator shall review the conceptual site plan for compliance
with the applicable standards set forth in the ordinance and §
3-4.8(E), Conceptual Site Plan Standards. Following the review, the Ordinance
Administrator shall submit his comments in writing to the applicant, who may
then begin the preparation of the site development plan.
         ii.   Review and recommendation by the Planning Board. Following
receipt of the staff report from the Ordinance Administrator, the Planning
Board shall review and make a recommendation on the conceptual site plan as
part of the Conditional Zoning District classification process following the
procedures in §
3-4.2(C)(3).
         iii.   Review and action by the Town Council. Following the receipt of
a recommendation from the Planning Board, the Town Council shall review and
make its decision on the conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning
District classification process following the procedures in §
3-4.2(C)(4).
      (4)   Conceptual site plan - special use permit.
         i.   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. The Ordinance
Administrator shall review the conceptual site plan for compliance with the
applicable standards set forth in the ordinance and §
3-4.8(E), Conceptual Site Plan Standards, and submit his comments to the Board
of Adjustment for consideration as it makes its decision on the special use
permit application.
         ii.   Review and Action by the Board of Adjustment. Following the
receipt of comments from the Ordinance Administrator, the Board of Adjustment
shall review the conceptual site plan as part of the special use permit
application process following the procedures in §
3-4.4(D)(3).
   e.   Conceptual site plan standards. A conceptual site plan shall be
reviewed for compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   Setbacks and lot coverage;
      (2)   Location and orientation of structure(s);
      (3)   Street layout;
      (4)   Right-of-way width and configuration;
      (5)   Public utility location and sizing;
      (6)   Landscaping;
      (7)   Buffering;
      (8)   Parking and loading;
      (9)   Open space configuration;
      (10)   Fencing, walls, and screening;
      (11)   Stormwater management;
      (12)   Exterior lighting;
      (13)   Signage; and
      (14)   Solid waste collection facilities.
      Conceptual site plans associated with an application for a Conditional
Zoning District classification to a Planned Unit Development District shall
also include sufficient information to establish the development standards for
the PUD.
   f.   Amendment. A conceptual site plan may only be amended or modified in
accordance with the procedures set forth for its initial approval
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.9 SITE PLAN.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and
standards for the review and approval of a site plan that depicts site and
building related details and engineered drawings.
   b.   Applicability. All development, unless exempted in accordance with §
3-4.9(C), Exemptions, shall be required to have a site plan approved in
accordance with this section prior to the issuance of a land development
permit.
   c.   Exemptions. The following development shall be exempted from the
requirements of this section:
      (1)   Internal or external construction that does not increase gross
floor area, building height, the density, or intensity of use, or affect
parking requirements;
      (2)   The construction of a single family dwelling or duplex on an
individual lot;
      (3)   The construction or placement of an accessory structure associated
with a single family dwelling or duplex; and
      (4)   Changes in use where there is no associated change in landscaping,
buffering, off- street parking requirements, lot coverage or other external
site characteristics.
   d.   Procedures.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review and decision by the Ordinance Administrator. Following the
submission of a site plan by an applicant, the Ordinance Administrator shall
review and approve, approve with modifications, or deny approval of the site
plan based on the standards in §
3-4.9(E), Site Development Plan Standards.
   e.   Site plan development standards. A site development plan shall be
approved only upon a finding that it adequately depicts the precise design,
location, and profile of all structures, site features, and public facilities
proposed for development, as well as all other technical considerations. In
addition, the site development plan shall demonstrate that all of the following
standards are met:
      (1)   The use is allowed in the zoning district in accordance with
Article VII, District Regulations;
      (2)   The development and uses in the site development plan comply with
Article VII, District Regulations;
      (3)   The development is consistent with the associated conceptual site
plan and applicant sponsored conditions (if applicable);
      (4)   The development proposed in the site development plan and its
general layout and design comply with all appropriate standards in this
ordinance; and
      (5)   The development complies with all other applicable regulations and
requirements.
   f.   Effect of approval. The approval of a site development plan allows the
applicant to apply for a land development permit to initiate land development
activities in accordance with the approved site development plan.
   g.   Expiration. Site development plan approval shall automatically expire
at the end of two years following initial approval if a building permit has not
been issued and construction pursuant to that permit has not commenced for at
least one building in the proposed development. A change in ownership shall not
affect this time frame.
   h.   Amendments. A site development plan may be amended, extended, or
modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval. Changes to any approved site development plan following
the issuance of a land development permit shall require a re-review of a site
development plan, may void the land development permit, and may require
additional review fees at the discretion of the Ordinance Administrator. If the
amended site development plan was approved as a conceptual site plan, any
significant departure must be amended in accordance with the procedures set
forth for its initial approval.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.10 LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   a.   Purpose. A land development permit shall be required in accordance with
the provisions of this section in order to ensure that proposed development
complies with the standards of this ordinance, and to otherwise protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Newport.
   b.   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to
all development within the Town of Newport's jurisdiction. No building, sign,
or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended, enlarged, or structurally
altered, any building permit be issued, or any other development activity
commence until the Ordinance Administrator has issued a land development permit
in accordance with this section.
   c.   Procedure.
      (1)   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
      (2)   Review and decision by the Ordinance Administrator. The Ordinance
Administrator shall review and approve or deny an application for a land
development permit in accordance with the standards in §
3-4.10(D), Land Development Permit Standards. If the application is denied, the
reasons for denial shall be provided to the applicant in writing.
   d.   Land development permit standards. A land development permit shall be
approved upon a finding by the Ordinance Administrator that the application
fully complies with all relevant standards of this ordinance, as well as all
other applicable requirements and applicable conditions of approval if any were
imposed as part of a preceding approval for the proposed development (see G.S.
§ 160D-403(a)).
   e.   Approval. A land development permit approval shall be in writing and
may contain a provision requiring the development to comply with all applicable
state and local laws. Such permit may issue development approvals in print or
electronic form. Any development approval issued exclusively in electronic form
shall be protected from further editing once issued. Applications for land
development permit approvals may be made by the landowner, a lessee, or person
holding an option or contract to purchase or lease land, or an authorized agent
of the landowner. An easement holder may also apply for development approval
for such development as is authorized by the easement.
   f.   Appeals. The appeal of a decision by the Ordinance Administrator on the
issuance of a land development permit shall be heard by the Board of Adjustment
in accordance with §
3-4.6, Appeals of Administrative Decisions.
   g.   Expiration.
      (1)   For development activity that requires a building permit, the land
development permit issued for that activity shall expire one year after the
date of its issuance if a building permit has not yet been issued.
      (2)   For development activity that does not require a building permit,
the land development permit shall expire unless the activity authorized by the
land development permit has commenced within one year of the date of its
issuance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.11 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE .
   a.   Purpose. Certificates of compliance are required to ensure that
previously authorized development has taken place in conformance with approved
plans, permits, conditions, and the general provisions of this ordinance.
   b.   Applicability. All land development activity which was authorized by
the issuance of a land development permit for nonresidential use must receive a
certificate of compliance prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy from
the Town of Newport's Building Inspector.
   c.   Procedure. Upon the completion of development activity, the developer
shall make an application for a certificate of compliance. Following the
receipt of the application, the Ordinance Administrator shall inspect the
development for conformance with the approved plans and permits and for
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. If the development is found
to be in compliance, the Ordinance Administrator shall issue a certificate of
compliance. If the development is found not to be in compliance, the Ordinance
Administrator shall submit the deficiencies to the applicant in writing and
deny the issuance of a certificate of compliance. The applicant may then
correct any deficiencies and reapply for a certificate of compliance.
   d.   Phased development. Where development of a site is conducted in phases,
certificates of compliance may be issued for those specific portions of the
development which have been completed to that point, provided that all required
infrastructure and all site features, such as parking and landscaping, related
to that portion of the development have been installed.
   e.   Temporary certificates authorized. The Ordinance Administrator is
authorized to grant a temporary certificate of compliance when it has been
determined that substantial compliance with all approved plans, permits, and
conditions exists, but uncontrollable circumstances will prevent the immediate
completion of the development, such as weather impacting the installation of
landscaping materials. A temporary certificate of compliance may be granted for
a period not to exceed 90 days. One extension, not to exceed 30 days may be
granted upon demonstration by the developer that conditions outside of their
control have precluded the completion of the development. In no case shall a
temporary certificate of compliance be in effect for a periods of more than 120
days.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 3-4.12 SUBDIVISIONS.
   a.   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section and Article XVI,
Subdivisions, are to promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents
within the Town of Newport's jurisdiction by:
      (1)   Providing for the orderly growth and development of the town's
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Coordinating streets and roads within proposed subdivisions with
the state and town road networks and all applicable transportation plans;
      (3)   Providing easements and rights-of-way for utilities and future
streets;
      (4)   Avoiding congestion and overcrowding, and encouraging the proper
arrangement of streets and other transportation infrastructure in relation to
existing or planned streets;
      (5)   Ensuring that there is adequate open space and recreation
facilities to serve new development; and
      (6)   Ensuring that there is proper recordation of landownership and/or
property owner association records where applicable.
   b.   Applicability. Unless exempted in accordance with §
3-4.12(c), Exemptions, the following forms of development shall be required to
have land subdivided in accordance with the procedures and standards of this
section prior to the transfer of title or sale of any lots, the issuance of a
land development permit or the issuance of a building permit for development:
      (1)   The division of land into two or more lots, building sites, or
other divisions for the purpose of immediate or future sale, lease or
development;
      (2)   All divisions of land involving the creation of a new street or the
change or modification of an existing street;
      (3)   Re-subdivision involving the further division or relocation of lot
lines of any lot or lots within an already approved subdivision; and
      (4)   The combination or consolidation of existing lots of record.
   c.   Exemptions (G.S. § 160D-802). The following actions shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased,
and where the lots are equal to or exceed the standards set forth in this
ordinance;
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres in size
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;
      (3)   The public acquisition of land for public use by purchase of strips
of land for the widening or opening of streets, placement of utilities or
establishment of park land or greenway trails;
      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-
way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of this ordinance; and
      (5)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms
of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under G.S.
Chapter 29.
      Plats for subdivisions which are exempt from the requirements of this
section shall be submitted to the Ordinance Administrator who shall sign a
Certificate of Exemption (see
Appendix A-3) on the plat. This certificate must be signed prior to recordation
of the exempt subdivision plat with the Carteret County Register of Deeds.
   d.   Sketch plat review.
      (1)   General. The sketch plat review process allows applicants for
subdivision approval to submit their initial development proposal to the
Ordinance Administrator for review and comment prior to making a formal
application for subdivision approval. This process is intended to reduce the
cost of land subdivision by allowing the Ordinance Administrator to provide the
applicant with comments on the proposed subdivision prior to the applicant
undertaking the expense of preparing a formal subdivision application.
      (2)   Applicability. Sketch plat review shall be required prior to the
submission of a preliminary plat (major subdivision) and is permitted prior to
the submission of a minor subdivision plat.
      (3)   Sketch plat content standards. A sketch plat shall contain all
information as shown in
Appendix A-2, Subdivision Plat Content Standards.
      (4)   Review procedures.
         i.   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
         ii.   Review and comment by the Ordinance Administrator. Following the
receipt of a complete application for sketch plat review, the Ordinance
Administrator, along with other Town of Newport Departments, shall review the
submitted plat for general conformance to the requirements of all applicable
ordinances. Following this review, the applicant shall receive comments in
writing, and then may begin preparation of a preliminary plat (major
subdivision) or minor subdivision plat.
   e.   Minor subdivision.
      (1)   Applicability. The minor subdivision procedure shall be utilized
for the subdivision of land into three or fewer lots, provided the proposed
subdivision complies with all of the following:
         i.   The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is five
acres or less;
         ii.   No new streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way are
created;
         iii.   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided
in the ten years prior to division;
         iv.   No changes are made to the existing streets, alleys, or other
rights-of-way;
         v.   No new utilities are required to be installed to serve the
subdivided land; and
         vi.   No flag lots are created.
      (2)   Required content of minor subdivision plats. A minor subdivision
plat shall contain all information as shown in
Appendix A-2, Subdivision Plat Content Standards.
      (3)   Review and action by the Ordinance Administrator. Once the minor
subdivision plat has been submitted, the Ordinance Administrator shall review
the application and make a decision to approve, approve with modification, or
deny the application in accordance with §
3-4.12(e)(4), Standards for Approval.
      (4)   Standards for approval. A minor subdivision shall be approved upon
a finding that the application complies with the standards in Article XVI
Subdivisions, as well as all other relevant provisions of this ordinance, and
all other relevant ordinances and regulations.
      (5)   Certification. No minor subdivision plat may be recorded unless all
relevant certificates, as identified in
Appendix A-3, have been signed by the appropriate authorities.
      (6)   Recordation. The applicant shall file the approved minor
subdivision plat with the Carteret County Register of Deeds within 90 days
after the date of approval or such approval be null and void.
   f.   Preliminary plat (major subdivision).
      (1)   General. A preliminary plat (major subdivision) establishes the
general layout and design for the subdivision. Upon the approval of a
preliminary plat, applicants may begin to install streets, public utilities,
and other infrastructure. Following installation and approval of all required
infrastructure, applicants may submit an application for a final plat. Building
permits may be issued before approval and recordation of a final plat, but no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued.
      (2)   Applicability. The subdivision preliminary plat (major subdivision)
procedures shall be utilized for the subdivision of land where any of the
following apply:
         i.   New public streets are proposed;
         ii.   Changes to existing public rights-of-way are proposed;
         iii.   New public utilities are required to serve the proposed lots;
         iv.   Flag lots are created or modified;
         v.   Part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided in the
ten years prior to division; or
         vi.   More than three lots are proposed.
      (3)   Required content of preliminary plats. A preliminary plat shall
contain all information as shown in
Appendix A-2, Subdivision Plat Content Standards.
      (4)   Review and approval procedures.
         i.   Review and recommendation by the Ordinance Administrator.
Following the review of the sketch plat, the applicant shall prepare a
preliminary plat that reflects the configuration depicted in the finalized
sketch plat along with any other required information. Once the complete
application and preliminary plat are submitted, the Ordinance Administrator
shall review the application and submit his recommendation and comments to the
Planning Board prior to the meeting at which they will review the application.
         ii.   Review and recommendation by the Planning Board. Following the
receipt of comments and a recommendation from the Ordinance Administrator, the
Planning Board shall review the proposed preliminary plat for compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance. Within 45 days following its initial review,
the Planning Board shall make a recommendation to the Board of Commissioners to
approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of the preliminary plat based
on the standards in §
3-4.12(f)(5).
         iii.   Review and action by the Town Council. Following the receipt of
comments and a recommendation from the Ordinance Administrator and the Planning
Board, the Town Council shall review the proposed preliminary plat for
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Within 45 days following its
initial review, the Council shall make its decision to approve, conditionally
approve or deny approval of the preliminary plat based on the standards in §
3-4.12(f)(5).
      (5)   Standards of approval. A preliminary plat shall only be approved
upon finding that the application complies with the standards in Article XVI,
Subdivisions, all other relevant provisions of this ordinance, and all other
relevant ordinances, plans and regulations.
      (6)   Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall constitute
approval of the development with the general lot shapes and alignments of
streets identified in the phases depicted on the approved preliminary plat.
Phases not depicted on an approved preliminary plat shall not have preliminary
plat approval. Approval of a preliminary plat allows the applicant to proceed
with the installation of the required infrastructure and utilities. Approval of
a preliminary plat does not constitute or guarantee approval of a final plat.
The approval of a subdivision preliminary plat is not a personal right, but one
which runs with the land, and, therefore, changes in ownership of the subject
property shall not alter the effect of the approval.
      (7)   Amendment. A preliminary plat may be amended or modified only in
accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original
approval.
      (8)   Installation and inspection of required improvements. Following the
construction of all required improvements, or the posting of a performance
guarantee for required improvements that are not installed or completed, the
applicant shall submit a written request for inspection of those improvements
to the Ordinance Administrator. When all required public improvements and/or
performance guarantees have been approved by the Town of Newport, the applicant
may apply for final plat approval.
      (9)   Performance guarantees. In lieu of meeting the requirements for the
completion, installation, and dedication of any and all public infrastructure
improvements (e.g., underground utilities, streets, sidewalks, storm drainage,
trees, landscaping, buffer plantings, street lights, etc.). Prior to final plat
approval, the Town of Newport may accept a performance guarantee in accordance
with the standards in this section.
         i.   Form of performance guarantees. Where required, the applicant
shall furnish a performance guarantee in any form acceptable to the Town
Attorney. Such forms may include any of the following:
            (a.)   Cash or equivalent security. The applicant shall deposit
cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument readily convertible
into cash at face value, either with the Town of Newport or in escrow with a
financial institution designated as an official depository of the town. The
amount of deposit shall be equal to 125% of the entire cost, as certified in an
estimate by a licensed design professional and verified by the town, of
installing all required improvements.
            (b.)   Surety performance bonds. The developer shall obtain a
performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in
North Carolina, and approved by the Town Attorney. The bond shall be payable to
the Town of Newport and shall be in an amount equal to 125% of the entire cost
of installing all required improvements, as certified in an estimate by a
licensed design professional and verified by the town. The duration of the bond
(s) shall be until such time as the improvements are approved by the town. Any
expenses associated with the cost verification by the town shall be paid
entirely by the applicant.
            (c.)   Escrow guarantee. If cash or other instrument is deposited
in escrow with a financial institution, then the applicant shall file with the
Town of Newport an agreement with the financial institution guaranteeing the
following:
               1.   Exclusivity of funds. That the escrow amount will be held
in trust until released by the town and may not be used or pledged by the
applicant in any other transaction during the term of the escrow; and
               2.   Immediate release of funds. That in case of a failure on
the part of the applicant to complete the guaranteed improvements, the
financial institution shall, upon notification by the town of an estimate of
the amount needed to complete the improvements, immediately pay to the town the
funds estimated to complete the improvements, up to the full balance of the
escrow account, or deliver to the town any other instruments fully endorsed or
otherwise made payable in full to the town.
         ii.   Default. Upon failure on the part of the applicant to complete
the required improvements in the time required by this ordinance or as spelled
out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, the surety, or financial
institution holding the escrow account, shall, if required by the Town of
Newport, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the town up to
the amount required to complete the improvements based on an estimate by the
town. Upon payment, the town, in its discretion, may expend such portion of
these funds, as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the
required improvements. The town must return any funds not spent in completing
the improvements to the applicant.
         iii.   Release of security guarantee. The Town of Newport may release
a portion of any security posted after the improvements are completed to the
satisfaction of the town. When the town approves the improvements, it shall
immediately release the portion of the security posted which covers the cost of
the improvements approved by the town, as shown in the detailed cost estimate.
      (10)   Expiration of approval. Preliminary plat approval shall be valid
for a period of two years from the date of approval of the preliminary plat
unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Town Council, or
unless a longer time period is established under applicable vested rights
provisions. Preliminary plats which have expired shall be resubmitted in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   g.   Final plat (major subdivision).
      (1)   General. After the inspection and approval of the required public
improvements or the posting of a performance guarantee for improvements that
are not installed or completed, the applicant shall prepare a final plat for
review in accordance with this section. Where a subdivision is developed in
phases, only that phase which has been completed may be included in the final
plat. The applicant shall receive approval of a final plat prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy for structures on newly created lots.
      (2)   Required contents of the final plat. A final plat shall contain all
information as shown in
Appendix A-2, Subdivision Plat Content Standards.
      (3)   Review and approval procedures.
         i.   Preliminary procedures. See §
3-3, Common Review Procedures.
         ii.   Review by the Ordinance Administrator. Following the submission
of a complete application for final plat approval, the Ordinance Administrator
shall review the application and submit a recommendation to the Town Council
prior to the meeting at which they will review the application.
         iii.   Review and action by the Town Council. Following the receipt of
a recommendation from the Ordinance Administrator, the Town Council shall
review the proposed final plat. The Town Council shall review the application
for consistency with the standards of this ordinance and with the approved
preliminary plat. Within 45 days following its initial review, the Town Council
shall make its decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of
the final plat. In those cases where the applicant has submitted a performance
security in lieu of installing all required improvements, the Town Council may
only grant approval of the final plat if it has received a positive
recommendation from the Town Attorney with regard to the sufficiency of the
posted security.
      (4)   Standards of approval.
         i.   The final plat complies fully with the standards in Article XVI,
Subdivisions;
         ii.   The final plat is in substantial conformity with the approved
preliminary plat;
         iii.   The final plat indicates the installation, or financial
guarantee of the installation, of all required improvements; and
         iv.   The final plat contains all required certificates, signed by the
appropriate authorities.
      (5)   Certification. No minor subdivision plat may be recorded unless all
relevant certificates, as identified in
Appendix A-3, have been signed by the appropriate authorities.
      (6)   Recordation. The applicant shall file the approved minor
subdivision plat with the Carteret County Register of Deeds within 90 days
after the date of approval or such approval be null and void.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
ARTICLE IV: ENFORCEMENT
§ 4-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This article establishes the procedures through which the Town of Newport
seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and obtain
corrections for ordinance violations. It also sets forth the remedies and
penalties that apply to violations of this ordinance. It is the intent of this
article to encourage the voluntary correction of violations, where possible.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-2 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Compliance with all of the procedures, standards, and other provisions of
this ordinance is required by all persons owning, developing, managing, using,
or occupying land or structures within the Town of Newport's jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-3 VIOLATIONS.
§ 4-3.1 VIOLATIONS GENERALLY.
   a.   Failure to comply with any ordinance provision, term, or condition of
approval shall constitute an ordinance violation. Any failure to comply with a
standard, requirement, prohibition, or limitation imposed by this ordinance;
the terms or conditions of any permit or other development approval; or
authorization granted in accordance with this ordinance constitutes a violation
of this ordinance punishable as provided in this article.
   b.   Permits and development approvals only authorize specific development.
Permits or development approvals issued by a decision-making body authorize
only the use, arrangement, location, design, density, or intensity, and
development set forth in such permits or development approvals.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-3.2 SPECIFIC VIOLATION.
   It shall be a violation of this ordinance to undertake any land development
activity contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, including, but not
limited to, any of the following:
   a.   Developing land or a structure without first obtaining the appropriate
permit or permit approval;
   b.   Occupying or using land or a structure without first obtaining the
appropriate permit or permit approval;
   c.   Developing land or a structure without complying with the terms or
conditions of the permit or permit approval required to engage in development;
   d.   Occupying or using land or a structure in violation of the terms or
conditions of the permit or permit approval;
   e.   Subdividing land without first obtaining the appropriate permit or
permit approval required to engage in the subdivision;
   f.   Subdividing land without complying with the terms or conditions of the
permit or permit approval required to engage in the development;
   g.   Excavate, cut, clear, or undertake any land disturbing activity without
first obtaining all appropriate permits and permit approvals, and complying
with their terms and conditions;
   h.   Install, create, erect, alter, or maintain any sign without first
obtaining the appropriate permit or permit approval;
   i.   Fail to remove any sign installed, created, erected, altered, or
maintained in violation of this ordinance, or for which the permit has expired.
   j.   Create, expand, replace, or modify any nonconformity except in
compliance with this ordinance;
   k.   Reduce or diminish the requirements for development, design or
dimensional standards below the minimum requirements;
   l.   Increase the intensity or density of development, except in accordance
with the standards of this ordinance; and
   m.   Through any act of omission, fail to comply with any other provisions,
procedures, or standards required by this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-4 RESPONSIBLE PERSONS.
   Any person who violates this ordinance shall be subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth in this article.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-5 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.
§ 4-5.1 RESPONSIBLE PERSONS.
   The Ordinance Administrator shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-5.2 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a complaint. The complaint, stating fully the
cause and basis therefore, shall be filed with the Ordinance Administrator, who
shall properly record such complaint, investigate, and take appropriate action
as provided by this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-5.3 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   a.   Inspections. Administrative staff may inspect work undertaken pursuant
to a development approval to assure that the work is being done in accordance
with applicable state and local laws and of the terms of the approval. In
exercising this power, staff are authorized to enter any premises within the
jurisdiction of the local government at all reasonable hours for the purposes
of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper
credentials; provided, however, that the appropriate consent has been given for
inspection of areas not open to the public or that an appropriate inspection
warrant has been secured (G.S. § 160D-403(e)).
   b.   Notice of violation. When the Ordinance Administrator finds that a
violation of this ordinance has occurred, the Ordinance Administrator shall
take appropriate action to remedy the violation consistent with §
4-6, Remedies and Penalties. The Ordinance Administrator shall notify, in
writing, the holder of the development approval and the landowner of the
property involved, if the landowner is not the holder of the development
approval or the person undertaking the work or activity. Such notification
shall indicate:
      (1)   The nature of the violation;
      (2)   The necessary action to correct or abate the violation; and
      (3)   The deadline for correcting the violation.
      The notice of violation shall state what course of action is intended if
the violation is not corrected within the time frame specified by the Ordinance
Administrator. The notice of violation shall also advise the violator of their
right to appeal the notice of violation to the Board of Adjustment within 30
days of the date the notice of violation was issued. The notice of violation
may be delivered by personal delivery, electronic delivery (email), or first-
class mail, and may be posted on the property. The Ordinance Administrator will
certify service of the notice of violation for the file (G.S. § 160D-404(a)).
   c.   Application of remedies and penalties. If the owner, occupant, or
person responsible for the violation fails to comply with the notice of
violation, from which no appeal has been taken within 30 days, as provided in
the notification, the Ordinance Administrator shall take appropriate action, as
provided in §
4-6, Remedies and Penalties, to correct and abate the violation and to ensure
compliance with this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES (G.S. § 160D-404(c)).
   Any of the following remedies and enforcement powers may be used to
administer and enforce this ordinance following a notice of violation as
described in §
4-5.3, Enforcement Procedures. While the Town of Newport may exercise any of
the following remedies or penalties at any point following issuance of a notice
of violation and the required correction period, the following remedies and
penalties are listed in their general order or sequence of application.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.1 CIVIL PENALTY.
   a.   In addition to the other remedies cited in this ordinance for the
enforcement of its provisions, and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175, the standards
in this ordinance may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by
the Ordinance Administrator.
   b.   Following the delivery of a notice of violation according to the
provisions of §
4-5.3, Enforcement Procedures, if the alleged violator or property owner does
not correct the violation within the time period determined by the Ordinance
Administrator, a citation shall be issued subject to
Table 4-1 below.
 
TABLE 4-1: SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES
Notice/Citation                         Penalty
                                        No penalty if the violation is
Notice of violation                     corrected within the time period
                                        determined by the Administrator as
                                        identified in the written notice.
                                        $50; Violation must be corrected within
First citation (for each uncorrected    10 calendar days of citation delivery
offense)                                or second citation will be issued and
                                        delivered to the violator and property
                                        owner.
                                        $100; Violation must be corrected
                                        within 10 days (as defined as the 24-
Second citation (for each uncorrected   hour period after which the notice has
offense)                                been delivered) of second citation
                                        delivery or third citation will be
                                        issued.
                                        $200 per day (as defined as the 24-hour
Third and subsequent citation (for each period after which the notice has been
uncorrected offense)                    delivered) that the violation continues
                                        to exist.
 
   c.   If the Ordinance Administrator notifies a party of a violation, and
that violation is remedied but subsequently re-established (committed by the
same violator at the same location and being of the same nature as the original
violation) within a period of 12 months, the violator shall incur the fines
prescribed above without the need of a notice of violation.
   d.   It is the responsibility of the party in violation to submit a request
for an inspection for compliance to the Administrator upon correction of the
violation. The violation will assume to be continued, and penalties assessed
according to the schedule above, until an inspection is requested and the
property is found to be in compliance.
   e.   If the violator fails to pay the civil penalty within 30 days after
being cited for a violation, the Town of Newport may recover the penalties in a
civil action in the nature of debt.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.2 STOP WORK ORDER.
   Whenever a building or structure is being constructed, demolished,
renovated, altered, or repaired in violation of any applicable provision of
this ordinance, the Ordinance Administrator may order the revocation of the
land development permit for such work and request a stop work order be issued
by the Town of Newport Building Inspector. The stop work order shall be in
writing, directed to the person doing the work, and shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reasons for cessation and the action(s)
necessary to lawfully resume work.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.3 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Ordinance Administrator may revoke any land development permit by
written notification to the permit holder when violations of this ordinance
have occurred. Permits may be revoked when false statements or
misrepresentations were made in securing the permit, work is being or has been
done in substantial departure from the approved application or plan, there has
been a failure to comply with the requirements of this ordinance or a permit
has been mistakenly issued in violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.4 INJUNCTION.
   When a violation occurs, the Ordinance Administrator may, either before or
after the initiation of other authorized actions, apply to the appropriate
court for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction ordering the offender to
correct the unlawful condition or cease the unlawful use of the land in
question.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.5 ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   In addition to an injunction, the Town of Newport may apply for, and the
court may enter into, an order of abatement as part of the judgment in the
case. An order of abatement may direct any of the following actions:
   a.   Buildings or other structures on the property to be closed, demolished,
or removed;
   b.   Fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property to be moved or removed
entirely;
   c.   Improvements, alterations, or repairs to be made; or
   d.   Any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into
compliance with this ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.6 EQUITABLE REMEDY.
   The Town of Newport may apply to a court of law for any appropriate
equitable remedy to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The fact that
other remedies are provided under general law or this ordinance shall not be
used by a violator as a defense to the town's application for equitable relief.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.7 CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person, firm, or corporation convicted of
violating the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of
a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined an amount not to $500.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.8 EXECUTION OF COURT DECISIONS.
   a.   As provided in G.S. § 160A-175(e), if the violator fails or refuses to
comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed
by the court, the violator may be cited for contempt, and the Town of Newport,
by and through the Town Attorney, may execute the order of abatement. The town
shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of
abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien.
   b.   The violator may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying
all costs of the proceeding and posting a bond for compliance with the order.
The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court
in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be
conditioned upon the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of
abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of
abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction
therewith.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-6.9 DENY OR WITHHOLD PERMITS.
   The Ordinance Administrator may deny or withhold authorization to use or
develop any land, structure, or improvements until an alleged violation and
associated civil penalty related to such land, use, or development is
corrected.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-7 CUMULATIVE PENALTIES.
   The remedies provided for violations of this ordinance, whether civil or
criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by
law, and may be exercised in any order.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 4-8 CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.
   Each day that a violation continues shall be considered as a separate and
distinct offense, and may be enforced as such at the discretion of the
Ordinance Administrator.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
ARTICLE V: NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 5-1 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this ordinance there may exist
structures and uses of land, which were lawful before this ordinance was passed
but will be prohibited under the terms of this ordinance. It is the intent of
this ordinance to provide for their gradual elimination or improvement in order
to further the general plan and overall goals of the town for orderly community
development.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 5-2 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   On any building or structure devoted in whole or in part to any
nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary fixtures, wiring or plumbing,
providing that the cubic content of the building shall not be increased.
Repairs may be made as required to keep the building or structure in a safe
condition provided that no structural alteration or replacement shall be made.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 5-3 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   a.   Where a lawful structure exists at the date of adoption of this
ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason
of some characteristic of the structure or its placement on the lot, such
structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful.
   b.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity.
   c.   Where a structure or building containing a nonconforming use is damaged
or destroyed by any natural disaster, fire or accident, and repair or
replacement exceeds 50% of the cost of construction of a comparable new
building or structure, as determined by the Building Inspector, it shall not be
reconstructed or enlarged to accommodate a nonconforming use. It may only be
restored and used in conformity within the provisions of the district.
   d.   All nonconforming shipping containers, truck bodies, buses, mobile
homes, semitrailers, or variations thereof, are prohibited as accessory
structures, except as provided herein, and shall be removed 18 months from the
date of this regulation. An extension of six months may be granted if progress
has been and is being made at correcting the nonconformity. Any nonconforming
accessory building remaining on property shall be removed or be subject to code
enforcement action.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 5-4 CONTINUANCE AND CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   a.   Nothing in this ordinance shall allow a change from one nonconforming
use to another.
   b.   Any legal nonconforming use of a building, structure, mobile home or
premises may be continued; provided, however, that if the use is discontinued
for a period of 180 calendar days, said use shall be considered abandoned and
said building, structure or premises shall thereafter be used only for uses
permitted within the district in which the use is located. A mobile home shall
be removed from the district within 90 days after its abandonment. One-hundred
eighty days shall be allowed to remove from the premises all debris, equipment,
etc., that was associated with the nonconforming use. Three years shall be
given for the removal or conversion of structures and buildings.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 5-5 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Nonconforming signs, in addition to this section, shall be regulated by the
provisions of Article XIV of this ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 5-6 RESERVED FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION.
§ 5-7 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   a.   When a nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the
regulations (other than area, depth or width requirements) applicable to the
district in which the lot is located, such use may be made as of right.
Otherwise, the nonconforming lot may be used only in accordance with a special
use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall
issue such permit if it finds that: (i) the proposed use is one permitted by
the regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located;
and (ii) the property can be developed as proposed without any significant
negative impact on the surrounding property or public health, safety or
welfare. In issuing the permit authorized by this paragraph, the Board may
allow deviations from applicable dimensional requirements (such as setback
lines and yard minimums) if it finds that no reasonable use of the property can
be made without such deviations.
   b.   Whenever this ordinance creates a nonconforming lot and the owner of
the nonconforming lot also owns land adjacent to it, and a portion of this
other land can be combined with the nonconforming lot to create a conforming
lot (without thereby creating other nonconformities), the owner of the
nonconforming lot, or his or her successors in interest, may not take advantage
of the provisions of paragraph a. of this section.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 5-8 EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.
   a.   Except as specifically provided in this subsection, it shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in any activity that causes an increase in
the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation.
   b.   Subject to paragraph d. of this subsection, a nonconforming use may not
be extended throughout any portion of a completed building that, when the use
was made nonconforming by this ordinance, was manifestly designed or arranged
to accommodate such use. However, subject to §
5-9 (authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects in certain
circumstances), a nonconforming use may not be extended to additional buildings
or to land outside the original building.
   c.   Subject to §
5-9 (authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects in certain
circumstances), a nonconforming use of open land may not be extended to cover
more land that was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming, except
that a use that involves the removal of natural materials from the lot (e.g., a
quarry) may be expanded to the boundaries of the lot where the use was
established at the time it became nonconforming, if 10% or more of the earth
products had already been removed at the effective date of this ordinance.
   d.   The volume, intensity or frequency of use of property where a
nonconforming situation exists and may be increased and equipment or processes
used at a location where a nonconforming situation exists may be changed if
these or similar changes amount only to changes in the degree of activity
rather than changes in kind and no violations of other paragraphs of this
subsection occur.
   e.   Physical alteration of structures or the placement of new structures on
open land is unlawful if it results in:
      1.   An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming
use;
      2.   Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions such
as yard requirements, height limitations or density requirements; or
      3.   The enclosure of previously unenclosed areas, even though those
areas were previously used in connection with the nonconforming activity. An
area is unenclosed unless at least 75% of the perimeter of the area is marked
by a permanently constructed wall or fence.
   f.   For the purpose of determining whether a right to continue a
nonconforming situation is lost pursuant to this subsection, all of the
buildings, activities and operations maintained on a lot are generally
considered as a whole. For example, failure to rent one apartment in a
nonconforming apartment building or one space in a nonconforming mobile home
park for 180 days shall not result in a loss of the right to rent that
apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building or mobile home
park as a whole is continuously maintained. But if a nonconforming use is
maintained in conjunction with a conforming use, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for the required period shall terminate the right to maintain
it thereafter. And so, if a mobile home is used as a nonconforming use on a
residential lot where a conforming residential structure also is located,
removal of the mobile home for 180 days terminates the right to replace it.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 5-9 COMPLETION OF NONCONFORMING PROJECTS.
   a.   All work on any nonconforming project shall cease on the effective date
of this ordinance, and all permits previously issued for work on nonconforming
projects shall be revoked as of that date. Thereafter, work on nonconforming
projects may begin, or may be continued, only pursuant to a special use permit
issued by the Board of Adjustment (except as provided in paragraph b. of this
section). The Board shall issue such a permit if it finds that the applicant
has in good faith made substantial expenditures or incurred substantial binding
obligations or otherwise changed his or her position in such substantial way in
reasonable reliance on the land use law as it existed before the effective date
of this ordinance and thereby would be unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed
to complete his or her project as proposed. In considering whether these
findings may be made, the Board shall be guided by the following.
      1.   All expenditures made pursuant to a validly issued and unrevoked
building or zoning permit shall be considered as evidence of reasonable
reliance on the land use law that existed before this ordinance became
effective.
      2.   Except as provided in subparagraph 1. of this paragraph, no
expenditures made between 180 days and the effective date of this ordinance
shall be considered as evidence of reasonable reliance on the land use law that
existed before this ordinance became effective. An expenditure is made at the
time a party incurs a binding obligation to make that expenditure.
      3.   To the extent that expenditures are reasonable with a reasonable
effort, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having made those
expenditures. For example, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having
made expenditure to acquire a potential development site if the property
obtained is just as valuable under the new classification as it was under the
old, for the expenditure can be recovered by resale of the property.
      4.   An expenditure shall be considered substantial if it is significant
both in dollar amount and in terms of: (i) the total estimate cost of the
proposed project; and (ii) the ordinary business practices of the developer.
      5.   A person shall be considered to have acted in good faith if actual
knowledge of a proposed change in the land use law affecting the proposed
development site could not be attributed to him or her.
      6.   Even though a person had actual knowledge of a proposed change in
the land use law affecting a development site, the Board may still find that he
or she acted in good faith if he or she did not proceed with his or her plans
in a deliberate attempt to circumvent the effects of the proposed ordinance,
the Board may find that the developer did not proceed in an attempt to
undermine the proposed ordinance if it determines that: (i) at the time the
expenditures were made, either there was considerable doubt about whether any
ordinance would ultimately be passed, or it was not clear that the proposed
ordinance would prohibit the intended development; and (ii) the developer had
legitimate business reasons for making expenditures.
      7.   Nothing in this section shall interfere with the provisions in §
1-11 (Vested Right) of this ordinance. The requirements of paragraph a. of this
section shall not apply to a nonconforming project if the Zoning Administrator
certifies that actual construction of the project began at least 180 days
before the effective date of this ordinance and that the work is at least 75%
complete at the effective date of this ordinance, notwithstanding the two-year
vested rights, §
1-11 of this ordinance.
   b.   The Board of Adjustment shall not consider any application for the
special use permit authorized by paragraph a. of this section that is submitted
more than 60 days after the effective date of this ordinance, unless it waives
this requirement for good cause shown.
   c.   If the Board of Adjustment issues a special use permit pursuant to
paragraph a. of this section, it may attach such reasonable conditions to the
permit as it finds necessary to reduce the extent to which the nonconforming
project is incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood. In particular, the
Board may require that work on the nonconforming project be continuously
maintained, if possible, and that the project be completed as expeditiously as
possible.
   d.   The Zoning Administrator shall send copies of this subsection to owners
(and developers, if different from the owners) of all properties in regard to
which permits have been issued for nonconforming projects or in regard to which
a nonconforming project is otherwise known to be under construction. This
notice shall be personally delivered or sent by registered or certified mail
not less than 15 days before the effective date of this ordinance.
   e.   The Board of Adjustment shall establish expedited procedures for
hearing applications for special use permits under this subsection. These
applications shall be heard, whenever possible, before the effective date of
this ordinance, so that construction work is not needlessly interrupted.
   f.   When it appears from the developer’s plans, or otherwise, that the
nonconforming project was intended to be or reasonably could be completed in
phases, segments or other discrete units, the Board of Adjustment shall
determine and not allow the nonconforming project to be constructed or
completed in a fashion that is larger or more extensive than is necessary to
allow the developer to recoup and obtain a reasonable rate of return on the
expenditures he or she has made in connection with that nonconforming project.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
ARTICLE VI: ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 6-1 ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The various districts hereby established and into which the Town of Newport
and the extraterritorial jurisdiction are divided are designated as follows:
 
R-8 Residential Single-Family District
R-10 Residential Single- and Multi-Family District
R-15 Residential Single-Family District
R-15D Residential Single-Family Townhouse District
R-20 Agricultural, Residential District
R-20A Residential Single-Family District
 
R-20MH Residential Manufactured Home District
RO Residential Office District
NB-1 Neighborhood Business District
CD Commercial Downtown District
CH Commercial Highway
LI Light Industrial
IW Industrial Warehousing
U Interim District
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
§ 6-2 CONDITIONAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 6-2.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A Conditional Zoning District allows particular uses to be established only
in accordance with specific standards and conditions pertaining to each
individual development project. Some land uses are of such a nature or scale
that they have significant impacts on both the immediately surrounding area and
on the entire community, which cannot be predetermined and controlled by
general district standards. There are also circumstances in which a general
district designation allowing such a use by right would not be appropriate for
a particular property even though the use itself could, if properly planned, be
appropriate for the property consistent with the objectives of these
regulations and the adopted Core CAMA Land Use Plan.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
§ 6-2.2 DESIGNATION.
   Conditional Zoning Districts shall be established only in accordance with
the procedures set forth in § 3.4.2, Conditional Zoning District
Classification, and may not contain conditions which are less restrictive than
this ordinance or other applicable regulation.
Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
§ 6-2.3 ALLOWED USES.
   No use shall be permitted within a Conditional Zoning District except
pursuant to the conditions imposed as part of the approval. The permitted uses
shall be limited to those permitted in the corresponding base zoning district
unless otherwise restricted in the conditions set forth in the approval of the
Conditional Zoning District.
Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
§ 6-2.4 STANDARDS.
   a.   Base zoning district standards apply. All standards and requirements
that apply to the corresponding base zoning district shall also apply to the
Conditional Zoning District.
   b.   No less restrictive than base district. Conditions imposed on a
conditional zoning district may be no less restrictive than the standards that
apply to the corresponding base zoning district.
   c.   Stricter standards adopted. Existing conditions or limitations
associated with an approved Conditional Zoning District classification shall
become null and void if future amendments to this ordinance require stricter
standards than those imposed under the Conditional Zoning District
classification.
   d.   Application of conditions. In cases where the ability to implement an
approved Conditional Zoning District condition is impossible or impractical
(e.g. a condition requiring trees to be preserved when the trees have
subsequently died due to natural causes), the Ordinance Administrator shall
enforce the condition in a way that most closely meets the condition's original
intent.
Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
§ 6-2.5 PARALLEL CONDITIONAL ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   Each base zoning district shall have a corresponding "parallel" Conditional
Zoning District. Conditional Zoning District classifications shall be indicated
on the Official Zoning Map by the affix "CD" behind the associated base zoning
district. The Conditional Zoning Districts are:
   a.   R8-CD.
   b.   R-10-CD.
   c.   R-15-CD.
   d.   R-15D-CD.
   e.   R-20-CD.
   f.   R-20A-CD.
   g.   R-20MH-CD.
   h.   RO-CD.
   i.   NB-1-CD.
   j.   CD-CD.
   k.   CH-CD.
   l.   LI-CD.
   m.   IW-CD.
Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
§ 6-2.6 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   a.   General. The Planned Unit Development District (PUD) is a special
purpose Conditional Zoning District that is established in order to accommodate
a diverse mix of residential and nonresidential uses and structures that
function as a cohesive, integrated and unified development. This district
encourages innovative development patterns by allowing flexibility in permitted
uses, design and layout requirements in conjunction with a conceptual site
plan. This district may only be established through the process set forth in §
3-4.2, Conditional Zoning District Classification.
   b.   Planned Unit Development standards.
      (1)   Minimum size. The minimum size for an application for Conditional
Zoning District classification to a PUD District is five contiguous acres.
      (2)   Permitted uses. Planned unit developments may contain any use which
is permitted by right, by Conditional Zoning District, or by special use permit
in the R-20, R-15, R-10, RO, or NB-1 districts.
      (3)   Preservation of environmentally sensitive areas. All areas of
wetlands, floodways, and other environmentally sensitive areas must be
preserved as open space.
      (4)   Residential density. The overall residential density of the PUD is
established by the conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning
District classification.
      (5)   Minimum lot size. Minimum lot sizes in each area of the PUD are
established by the conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning
District classification. Where a residential portion of a PUD abuts a platted
or developed residential subdivision, the minimum lot size of the adjoining
district shall be utilized for all adjoining properties in the PUD.
      (6)   Minimum interior setbacks. Setback requirements within the PUD are
established by the conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning
District classification. While no minimum setback is required, if one is
provided it must be at least five feet in width.
      (7)   Minimum street setbacks. Minimum street (front yard) setbacks
within the PUD are established by the conceptual site plan as part of the
Conditional Zoning District classification.
      (8)   Maximum height. Maximum height restrictions within the PUD are
established by the conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning
District classification.
      (9)   Open space and recreation facilities. Open space areas and
recreation facilities must be provided in accordance with this ordinance.
      (10)   Nonresidential area. Nonresidential areas and adjacent residential
areas must be arranged in such a manner that convenient pedestrian access is
provided between and within those areas.
      (11)   Parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading areas must be
provided in accordance with this ordinance.
      (12)   Street design. All streets must be designed in accordance with
this ordinance.
      (13)   Signage.
         (a)   A common signage plan must be included as part of the conceptual
site plan. This common signage plan shall specify the size, type, height,
setback, location, design, illumination, and number of signs to be allowed in
the PUD. All signs included in the common signage plan shall utilize the same
coordinated colors, styles, and lettering schemes throughout the development.
         (b)   Signs allowed in residential portions of the PUD may be no less
restrictive than the standards set forth for signs in the R-15 district.
         (c)   Signs allowed in nonresidential portions of the PUD may be no
less restrictive than the standards set forth for signs in the NB-1 district.
      (14)   Landscaping. Landscaping standards for the PUD are established by
the conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning District
classification.
      (15)   Buffering. Buffering standards for the PUD are established by the
conceptual site plan as part of the Conditional Zoning District classification.
Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-21)
ARTICLE VII: DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 7-0 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Refer to Article III, §
3-8 for Uses Prohibited.
   The town desires to limit and control the access to properties onto Highway
70 in order to discourage the proliferation of traffic signals along the
thoroughfare and maintain unimpeded flow of vehicular traffic along the
highway. In doing so, a planned access will be awarded only by a special use
permit.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-21)
§ 7-1a R-20 RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. R-20 Residential Agricultural District is rural, agricultural
in nature. The district is primarily farming agricultural uses and permits
single-family dwellings and manufactured homes (mobile homes). Public water and
sewer are normally not available. This district is generally considered not to
be within the town limits; however, it is transitional and may be developed to
a higher density residential or other than residential zone when it is
determined that the area in question is appropriate and the action is necessary
to the town. It is further intended that when these areas are developed and
provided with town water and sewer, the areas should be annexed into the town.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use and subject to provisions of Article VIII;
      b.   Bona Fide Farm, except for Intensive Livestock Operations;
      c.   Companion unit attached or detached guest house;
      d.   Dwelling, single-family, duplex apartment, module home (North
Carolina Residential Building Code labeled), licensed family care home five or
less unrelated persons, manufactured home (mobile home). Manufactured homes
shall be HUD approved and certified to meet or exceed North Carolina Wind Code
requirements for Wind Zone III;
      e.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of Article VIII;
      f.   Public utility use. Utility substations and the like shall be
screened and/or landscaped as provided in this ordinance. Refer to special use
permit section (3) below for office, storage, maintenance facilities and WTF;
and
      g.   Municipal park and/or recreational areas.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council.
      a.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS). Shall comply with
provisions of Article IX, §
9-7.
      b.   Mining and borrow pits;
      c.   Cemetery, places of worship, community centers, child day care
centers;
      d.   Mobile home park;
      e.   Hunting lodge, private club or lodge;
      f.   Recreational vehicle parks. Refer to §
9-5 for development standards;
      g.   Intentionally left blank for future use;
      h.   Convalescent, rest or nursing homes;
      i.   Golf courses, including par 3 but not miniature. Minimum ten acres,
together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that
such uses are scaled to meet the requirements of the members, guests or users
of the golf course only;
      j.   School;
      k.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities; and
      l.   Wind energy facilities (WTF). Must comply with Article IX, §
9-6.1.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VIII and XIV;
      b.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      c.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      d.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate;
      e.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2); and
      f.   Wind energy facilities shall be developed in accordance with Article
IX, §
9-6.1 as appropriate.
   (5)   Minimum setback and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  15 ft.
Side yard  10 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height  35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage     40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. 20,000 residential, single or duplex
Minimum lot width        100 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2020-01, passed
6-11-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 7-1b R-20A RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. R-20A Residential Single-Family District that is rural in
nature and is generally not served by a public water or sewer system. It is
usually created out of the R-20 District where the developer of a subdivision
or homeowners desire the development standards of single-family dwellings. Barn
yard animals and manufactured (mobile) homes are not permitted.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Single-family residential homes that are constructed in accordance
with the North Carolina Residential Building Code;
      b.   Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use and subject to provisions of Article VIII;
      c.   Companion unit attached or detached guest house;
      d.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of Article VIII;
      e.   Public utility building, use and substations. Utilities substations
shall be surrounded by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this
ordinance. Office, storage, maintenance facilities and WEF are not permitted
use; and
      f.   Municipal park, recreation areas.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS). Shall comply with
provisions of Article IX, §
9-7;
      b.   Cemetery, religious establishments, community centers, child day
care centers;
      c.   Convalescent, rest or nursing homes;
      d.   Golf courses, including par 3 but not miniature. Minimum ten acres,
together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that
such uses are scaled to meet the requirements of the members, guests or users
of the golf course only;
      e.   School; and
      f.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities. WEF are not permitted.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      b.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      c.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      d.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate; and
      e.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2).
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  15 ft.
Side yard  10 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height  35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage     40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. 20,000
Minimum lot width        100 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014: Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-1c R-20MH RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY, MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME)
DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. R-20MH Residential Single-Family District that is rural in
nature and may not be served by a public water or sewer system. It is usually
created out of the R-20 District where the developer of a subdivision or
homeowners desire the development standards of districts where single- family
manufactured homes (mobile homes) is the only dwelling permitted use.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Single-family manufactured homes (mobile homes). Manufactured homes
shall be HUD approved and certified to meet or exceed North Carolina Wind Code
requirements for Wind Zone III;
      b.   Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use and subject to provisions of Article VIII;
      c.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of Article VIII;
      d.   Public utility buildings and substations. Office, storage or
maintenance facilities are not permitted use; and
      e.   Municipal park, recreation areas.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS). Shall comply with
provisions of Article IX, §
9-7;
      b.   Cemetery, religious establishments, community centers, child day
care centers;
      c.   Golf courses, including par 3 but not miniature. Minimum ten acres,
together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that
such uses are scaled to meet only the requirements of the members, guests or
users of the golf course;
      d.   School; and
      e.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities. WEF are not permitted.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      b.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      c.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      d.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate; and
      e.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2).
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  15 ft.
Side yard  10 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height  35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage     40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. 20,000
Minimum lot width        100 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-2 R-15 RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. The R-15 District is for medium density residential single-
family development. This district is the preferred development where public
water and sewer is provided. The development standards are single-family
dwellings. It is further intended that when these areas are developed and
provided with town water and sewer, the area shall be annexed into the town.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Only single-family residential homes that are constructed in
accordance with the North Carolina Residential Building Code;
      b.   Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use and subject to provisions of Article VIII;
      c.   Companion unit attached or detached guest house that is constructed
in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code for that purpose;
      d.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of Article VIII;
      e.   Public utility building, use and substations. Utilities substations
shall be surrounded by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this
ordinance. Facilities with associated office, storage and/or maintenance
facilities and WEF is not a permitted use; and
      f.   Municipal park, recreation areas.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS). Shall comply with
provisions of Article IX §
9-7;
      b.   Cemetery, religious establishments, community centers, child day
care center;
      c.   Convalescent, rest or nursing homes;
      d.   Golf courses, including par 3 but not miniature. Minimum ten acres,
together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that
such uses are scaled to meet only the requirements of the members, guests or
users of the golf course; and
      e.   School.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      b.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      c.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      d.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance which apply; and
      e.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2).
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  15 ft.
Side yard  10 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height  35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage     40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. 15,000
Minimum lot width        85 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-3 R-8 AND R-10 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (1)   Purpose. The R-8 and R-10 Districts were created in recognition of
high density areas within the town that were developed prior to the existence
of the Zoning Ordinance. It is not the intent to create or expand any future R-
8 Districts. R-10 areas may be created when it is found to be in the best
interest of the town.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Single-family, in the R-8 District. Single-family and multi-family
residential homes in the R-10 District. Residential homes that are constructed
in accordance with the North Carolina Residential Building Code;
      b.   Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use and subject to provisions of Article VIII;
      c.   Companion unit attached or detached, guest house;
      d.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of Article VIII;
      e.   Public utility building, use and substations, (WEF is not
permitted). Utilities substations shall be surrounded by screening and/or
landscaping as provided for in this ordinance. Office, storage or maintenance
facilities are not permitted uses; and
      f.   Municipal park, recreation areas.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS). Shall comply with
provisions of Article IX, §
9-7;
      b.   Cemetery, religious establishments, community centers, child day
care center;
      c.   Convalescent, rest or nursing homes;
      d.   Golf courses, including par 3 but not miniature. Minimum ten acres,
together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that
such uses are scaled to meet only the requirements of the members, guests or
users of the golf course;
      e.   School; and
      f.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities (not to include WEF).
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      b.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      c.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      d.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate; and
      e.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2).
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  10 ft.
Side yard  8 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height                35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage                   40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. for R10, R- 8 10,000 single-family and 5,000
District                               additional for each multi- family unit
Minimum lot width                      75 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-4 R-15D RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. The R-15D District is for medium density residential single-
family town home development. This district is where public or private
community water and sewer systems are provided. It is usually created out of
the R-20 District where the developer of a subdivision or the homeowners desire
the development standards for North Carolina Building Code “Town Homes”.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Only single-family residential “town” homes and residential single-
family homes either of which are constructed in accordance with the North
Carolina Residential Building Code;
      b.   Accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant to a
permitted use and subject to provisions of Article VIII;
      c.   Home occupation subject to the provisions of Article VIII;
      d.   Public utility building, use and substations. Utilities substations
shall be surrounded by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this
ordinance. (WEF is not permitted); and
      e.   Municipal park, recreation areas.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS). Shall comply with
provisions of Article IX,
9-7;
      b.   Cemetery, religious establishments, community centers;
      c.   Convalescent, rest or nursing homes;
      d.   Golf courses, including par 3 but not miniature. Minimum ten acres,
together with such uses which are incidental to golf courses, provided that
such uses are scaled to meet only the requirements of the members, guests or
users of the golf course;
      e.   School; and
      f.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities. WEF is not a permitted use.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      b.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      c.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      d.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate;
      e.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2); and
      f.   A homeowners association (HOA) shall be created for any new town
home development regardless of the number of living units proposed. The HOA
document shall address all common areas such as: water, sewer and drainage
easements; maintenance and ownership; building maintenance and upkeep;
appearance standards; landscaping maintenance; and any other issues that the
town may identify for harmonious existence in the district.
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  15 ft.
Side yard  10 ft. for opposite side yards; no setback for common property line
           between the living units
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height  35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage     40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. 15,000 for a single-family house
                         7,500 for each unit of a townhouse development
Minimum lot width        85 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-5 RESERVED FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION.
§ 7-6 RESERVED FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION.
§ 7-7 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
§ 7-7.1 RO RESIDENTIAL OFFICE DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. RO Residential Office District is designed to establish and
preserve areas for employment activity and service to the public which do not
materially detract from, but to co-exist with, professional office, limited
commercial and residential uses. This district is generally created along the
south side of Howard Boulevard.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Professional offices such as business, financial, medical, clinics,
dental, veterinary, real estate, legal, governmental, contractors, etc.;
provided that no outside storage is maintained;
      b.   Limited retail and personal services such as flower shops, barber
and beauty shops, arts and crafts, clothing stores, eatery/café, pharmacy,
etc., not to include tattoo or body piercing. The permitted establishments are
generally for the convenience of local clientele and the size of the retail
building is intended to encourage high volume retail to locate within the
appropriate commercial district;
      c.   Automobile parts and supplies, not to include used parts such as
salvage yard;
      d.   Building contractor office, not to include warehousing or storage of
building material;
      e.   Non-profit lodges and civic clubs;
      f.   Child care facilities;
      g.   Art museums/gallery, libraries and related cultural establishments;
      h.   Community parks and community centers;
      i.   A place of worship;
      j.   Funeral home;
      k.   Public utility building, use and substations. (Wind energy
facilities are not a permitted use.) Utilities substations shall be surrounded
by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this ordinance;
      l.   Wireless telecommunications service (WTS);
      m.   Accessory uses customary to the associated permitted use; and
      n.   Residential single-family, duplex and apartment. Residences may also
be permitted on any floor above other permitted uses in the district.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Auction house, provided that outside display of merchandise is
permitted only on the day of the sale; and
      b.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities, (not to include wind energy facilities).
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   The limited commercial uses are permitted in buildings that do not
exceed 2,000 square feet in gross area;
      b.   None of the uses shall allow the outside display or storage of
merchandise or equipment including vehicles, boats, mobile homes, etc.;
      c.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      d.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      e.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      f.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate;
      g.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2); and
      h.   Funeral homes shall be located on a parcel of land not less than one
acre; no portion of the structure may be closer than 25 feet from any
residential lot line.
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Setback for the district.
 
Corner lot 20 ft. on both street fronts
Front yard 20 ft.
Rear yard  15 ft.
Side yard  10 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area for the district.
 
Maximum building height  35 ft.
Maximum lot coverage     40%
Minimum lot area sq. ft. 15,000 commercial, residential, single or duplex
                         3,000 sq. ft. additional for each unit over two
Minimum lot width        85 ft.
 
      c.   Minimum front yard setback is 40 feet along U.S. Highway 70 and 20
feet setback from secondary roads, such as 9 Foot Road, Roberts Road, East
Chatham Street or service roads. Corner lots shall be treated as having two
front yards. Distance between buildings and structures shall comply with the
North Carolina Building Code. The “drip” off of canopies may encroach to within
15 feet of the front property line. Refer to Article III, §
3-5 for the placement of accessory uses such as vending machines and bank
teller machines within the minimum setback.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-7.2 NB-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. The NB-1 District is designed to provide areas where limited
business and personal service establishments can locate near or within a
residential district for the convenience or necessity of the neighborhood. This
is an overlay district and is created only when the applicant can demonstrate
that it is in the best interest of the neighborhood to locate there. Any one
business of a type or kind is limited to a maximum gross floor area of 2,000
square feet.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Professional offices such as real estate, legal, accessory uses
customarily incidental to the permitted use, café, convenient mart not to
include fuel dispensing, car wash, and auto related services, book and news
stand, etc.;
      b.   Personal services such as barbershop, beauty shop, child care
center, launderette, pick-up laundry and dry cleaning stations, financial,
doctor, dentist;
      c.   Video gaming machines or stations limited to three or fewer as
accessory to convenience stores;
      d.   Mixed use buildings; and
      e.   Public utility building, use and substations. Utilities substations
shall be surrounded by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this
ordinance. (Not to include WEF.)
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Convenient mart which may include automotive fuel dispensing;
      b.   Wireless telecommunications service; and
      c.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities, (not to include WEF).
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   None of the uses permit the outside display or storage of
merchandise or equipment including vehicles, boats, mobile homes, etc.;
      b.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles VII and XIV;
      c.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      d.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      e.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate;
      f.   Support equipment such as air compressors and air conditioners,
which may generate loud noise, shall be located within sound proof enclosures;
      g.   Outdoor lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential
properties;
      h.   A privacy type fence, minimum six feet high, shall be provided and
maintained along the rear property line and property line adjacent to
residential zoned property; and
      i.   Convenient marts and any other business that may create noise or
disturb the quiet nature of nearby residences shall limit hours of operation to
between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area for the district.
      a.   Minimum setbacks.
 
Corner parcels    40 ft. on both streets
Front yard        40 ft.
                  Canopy may be 5 ft. setback
Minimum rear yard 20 ft.
Minimum side yard 20 ft.
 
      b.   Lot area in the district.
 
Maximum district area     43,560 sq. ft.
Maximum height            35 ft.
Maximum property coverage 40%
Minimum district area     20,000 sq. ft.
Minimum lot width         100 ft.
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-7.3 CD COMMERCIAL DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. CD Commercial Downtown District is designed to establish and
preserve areas for business activity and serve the public with compatible uses
within the historical central area of the town which is located along parts of
Chatham and East Chatham Street.
   (2)   Permitted uses. Within the CD District, a building shall be used for
the following uses only:
      a.   Convenience retail establishments such as, but not limited to,
pharmacy, hardware, grocery and beverage stores, hobby, crafts, gunsmith,
bakery, flower and gift shops, news stands and book stores, general mercantile
stores, clothing, variety and similar small size businesses;
      b.   Personal service establishments such as, but not limited to, barber
and beauty shops, tanning and aesthetician or esthetician shops not including
tattoo and body piercing parlor, photo studios, libraries, child care centers,
laundromats, laundry pick-up, tailor, dressmaking, shoe shop, photo studio,
restaurants and similar personal services. Adult establishments are not
permitted;
      c.   Professional offices such as business, legal, financial, medical
clinics and governmental;
      d.   Lodges and civic clubs;
      e.   Public schools and commercial schools providing training in any of
the arts, sciences, trades and professions;
      f.   Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings. Video gaming
machines and/or other coin operated gaming machines not to exceed three per
establishment as accessory uses;
      g.   Mixed use buildings;
      h.   All of the permitted uses listed in the RO District except
residential;
      i.   Residential dwelling units are allowed on any floor above a first
floor business which is operating five or more days a week at least four hours
daily; and
      j.   Public utility building, use and substations. Utilities substations
shall be surrounded by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this
ordinance. (Not to include WEF.)
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Motor vehicle sales and service;
      b.   Commercial recreation establishments, including theaters;
      c.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities, (not to include wind energy facilities); and
      d.   Any large accessory use or machine that will encroach in the minimum
setback such as bank teller machines, ice manufacturing vending machine, etc.
Refer to Article XV for requirements.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   There is no minimum lot size, width or frontage in the CD District.
Distance between buildings and structures are in accordance with the North
Carolina Building Code.
      b.   Maximum building height is 50 feet measured from mean elevation of
ground within five feet of building foundation and mean height of roof
structure.
      c.   None of the permitted or special uses allow after close of business
outside display or storage of merchandise or equipment with the exception of
motor vehicle repair and/or sales lots and then only that material necessary
for the service or marketability of the product. Junk or salvage vehicles or
parts are not permitted to be stored or kept outside of a building. Maximum
time for storage of vehicles outside of a building is 30 days.
      d.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles XIV and VII.
      e.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII.
      f.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate.
      g.   There are no minimum parking requirements except the minimum
accessible parking required by the Building Code.
   (5)   Minimum setbacks and lot area.
      a.   Minimum setbacks. Only apply when the use abuts a zone with
setbacks. CD use shall honor those abutting setbacks. The “drip” off of
canopies may encroach to within 15 feet of the front property line. Refer to
Article XV for accessory uses.
 
Corner parcels    35 feet on both streets
Front yard        N/A
Minimum rear yard N/A
Minimum side yard N/A
 
      b.   Lot area in the district.
 
Maximum building height   50 ft.
Maximum district area     N/A
Maximum property coverage N/A
Minimum district area     N/A
Minimum lot width         N/A
 
      c.   Minimum front yard setback is 40 feet along U.S. Highway 70 and/or
20 feet setback from secondary roads, such as 9 Foot Road, Roberts Road, East
Chatham Street or service roads. Corner lots shall be treated as two front
yards. Distance between buildings and structures shall comply with the North
Carolina Building Code.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-7.4 CH COMMERCIAL HIGHWAY DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. CH Commercial District is to provide commercial opportunities
to the traveling public and areas in the town where large scale commercial
projects may take place with minimum impact on contiguous residential
development. This district is designed to support local as well as regional
shopping centers and business complexes. As such, the district will accommodate
a wide range of business and commercial uses, clustered where feasible for
“cumulative attraction” and located for optimum accessibility.
      The town desires to limit and control the access from commercial
properties onto Highway 70 in order to discourage the proliferation of traffic
signals along the thoroughfare and maintain unimpeded flow of vehicular traffic
along the highway. In doing so, a planned access will only be allowed only by a
special use permit.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Primary retail establishments such as those selling one-stop items,
usually high bulk, including, but not limited to, home furnishings, business
machines, heating and air conditioning, appliance sales and service, and
similar establishments; also including establishments sales and service, repair
motor vehicles, boats, farm equipment, tombstones, bicycles and service, small
motor repair. Any single retail establishment that exceeds 50,000 square feet
in gross sales floor area is separately defined as “big box” retail; motels;
      b.   Convenience retail establishments such as, but not limited to,
pharmacy, hardware, restaurants with or without serving alcohol beverages,
appliance service and repair, grocery, general mercantile stores;
      c.   Personal service establishments such as, but not limited to, barber
and beauty shops, tanning and aesthetician or esthetician to include tattoo and
body piercing parlor, health care establishments, physical fitness, etc., not
to include adult uses as defined herein. Financial and banking, photo studios,
libraries, child care centers, laundromats, laundry pick-up, tailor,
dressmaking, shoe shop, photo studio, print shop, restaurants with drive-
through and similar personal services. Dry storage (mini-storage warehousing),
where all storage is inside of the building and the maximum size of individual
stalls not to exceed 300 square feet. The storage stalls shall not be used for
sleeping accommodations. Special attention is given to litter and
unsightliness, ice and other vending machines;
      d.   Building and home furnishing supplies. Intended for “within”
building enclosure lumber storage. Outside storage shall be out of view of the
primary highway;
      e.   Funeral homes;
      f.   Recreation establishments, including theaters, indoor shooting
range, miniature golf, water slides and arcades, helicopter rides and other
aircraft rides and tours, indoors and outdoor multi-recreation and
entertainment such as rodeos, fairs, circus, carnival, bowling alleys, car/boat
shows, ball stadiums, race tracks, swimming pools;
      g.   Schools providing training in any of the arts, science, trades and
professions;
      h.   Customary accessory uses, structures and buildings;
      i.   Worship and religious institutions;
      j.   Gas stations, motor vehicle service, repair, car wash, boat and
similar activity; provided, there shall be no openings toward adjoining
residential districts and no junked salvaged vehicles or used/salvaged parts or
equipment shall be kept on the outside unless approved by a special use permit;
      k.   Public and private transportation service and facilities;
      l.   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2).
      m.   Residential dwelling units where located on any floor above the
first floor. These units can be single-family, apartments, condominium, etc.;
      n.   Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted uses. Accessory
uses associated with activities such as poolside, restaurants, night clubs and
radio broadcast studios, drive-up or drive-in service and the like. The Zoning
Official shall determine the appropriate action necessary to mitigate any
noise, air pollution, litter or unsightliness. Any complaint mitigation of the
offending use may include limiting hours of operation, erecting buffers or any
other enforcement provided for in the Zoning Ordinance;
      o.   Public utility building, use and substations. Utilities substations
shall be surrounded by screening and/or landscaping as provided for in this
ordinance. Storage or maintenance facilities is not a permitted use. Refer to
special use permits. WEF is not a permitted use; and
      p.   Veterinarian Offices/Animal Hospitals.
   (3)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   Any permitted use or modification of a facility or use that requires
the construction of an ingress or egress drive from U.S. Highway 70 into the
property. Highway 70 is designated as a limited access highway:
         1.   The owner or agent for the owner shall include in the application
the name and address of all persons owning an interest in the permitted use;
         2.   The nature and proposed or contemplated use;
         3.   A plat of the land upon which the use is located showing all
access to the highway within 500 feet of the proposed use;
         4.   The distance to the nearest intersection on each side of the use
location;
         5.   Location of service roads;
         6.   A statement of the need for the proposed direct access and why a
nearby access cannot be used or is inadequate; and
         7.   The Council may grant the access after finding that:
            a.   Granting will not confer upon the applicant an advantage not
accorded to others whose property is similarly situated;
            b.   Present access is inadequate;
            c.   Traffic flow and patterns will not be substantially adversely
impaired;
            d.   Public safety will not be significantly impaired;
            e.   There are no reasonable alternatives which would provide
adequate access;
            f.   The applicant may be required to share the access with present
or future adjacent land uses;
            g.   Any other consideration or requirement the Council deems
necessary; and
            h.   Public utility facilities with associated office, storage or
maintenance facilities, (not to include wind energy facilities).
      b.   Adult establishments and uses. Refer to the requirements of § 9-4 of
this ordinance;
      c.   Bar or night club; and
      d.   Surplus materials, heavy machinery, manufactured homes service and
repair, light manufacturing or fabrication establishes that is conducted within
doors or any similar business may be favorably considered after consideration
of appearance, noise, etc. associated with roadway and neighboring property.
   (4)   Development standards.
      a.   None of the uses allow after close of business outside display or
storage of merchandise or equipment with the exception of vending machines, and
equipment in accordance with Article XV, motor vehicle repair and/or sales lots
and then only that material necessary for the service or marketability of the
product. Junk or salvage vehicles or parts are not permitted to be stored or
kept outside of a building. Maximum time for storage of vehicles outside of a
building is 30 days;
      b.   Construction offices where machinery, trucks, equipment, etc. are
stored out of doors. Special attention shall be given to mitigate problems with
noise, congestion, litter and unsightliness and all such equipment, machinery
and vehicles shall be screened from view by fencing to a minimum height of five
feet and landscaping and screening as provided elsewhere in this ordinance;
      c.   There is no minimum lot size, width, or side and rear setbacks.
Minimum front yard setback is 40 feet along U.S. Highway 70 and/or 20 feet
setback from secondary roads, such as 9 Foot Road, Roberts Road, East Chatham
Street or service roads. Corner lots shall be treated as two front yards.
Distance between buildings and structures shall comply with the North Carolina
Building Code. The “drip” off of canopies may encroach to within 15 feet of the
front property line. Refer to ArticleXV for the placement of accessory uses
such as vending machines and bank teller machines within the minimum setback;
      d.   Maximum building height is 70 feet;
      e.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles XIV and VII;
      f.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      g.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII; and
      h.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2020-03, passed
8-13-2020; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 7-7.5 LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to encourage the development
of business and manufacturing uses relatively free of offensive elements.
Industrial uses which may involve the manufacturing, processing, assembly,
operation, storage of materials or equipment and public utility operations that
are conducted within doors. Special attention shall be placed on buffering and
landscaping.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   Administrative offices associated with related industrial use;
      b.   Wholesale establishments, office buildings and institutions;
      c.   Manufacturing, assembly and processing uses that are conducted
indoors such as electronics, small appliances, electrical/mechanical supplies
and distribution, testing laboratories, furniture manufacturing, manufacturing
or assembly of previously processed raw material such as clothing, plastic,
paper, leather, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, but not such
operations as lumber mills, rock crushing or the like from raw materials. Boat
manufacturing and the like;
      d.   Alcohol and other beverage manufacturing and distributing, bakeries,
boat manufacturing and repair facility, appliance repair;
      e.   Automotive and other vehicle wash, repair centers and parts not to
include salvage or wrecking yards;
      f.   Building materials sales yard not to include concrete mixing plant,
asphalt processing or handling areas;
      g.   Building contractor shops, dry storage (mini storage) to include
outside storage of RV, boats, etc., where special attention is given to
mitigate unsightliness. Chemical manufacturing, refining or processing except
those processes prohibited in this section;
      h.   Dairy products processing and distribution, bakeries;
      i.   Telecommunications facilities shall comply with Article IX
development standards (§
9-7.2);
      j.   One residential dwelling unit for the purpose of security or
caretaker living quarters; and
      k.   Indoor/out of doors recreation facilities.
   (3)   Prohibited uses. Certain manufacturing or processing products or
chemicals by their nature are declared incompatible with and injurious to the
town and its environs, and therefore are expressly prohibited by this part.
Such prohibited uses include, but are not limited to:
      a.   The manufacture of acid, ammonia, aniline colors or dyes, lime and
sulfates, coal tar products, fertilizer, glue, gelatin, industrial poisons or
chemicals, lampblack, matches, oil cloths or linoleum, paper or pulp, printing
ink, pyroxylin or celluloid products, rubber or leather goods, tar or
waterproofing products, slaughterhouses, rolling mills and coke ovens, and the
manufacture of gunpowder, fireworks or other explosives or explosive
substances, except fixed ammunition;
      b.   The distilling or grinding of coal, wood, bones or shells;
      c.   The manufacturing, rendering or refining of fats, soap, tallow,
grease or lard;
      d.   The manufacture or refining of asphalt;
      e.   Iron or steel foundry or works;
      f.   Tanning, curing or storing of raw hides or skins, leather or hair;
      g.   The manufacture of disinfectants or insecticides;
      h.   Truck terminals;
      i.   Saw mills and the processing of raw wood lumber products;
      j.   Cement or concrete plants; and
      k.   Domestic animal boarding kennel.
   (4)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   The use of a prohibited chemical, product or process in a permitted
industrial use shall be considered on a case by case basis;
      b.   Any non-offensive manufacturing use that is not expressly prohibited
in this chapter that the Board finds is appropriate for the district; and
      c.   Wind energy systems. WEF shall be developed in accordance with
Article IX, §
9-6.1 as appropriate.
       d.   Solar farm facility. SFF shall be developed in accordance with
Article IX, §
9-9.
   (5)   Development standards.
      a.   Minimum lot area is 20,000 square feet;
      b.   Minimum lot width at the street 35 feet;
      c.   Maximum height of building if located within 200 feet of a
residential district 50 feet unless approved by a special use permit;
      d.   Maximum lot coverage 35% for industrial and office buildings, 45%
for warehouse, 55% for personal storage; and
      e.   Minimum front yard setback is 40-foot setback along U.S. Highway 70
and/or 20- foot setback from secondary roads, such as 9 Foot Road, Roberts
Road, East Chatham Street or service roads. Corner lots shall be treated as two
front yards. Distance between buildings and structures shall comply with the
North Carolina Building Code. The “drip” off of canopies may encroach to within
15 feet of the front property line. Refer to Article XV for the placement of
accessory uses such as vending machines and bank teller machines within the
minimum setback.
   (6)   Other development standards.
      a.   Special attention shall be given to the out of doors storage of
equipment, trucks, etc., to mitigate problems of noise, congestion, odor, dust,
litter and unsightliness which may require fencing, additional landscaping and
buffering;
      b.   Area lighting shall not cause glare to other off-premises business
establishments or nearby residential neighborhoods;
      c.   Public address systems shall not be situated or the volume level set
so as to cause a nuisance to any off-premises business or residential
neighborhoods;
      d.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles XIV and VII;
      e.   Site development and landscaping in accordance with Article XII;
      f.   Off-street parking in accordance with Article XIII;
      g.   There shall be no emission of any fumes, vapors or gases of a
noxious, toxic or corrosive nature which can cause any damage or nuisance to
other uses beyond the property line; and
      h.   Activities which could produce any adverse effect on the
temperature, motion or humidity of the atmosphere beyond the property line
shall not be permitted.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. Z2014-01a, passed 12-11-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed
6-14-2021)
§ 7-7.6 IW INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE DISTRICT.
   (1)   Purpose. IW Industrial Warehouse District is to permit the development
and operation of uses and processes that are determined by the Town Council to
be necessary and beneficial to the town and are ordinarily prohibited in any
other district as a special or permitted use.
   (2)   Permitted uses.
      a.   All uses that are permitted uses listed in the LI Light Industrial
District;
      b.   Alcohol and beverages manufacturing, bakeries;
      c.   Motor vehicle, boat, aircraft and the like manufacturing and/or
repair garages;
      d.   Telecommunications systems and towers; and
      e.   Any use, production or manufacturing not listed as permitted uses.
   (3)   Prohibited uses. Any use determined by the Town Council as not
compatible with the surrounding area or within the district.
   (4)   Use that requires classification as a Conditional Zoning District as
approved by Town Council:
      a.   A use of a prohibited chemical, product or process in an industrial
use shall be considered on a case by case basis; and
      b.   Wind energy systems. WEF shall be developed in accordance with
Article IX, §
9-6.1 as appropriate.
      c.   Solar farm facility. SFF shall be developed in accordance with
Article IX, §
9-9.
   (5)   Development standards.
      a.   There is no minimum lot size, width, or side and rear setbacks.
Minimum front yard setback is 40 feet along U.S. Highway 70 and/or 20-foot
setback from secondary roads, such as 9 Foot Road, Roberts Road, East Chatham
Street or service roads. Corner lots shall be treated as two front yards.
Distance between buildings and structures shall comply with the North Carolina
Building Code.
      b.   Maximum building height is 70 feet measured from mean elevation of
ground within five feet of building foundation and mean height of roof
structure, the Council may grant heights greater than 70 feet to structures and
equipment on a case by case basis.
      c.   Signs are permitted in accordance with Articles XIV and VII.
      d.   Site development and landscaping are permitted in accordance with
Article XII.
      e.   Off-street parking is permitted in accordance with Article XIII.
      f.   Other sections of the Zoning Ordinance may apply as appropriate.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
ARTICLE VIII: ACCESSORY USES
§ 8-1 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   a.   Home occupations are defined in this ordinance and permitted in an R
District provided that such occupations comply with the following standards
which are established to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood
and/or dwelling.
   b.   Only one person other than those residing in the home shall be engaged
in the occupation at the dwelling.
   c.   The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the
residential use of the building.
   d.   The occupation shall not be visible from the street and no remnants,
debris, materials or equipment in connection with the home occupation shall be
kept or stored on premises, except within the approved building.
   e.   The use will not materially increase vehicular or pedestrian traffic
over that normally found in the residential neighborhood nor will any
additional parking be needed or provided.
   f.   On-premises retail sales is prohibited as the primary home occupation,
except where it is incidental to the primary occupation, such as the sale of
art supplies to students in a home occupation, “art teacher”.
   g.   Accessory buildings may be used for a home occupation. Accessory
buildings shall not be equal to or exceed the area of the primary dwelling.
   h.   No outside signs or advertisements shall be displayed on the premises,
nor shall merchandise or articles be displayed so as to be visible from outside
the building.
   i.   The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance or any undue disturbance
in the neighborhood. No noise, dirt, fumes, odor, etc., not normally
appurtenant to residential use nor greater in intensity or duration than that
customarily associated with a dwelling shall be emitted as a result of the home
occupation.
   j.   No more than one commercial vehicle shall be permitted to be kept or
operated on or about the premises and this vehicle shall not exceed three-
quarter ton rated capacity.
   k.   The use shall not involve the storage of flammable, hazardous or
explosive materials unless specifically approved by the Fire Official and the
Building Inspector.
   l.   The home occupation shall be registered with the Town of Newport and
pay all privilege license fees where applicable.
   m.   Home occupations may consist of, but are not limited to, the services
listed below:
      1.   Registered child day care;
      2.   Beauty shop, ironing, sewing service, photographer and the like;
      3.   Home office;
      4.   Crafts; and
      5.   Gunsmith.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-2 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   a.   A building may be established as accessory to any permitted principal
use in any zoning district, provided that such accessory building is
customarily incidental to, maintained and operated as part of the principal
use.
   b.   Permitted accessory structures in zoning districts R-8, R-10, R-15, R-
20, R-20A, associated CU districts, and the PUD district, if used for a
residential use, are:
      1.   Private garages, open storage space or parking area for motor
vehicles, provided that such space shall not be used on the premises for more
than one commercial vehicle, with not more than three-quarter-ton capacity;
      2.   Shed or tool room; children’s playhouse and play equipment;
      3.   Private recreation facilities and community structures, including
swimming pool and bath house or cabana, clubhouse, tennis courts, and the like;
      4.   Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of
human-made or natural catastrophes; and
      5.   Noncommercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden,
greenhouse or slat house not over 12 feet in height.
      6.   On lots zoned R-20 and one acre or greater in size, shipping
containers are permitted. If adjacent to a residential zoning district, the
containers must be set back ten feet from property lines and screened with a
buffer as required in §
12-2.
   c.   Permitted accessory structures to places of worship in any zoning
district where they are permitted are:
      1.   Religious education buildings;
      2.   A parsonage, pastorium or parish house, together with any use
accessory to a permitted dwelling as listed herein;
      3.   An off-street parking area or garage for use without charge and only
as an accessory use to a permitted use on the same parcel or tract;
      4.   A completely enclosed building for storage of supplies or equipment;
      5.   Recreation facilities;
      6.   Guest houses meeting setbacks of the zoning district in which they
are located; and
      7.   Shipping containers. If adjacent to a residential zoning district,
containers must be set back 30 feet from property lines and screened with a
buffer as required in §
12-2.
   d.   A permitted accessory structure in zoning districts NB-1 and RO and
associated CU districts is: a completely enclosed building for the storage of
supplies, stock or merchandise.
   e.   Permitted uses accessory structures in zoning districts CD and CH,
associated CU districts and the PUD district, if used for a nonresidential use,
are:
      1.   A completely enclosed building for the storage of supplies, stock or
merchandise; and
      2.   Shipping containers. If adjacent to a residential zoning district,
containers must be set back 30 feet from property lines and screened with a
buffer as required in §
12-2.
   f.   Permitted accessory structures in zoning districts IW and LI and
associated CU districts are:
      1.   A manufacturing and/or repair facility incidental to the principal
use; provided that dust, odor, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare produced
as a result of such manufacturing or repair operation is not perceptible from
any boundary line of the lot on which the principal and accessory uses are
located;
      2.   Gasoline and fuel oil pumps and storage tanks; and
      3.   Shipping containers. If adjacent to a residential zoning district,
containers must be setback 30 feet from property lines and screened with a
buffer as required in §
12-2.
   g.   Accessory structures are not regulated on bona fide farms.
   h.   Truck bodies, buses, mobile homes, semitrailers, or variations thereof,
are prohibited as accessory structures in all zoning districts.
   i.   Caretaker’s quarters. A permanent residence located within the building
or on the site of a permitted commercial or industrial use. This use is an
accessory use to the primary use in the district. The requirements herein are
in addition to any other requirements in this section:
      1.   The residence shall meet the minimum requirements of the North
Carolina Residential Building Code;
      2.   At least two parking spaces shall be provided for the quarters, in
addition to the minimum parking required for the primary use;
      3.   Any play area shall be clearly separated from the primary use so as
not to cause danger, distractions or interference to the primary use;
      4.   The quarters shall be used solely by the owner or for a watchman,
caretaker or custodian of the facility or use on the same site;
      5.   The quarters shall be clearly incidental and accessory to the
permitted principal use(s) on the same parcel, and shall not exceed 50% of the
area of the principal use, except by favorable consideration of a special use
permit. If the use(s) to which the quarters is accessory change or cease, the
applicant shall demonstrate, within 60 days of the change, the need to continue
the quarters for the use or to convert the quarters into a permitted principal
use allowed in the district;
      6.   There shall be no more than one such quarters on any one lot;
      7.   The quarters shall be architecturally compatible with the principal
use structures on the same lot; and
      8.   If the quarters are for the use of the owner/operator of a
commercial use and is attached to the principal use building then, where
practical, the main entrance to the quarters shall be to the side or rear of
the building.
   j.   Temporary health care structures.
      1.   The following definitions apply in this section.
         ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING. Bathing, dressing, personal hygiene,
ambulation or locomotion, transferring, toileting and eating.
         CAREGIVER. An individual, 18 years of age or older, who:
            (1)   Provides care for a mentally or physically impaired person;
and
            (2)   Is a first or second degree relative of the mentally or
physically impaired person for whom the individual is caring.
         FIRST OR SECOND DEGREE RELATIVE. A spouse, sibling, uncle, aunt,
nephew or niece, and includes half, step, and in-law relationships.
         MENTALLY OR PHYSICALLY IMPAIRED PERSON. A person who is a resident of
this state and who requires assistance with two or more activities of daily
living, as certified in writing by a physician licensed to practice in this
state.
         TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE STRUCTURE. A transportable residential
structure, providing an environment facilitating a caregiver’s provision of
care for a mentally or physically impaired person, that:
            (1)   Is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of
installation;
            (2)   Is limited to one full-time, permanent occupant, who shall be
the mentally or physically impaired person;
            (3)   Has no more than 300 gross square feet; and
            (4)   Complies with applicable provisions of the State Building
Code and G.S. § 143-139.1(b).
Placing the temporary family health care structure on a permanent foundation
shall not be required or permitted.
      2.   A temporary family health care structure used by a caregiver in
providing care for a mentally or physically impaired person on property owned
or occupied by the caregiver as the caregiver’s residence is permitted as an
accessory use in the R-8, R-10, R-15, R-20 and R-20A zoning districts, on lots
zoned for single-family detached dwellings.
      3.   A temporary family health care structure used by an individual who
is the first or second degree relative of the mentally or physically impaired
person shall be considered a permitted, accessory use in any single-family
residential zoning district, on lots zoned for single-family detached
dwellings, in accordance with this section, if the temporary family health care
structure is placed on the property of the residence of one of the individuals
named above, and is used to provide care for the mentally or physically
impaired person.
      4.   Only one temporary family health care structure shall be allowed on
a lot or parcel of land. Such temporary family health care structures shall
comply with all setback requirements that apply to the primary structure, and
with any maximum floor area ratio limitations that may apply to the primary
structure.
      5.   Any person proposing to install a temporary family health care
structure shall first obtain a permit. The applicant shall provide evidence of
compliance with this section on an annual basis, as long as the temporary
family health care structure remains on the property. The evidence shall
include annual compliance confirmation, and annual renewal of the doctor’s
certification.
      6.   A temporary family health care structure installed under this
section shall be required to connect to any water, sewer and electric utilities
serving the property, and shall comply with all applicable state law, local
ordinances, and other requirements, as if the temporary family health care
structure were permanent real property.
      7.   No signage advertising or otherwise promoting the existence of the
temporary health care structure shall be permitted, either on the exterior of
the temporary family health care structure, or elsewhere on the property.
      8.   Any temporary family health care structure installed pursuant to
this section shall be removed within 60 days in which the mentally or
physically impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of
the assistance provided for in this section. If the temporary family health
care structure is needed for another mentally or physically impaired person,
the temporary family health care structure may continue to be used, or may be
reinstated on the property within 60 days of its removal, as applicable.
      9.   The permit granted pursuant to this section may be revoked if the
permit holder violates any provision of this section. The city may seek
injunctive relief or other appropriate actions or proceedings to ensure
compliance with this section.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2019-
01, passed 6-13-2019; Ord. 2019-03, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 8-2.1 SIZE OF ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   a.   In zoning districts R-8, R-10, R-15, CH, and associated CU districts,
accessory structures shall not occupy more than 40% of the rear yard area.
   b.   In zoning district CD and associated CU districts, an accessory
building shall not occupy more than 25% of the rear yard area.
   c.   In zoning districts R-8, R-10, R-l 5, and associated CU districts, an
accessory building shall not exceed the square foot area of the footprint of
the primary building.
   d.   In zoning districts R-8, R-10, R-15, R-20, R-20A, and associated CU
districts, an accessory building shall not exceed a height of 25 feet.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2019-
01, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 8-2.2 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   a.   Accessory structures shall comply with the setback requirements of the
zoning district in which they occur, and shall not be located forward of the
primary structure or building unless permitted elsewhere in this ordinance. In
the case of a corner lot, such accessory use or building shall be setback from
the right-of-way of the abutting side street a distance equal to the front yard
setback established for principal uses in the district.
   b.   Accessory structures located on a corner lot shall not be closer to the
side street than the front building line of the adjacent principal building
facing the side street.
   c.   In zoning districts R-8, R-10, R-15, R-20, R-20A, and associated CU
districts, accessory structures , except water pump shelters not exceeding a
height of four feet, shall not be located forward of the front building line of
the primary building.
   d.   Permitted shipping containers shall be located in the rear of the
primary structure.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2019-
01, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 8-3 SWIMMING POOLS.
   a.   The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located, shall
be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the
street or from adjacent properties. The said wall or fence shall be at least
four feet high. All gates or doors opening through such an enclosure, other
than the door of any dwelling which forms a part of all of such enclosure,
shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep
the said gates or doors securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
The self-latching device shall be placed at least three feet six inches above
the ground.
   b.   The pool and above ground decking shall not be located in the minimum
setback yard.
   c.   The area of the pool may be computed as part of the open yard if the
height of the pool is less than four feet above ground.
   d.   Lighting shall be so placed or shielded as to prevent direct rays being
visible on adjacent properties.
   e.   A public address system for the supervision and safety of swimmers
shall be the only broadcast device permitted.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-4 STABLES AND KENNELS.
   Shall be permitted in an R-20 District, provided that a stable or kennel
shall meet all other requirements of the R-20 District unless located on a bona
fide farm.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-5 ANIMALS PROHIBITED AS ACCESSORY USES.
   Barn yard animals, marsupial, domesticated pig, exotic or wild animals and
fowl are prohibited from being kept, penned or housed in a residential district
except where on a bona fide farm or in an R-20 District.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-6 COMPANION UNIT.
   a.   A companion unit may be attached to the primary dwelling unit as a
permitted use, provided that there is direct communication via an unobstructed
door way to the primary unit. The companion unit may have separate bath and
cooking facilities and shall not exceed 864 net square feet.
   b.   The companion unit shall not be otherwise used for rental property
unless permitted by other provisions of this ordinance.
   c.   The intent of this provision is to provide for a housekeeper, nursing
or care person to be housed and attend to the daily medical or personal care of
a family member or relative.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-7 YARD OR GARAGE SALES.
   The occasional private sale of household effects is a permitted use within
any R District with the following restrictions.
   a.   No more than two days within the preceding 60 days shall be used for
garage or yard sales.
   b.   Two or more families may combine and have such sale.
   c.   Tables and setup displays will be installed only on the day of the sale
and shall be removed along with all evidence of the sale by the close of the
last day of such sale.
   d.   Single items that belong to the household, such as boats, motor
vehicles, lawnmowers, etc., may be displayed on the premises for sale for an
indefinite period of time; provided, however, that the item is not obtained for
the purpose of resale, or the item does not become a nuisance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-8 FALLOUT SHELTERS.
   Fallout shelters or storm shelters are permitted as principal or accessory
uses in any district subject to the yard requirements of the district. Shelters
shall be maintained so as not to become a hazard or blight to the community.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2014-01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-9 PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS (SOLAR PANELS) AND OTHER SOLAR DEVICES.
   a.   Photovoltiac panels as used herein includes one or more solar
collectors placed on a parcel of land or incorporated on or within a building
or structure for the purpose of generating electricity as an accessory use for
residential, commercial, industrial or other uses. Within this article, the
panels are not of the quantity or electrical capacity to be used primarily to
supply the electrical utility grid. However, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained herein, the term “solar farm” shall not be construed to
include, so as to prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, the installation
of a solar collector that gathers solar radiation as a substitute for
traditional energy for water heating, active space heating and cooling, passive
heating or generating electricity for a uses stated in this part. Nothing in
this part is intended to prohibit the sale or furnishing excess energy to the
public utility.
   b.   If the total electrical generating capacity of the system is capable of
producing more than 15,000 watts (15 kW) direct current (DC) when operating at
maximum efficiency, the permit owner shall be required to apply for a special
use permit from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Refer to Article IX of this
ordinance.
   c.   All photovoltaic systems and other solar devices, where applicable,
shall be designed and installed in accordance with the North Carolina Building
Code.
   d.   Refer to Article IX of this ordinance for solar devices that are used
or go beyond this part.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 8-10 OTHER INNOVATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS.
   a.   It is not the intent of this ordinance to prohibit the use of
innovative energy systems as accessory uses such as heat producing or wind
energy systems that are not otherwise regulated by special use requirements in
other sections of this ordinance.
   b.   A small wind energy system that does not exceed rated capacity of 25
kilowatt (25 kW) may be considered an accessory use to supplement electrical
power for a residence or business.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2433.jpg]
   Examples of Accessory Use: Residential Solar Panels and Wind Energy System
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
ARTICLE IX: PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL USES
§ 9-1 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   Permission may be granted for the establishment of uses listed as special
uses by the Zoning Board of Adjustment if the Board of Adjustment finds from
the evidence produced after a study of the complete application records that:
   a.   The proposed use does not affect adversely the general plans for the
physical development of the town as embodied in these regulations or any plan
or portion thereof adopted by the Town Council;
   b.   The proposed use will not be contrary to the purposes stated in these
regulations;
   c.   The proposed use will not affect adversely the health and safety of
residents and workers in the town;
   d.   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of
adjacent properties or other neighborhood uses;
   e.   The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses;
   f.   The proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy
the space requirements of said use;
   g.   The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of
the number of persons who will attend or use such a facility, vehicular
movement, noise or fume generation, or type of physical activity;
   h.   The standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may
be granted have been met;
   i.   The proposed use shall be subject to the minimum area, setback and
other requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located or other
setbacks as stated herein;
   j.   The proposed use shall be subject to the off-street parking and service
requirements of these regulations; and
   k.   The location and character of the use, if developed according to the
plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is
to be located and in general conformity with the plan of development for the
town.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-2 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   a.   The Board of Adjustment may impose or require such additional
restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety
of workers and residents of the community, protect property values and the
general character and welfare of nearby areas.
   b.   Wherever the Board of Adjustment shall find, in the case of any permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms,
conditions or restrictions upon which such permits were granted are not being
complied with, said Board shall rescind and revoke such permits after giving
the notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunities for a
public hearing.
   c.   The Newport Planner or his or her designee may impose a civil penalty,
in accordance with the town’s civil penalty ordinance, for any violation of the
special use permit or any requirement of this ordinance in addition of any
other remedy prescribed by law. Each day of a continuing violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3 USES WHICH MAY BE PERMITTED.
   The Board of Adjustment may grant permission for the establishment of the
following uses where they are listed as special uses in the district, subject
to any specific conditions either set forth below or which said Board may deem
necessary to satisfy the conditions set forth in §
9-1 above.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.1 CEMETERY.
   A cemetery shall not be located on the same lot with any other use except a
bona fide church or mortuary and shall not be smaller than the minimum lot size
in the district and meet the minimum requirements of the Carteret County and
North Carolina State Health Departments.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.2 GOLF COURSE.
   A golf course may be permitted in an R District subject to the requirements
of the district and provided that all greens and fairways shall be set back at
least 25 feet from any property line.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.3 CONVALESCENT, NURSING HOME, REST OR CARE HOME.
   A care center for the aged, disabled or handicapped, including convalescent
or nursing home may be permitted in an R District subject to the requirements
of the district and provided that:
   a.   The lot size shall be no less than two acres;
   b.   The structure shall have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet and a
front yard of at least 25 feet greater than that required for single-family
residences within the district;
   c.   Site plan shall be approved in accordance with Article XII;
   d.   Emergency standby electrical power source, adequate for providing heat,
light and minimum facilities for the type of medical need and comfort of the
tenants without requiring outside assistance is available;
   e.   A staff vehicle appropriately equipped to transport, on a 24-hour
basis, any tenant to the doctor or hospital for non-emergency care is
available; and
   f.   A covered walk, canopy or roof, approved by the Board to provide a
protected area of vehicle discharge so as to enable passenger ingress/egress
into the main building in inclement weather, is available.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.4 CHILD DAY CARE.
   Day care facilities may be permitted in an R District subject to the
requirements of the district, and required state standards and provided that:
   a.   At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is supplied for each
child accommodated; and
   b.   The entire play area be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of
at least four feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum safety to the
children is ensured.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.5 CONDOMINIUM.
   a.   Condominium is an ownership concept therefore, does not in itself
require zoning approval.
   b.   Condominium ownership may be used on any style of construction, subject
to zoning district regulations and the North Carolina Building Code.
   c.   There may be projects such as duplex, apartments or planned unit
developments that may incorporate the condominium ownership concept. These
projects may incorporate condominiums in the zoning approval.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS (MOBILE HOME PARK).
   A manufactured home park may be permitted in an R-20 MH District as a
permitted use and in an R-20 as a special use permit. All manufactured home
parks shall be developed in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6.1 PARK DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   a.   Area. The minimum manufactured home park size shall be three acres.
   b.   Density. The density of the number of manufactured homes per acre will
be determined by the minimum lot sizes, recreation areas and streets within the
park as required by this chapter.
   c.   At least 20% of the total number of manufactured home lots shall be
designed for single- wide units, which shall accommodate units 80 feet in
length and 14 feet in width. The maximum size of the units they can accommodate
shall be noted on the development plans.
   d.   Landscaping and fencing. Screened planting strips, not less than ten
feet wide shall be established and permanently maintained between the park and
all incompatible peripheral boundary lines of the park.
      1.   Street frontages shall be provided with landscaped buffers adjacent
to the public right-of-way except where cut by an access drive, and occupy a
minimum of 60% of the required 30-foot setback area.
      2.   At least one tree, minimum two-inch caliper size, shall be provided
on each mobile home lot.
      3.   All areas of a mobile home park not occupied by approved paving or
by trailer park facilities held in common shall be landscaped.
   e.   Park roads.
      1.   A roadway of at least 30 feet shall be provided to accommodate
public utilities, drainage, etc., with the road at least 18 feet wide, paved.
      2.   Park roadways shall be illuminated with a minimum of 0.2 foot
candles of light at the roadway’s surface. Lights shall be directed away from
adjacent properties.
   f.   Guest parking and vehicle storage.
      1.   There shall be provided one paved guest parking space for every
three mobile home lots. Parking shall be uniformly distributed throughout the
manufactured home park.
      2.   There shall also be provided one storage space for every eight
mobile home lots to accommodate recreational vehicles, boats, boat trailers and
similar equipment. Each storage space shall be at least ten feet wide and 25
feet long. This space shall have an all weather surface and may be marl, rock,
etc.
   g.   Recreation areas.
      1.   There shall be a common recreation area equal to at least 200 square
feet for each mobile home lot.
      2.   All public areas and buildings shall be illuminated with a minimum
of 0.2 foot candles at the ground surface. Lights shall be directed away from
adjacent properties.
      3.   Pedestrian pathways shall be provided to recreation area.
   h.   Underground utilities. All utility services, including, but not limited
to, water, sewer, electrical, cable TV, gas and telephone lines shall be placed
underground.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6.2 MANUFACTURED HOME LOT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   a.   Each and every manufactured home in a park shall be located on an
approved manufactured home lot. There shall be no more than one mobile home per
mobile home lot. No mobile home lot shall be occupied by any other type of
living quarters.
   b.   Each manufactured home lot shall have provisions for a 15-foot wide
access to one of the park roads.
   c.   There shall be a minimum of 20 feet between any manufactured home and
any other structure.
   d.   Two paved parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home lot.
   e.   Each mobile home lot not occupied with structures or other landscaping
shall be landscaped with grass.
   f.   Where centrally located waste containers are used, they shall be no
further than 150 feet from any lot.
   g.   Each lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel or iron
pipe markers placed at all corners.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6.2.1 LOT SIZE.
   The minimum lot size shall not be less than:
      1.   Five thousand square feet if served by both a community water and
sewage disposal system;
      2.   Seven thousand square feet if served by either a community water or
sewage disposal system; and
      3.   Ten thousand square feet if served by individual water well and
septic tank.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6.2.2 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   Minimum setback for the manufactured home within a lot shall be:
      1.   Side yard of ten feet;
      2.   Rear yard of 20 feet; and
      3.   Front yard of 20 feet.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6.3 OTHER STANDARDS.
   a.   A mobile home shall not be occupied by more than one family.
   b.   If the park has a community water system and/or a community sewage
disposal system, other than a municipal system, it/they shall be approved by
the Carteret County Board of Health. Those containing 14 or more stalls shall
be subject to the State Health Department.
   c.   A plot plan shall be submitted for Planning Board approval showing
location and dimensions of stalls, parking, drives, playgrounds and other
improvements. Approval or disapproval shall be granted within 60 days from the
initial submission to the Board and the applicant so notified.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.6.4 SIGNS.
   The general provisions of Article XIV of this ordinance shall apply.
   a.   Identification signs. One identification sign shall be permitted for
each lot. The sign shall not exceed an area of two square feet, shall not
exceed a height of four feet above the surface of the street, shall be attached
directly to a building, fence, standard or mail box, and shall be unlighted or
can be provided with indirect illumination.
      1.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided a three-inch minimum size house
number installed in a prominent location in the vicinity of the main entrance
visible to the main street.
      2.   Every mobile home park shall provide at or near the entrance to the
park an illuminated directory including a map showing the location of all lots
and streets with street names.
   b.   Park identification signs.
      1.   The aggregate sign area for any park shall not exceed 32 square
feet.
      2.   One identification sign shall be permitted for each park. The sign
may be attached flat against a principal building. It shall not project above
the eaves of the roof or the top of the parapet or may be freestanding. It
shall not be located within ten feet of any public right-of-way and shall not
exceed a height of ten feet above the surface of the street. It shall be
located within an area landscaped pursuant to approved plans.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.7 LODGES.
   A lodge may be permitted in an R District subject to the requirements of the
district and provided that:
   a.   All new sites shall be no less than two acres in size;
   b.   The structures shall have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet and a
front yard of at least 25 feet greater than that required for single-family
residences within the district; and
   c.   Provisions for food, refreshment and entertainment for club members and
their guests may be allowed in conjunction with such use if the Board of
Adjustment determines that said provisions will not constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.8 PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDINGS AND USES.
   a.   Public or private utility buildings or facilities that may create
excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust or any other objectionable nuisance in the
opinion of the Zoning Administrator shall be subject to the requirements of
obtaining a special use permit. The Board of Adjustment may grant a permit, if
it is determined to be in the public interest. The Board may require additional
requirements on the permit to mitigate any nuisance(s).
   b.   Public utility buildings and uses such as sewage lift station,
electrical sub-stations, etc., which do not create excessive noise, odor,
smoke, dust and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which
might be detrimental to surrounding property or to other uses permitted in the
district may be permitted as a right in any district. Public buildings and uses
in this case shall not be construed to include post offices, armories, schools,
churches, etc.
   c.   The design of buildings, structures and facilities on the site should
conform as closely as possible to the character of the area or neighborhood.
   d.   Adequate fencing or comparable safety devices must be installed and
maintained in order to make the facility inaccessible to the public.
   e.   Underground sewage lift stations, small cabinet mounted telephone, TV
cable amplifiers, switching equipment, etc., are not construed to require a
special use permit and are permitted uses.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.9 SCHOOLS.
   Schools may be located in an R District subject to the requirements of the
district and provided that:
   a.   Off-street parking requirements in this ordinance be met; and
   b.   The minimum site size for an elementary school shall be ten acres, for
a junior high school shall be 20 acres and for a senior high school shall be 30
acres, plus one acre for each 100 students.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.10 LANDING STRIPS FOR AIRCRAFT AND HELIPORTS.
   A special use permit is required for the development of a public airport as
defined in G.S. Ch. 63, Aeronautics.
   a.   When considering approval, the Board of Adjustment shall consider the
runway orientation to adjacent uses and may advise the Planning Board and Town
Council of the necessity of initiating runway protection zones and any other
zoning considerations necessary for the protection of the airport and public
from incompatible development encroachment to the airport as provided for in
G.S. Ch. 63, Art. 4.
   b.   When a private and/or corporate owned airport or landing strip is
planned along with the development of a subdivision, planned unit development
or commercial/industrial development, the aircraft facility shall be considered
for approval along with the approval process with the planned development or
subdivision where appropriate.
   c.   When the facility in b. above is being considered, the Planning Board
and/or Town Council shall have the authority to approve, disapprove or approve
conditionally.
   Note
      Runways and facilities will be so oriented that aircraft takeoff and
landing shall not, in the opinion of the Council, constitute a nuisance to
neighboring uses.
   d.   Commercial or noncommercial helicopter uses may be housed and operate
as permitted accessory uses in all nonresidential districts.
   e.   Noncommercial helicopter and aircraft may be housed and operate as
permitted uses in all districts.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.11 DRIVE-IN THEATERS.
   Drive-in theaters shall provide ingress and egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion, shall be so screened from an R District or
dwelling that any noise shall not disturb residents or prospective residents.
Lighted signs and other lights maintained only in a way as not to disturb
neighboring residents and shall be so designed that the screen be set back from
and shall not be clearly visible from any street or highway.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.12 FAMILY CARE HOME.
   (Refer to G.S. § 160D-907 for authority.) A family care home is deemed a
residential use of property for all zoning purposes, and shall be a permissible
use in all residential districts, however, it is prohibited for a family care
home to be located within a one-half mile radius of existing family care home.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-12-2023)
§ 9-3.13 LAND APPLICATION OF SEWAGE AFFLUENT.
   The commercial application of affluent from wastewater treatment plants such
as pre-treated water or the depositing of sludge from septic tanks or treatment
plants shall only be permitted by favorable consideration of a special use
permit. In addition to requirements and controls from county, state or federal
agencies, the town may place additional requirements to mitigate vehicle
traffic, noise, odors or any other perceived health hazard.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.14 MINING, BORROW PITS.
   Each application shall include the following information in addition to the
general information required by this ordinance:
   a.   A boundary survey of the subject property, together with the proposed
location of the limits of excavation;
   b.   The means of vehicle access to the proposed excavation;
   c.   The number of cubic yards to be excavated;
   d.   The areas proposed for the storage of overburden and other spoil during
the process of excavation;
   e.   The proposed date on which excavation will commence, the proposed date
on which the excavation will be completed and the proposed date that all
required restoration measures are to be completed;
   f.   The location of all haul roads leading to public streets and highways
within the area, and the location of all service roads on site;
   g.   A statement listing the public streets and highways to be used as haul
routes;
   h.   A plan showing the proposed use of the property once excavation has
been completed, including the location of proposed lots, streets, structures
and other features; and
   i.   A plan for filling of the borrow pit, if this is intended, once
excavation has been completed. No filling of the borrow pit will be allowed
unless plans for the filling have been approved by the Town Council as part of
or as an amendment to the special use permit application, and until the Town
Engineer has issued a fill permit for such activity.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.14.1 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Undrained pockets and stagnant pools from surface drainage shall be
sprayed in accordance with requirements of the State Board of Health to
eliminate breeding places for mosquitoes and other insects.
   b.   Off-street parking areas adequate for all employees’ vehicles and
trucks shall be provided.
   c.   The edge of the area to be excavated shall be located at least 100 feet
from all exterior property lines. The setback area shall not be used for any
purpose during the period of excavation, including overburden and spoil
storage, except the setback area may be used for access roads. Exterior limits
of all work shall be monumented with iron markers no less than five feet above
surface of earth.
   d.   Access roads to any excavation where hauling is being conducted shall
be maintained in a dust-free manner. All access roads shall be constructed so
as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles with public roads and
highways and no access road shall intersect any public road at any angle of
less than 60 degrees.
   e.   Operating hours of excavation may be restricted to between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. and Sunday operations may be prohibited.
   f.   All construction buildings used for the production and processing of
excavated material shall be constructed and maintained as required by the
Building Code.
   g.   Existing trees and ground cover along public street frontage shall be
preserved and maintained, and replaced during the period of excavation if the
Zoning Administrator deems it necessary.
   h.   No excavation on the site shall commence until an excavation permit has
been received from the Zoning Administrator and all requirements of this code
have been complied with.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-3.14.2 FACTORS RELATING TO APPROVAL.
   Before issuing any special use permit for the excavation or fill of a borrow
pit, the Board shall give due consideration to the following factors:
   a.   Effect of the proposal upon groundwater supply and drainage in the
area;
   b.   Effect of the proposal upon the town streets in the area, including,
but not limited to, the factor of traffic safety;
   c.   Impact from noise, dust, odor or other nuisance upon surrounding
properties; and
   d.   Effect of the proposal as a potential health or safety hazard.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-4 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 9-4.1 ANTI-SKID ROW REGULATIONS.
   The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable regulations to prevent
the adverse effect of the concentration or clustering of certain uses of real
property, specifically adult entertainment establishments. Such uses have
serious objectionable characteristics when several of them are located in close
proximity to each other. Such concentration tends to create a “skid row”
atmosphere and has a detrimental effect upon the adjacent area. Regulation of
the locations of these uses is necessary to ensure that such adverse effects
will not contribute to the blight or downgrading of neighborhoods or deter or
interfere with the development and operation of other businesses which are
needed and desirable in the town.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-4.2 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   a.   In addition to the uses permitted in the CH Commercial Highway
District, there shall also be allowed subject to the provisions of the
following subsections as special uses, adult entertainment establishments as
defined. In all other districts, adult entertainment establishments are a
prohibited use.
   b.   The regulations set forth in this entire section are intended to be in
addition to and not in lieu of any other regulations of this code applicable to
any of the adult uses. Unless otherwise specifically approved, the regulations
shall not be deemed to repeal or amend any other provisions of this code which
are applicable to the adult uses nor be deemed to excuse noncompliance with any
such other provisions.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-4.3 PROXIMITY RESTRICTIONS.
   a.   The purpose of this subsection is to prevent the adverse effects of
location of certain uses of real property, specifically adult entertainment
establishments, in close proximity to one another, or in a district which is in
close proximity to and which serves residentially zoned property; or PUD which
is designated for residential use; or nursery schools, elementary schools,
junior high schools, high schools, churches or public playgrounds. Regulations
restricting the location of such uses with reference to residentially zoned
property or PUD which is designated for residential use, nursery schools,
elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools, churches or public
playgrounds are reasonable and necessary for the prevention of said deleterious
effects.
   b.   Notwithstanding anything elsewhere in this ordinance to the contrary,
except in the provisions of subparagraph
9-4.4 of this section, no building, structure or any portion thereof or any
portion of a lot or parcel of property in any zoning district, shall be used
for an adult entertainment establishment at a location closer than 2,640 feet
to any other adult entertainment establishment; or closer than 1,500 feet to
any residentially zoned property, PUD or parcel of property which is designated
for residential use, nursery schools, elementary schools, junior high schools,
high schools, churches or public playgrounds situated within the zoning
jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-4.4 APPLICATION TO EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   a.   Any establishment which does not comply solely by reason of its
noncompliance with subparagraph
9-4.3 of this section shall comply with all provisions of those sections within
five years of the effective date of this section; provided, however, that any
such establishment which intends to in any way alter or change the nature of
any such adult entertainment establishment on or after the effective date of
this section shall comply with this section prior to such transfer, alteration
or change. Any such use which, at the expiration of such period, is not in
compliance with the provisions of this section shall become unlawful and is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall immediately be discontinued
and abated. For the purpose of determining compliance with subparagraph
9-4.3 of this section as to, between, and with respect to, establishments in
operation on the effective date of this section, priority between such existing
establishments shall be assigned in accordance with the dates upon which said
establishments commence such operation, priority being given to the
establishment having the earliest of such dates. In the event any disputes
arise regarding said date, the applicant shall have the obligation to establish
the date of which he or she commenced operation. All distances referred to in
this entire section shall be measured as a radius from the adult entertainment
establishment without regard to public streets or sidewalks. The effective date
of this section shall also mean the effective date of the extension of the
corporate limits and/or the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   b.   Within 30 days following the effective date of this section, the Zoning
Administrator shall compile a list of all known establishments subject to the
provisions of this section doing business on its effective date and shall
notify such establishments of the date five years from the effective date of
the section when any such establishment which does not comply with this section
solely by reason of noncompliance with subparagraph 9-4.3 must comply with the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.
§ 9-5.1 DEFINITIONS.
   a.   CAMP SITE. An area within a recreational park designed for placement of
a tent, recreational camper trailer and/or a recreational vehicle.
   b.   CAMPER, RECREATIONAL CAMPER TRAILER. A trailer drawn especially by an
automobile and equipped for use (as while traveling) as a dwelling. The
definition does not include manufactured homes (mobile homes) as defined by The
State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
   c.   DEPENDENT RV, TENT OR RECREATIONAL CAMPER TRAILER. Does not have self-
contained sanitary facilities or holding tanks for gray water or sanitary
sewer.
   d.   DEPENDENT RV PARK. One that may cater to both dependent and independent
RV, tent or camper.
   e.   DUMP STATION. A place to discharge sewage from a recreational vehicle,
but not including a sewer hookup associated with a RV site.
   f.   ELECTRIC HOOKUP. The electrical supply to a campsite.
   g.   GREY WATER. The water that is contaminated with soap, grease, etc.,
normally associated with washing of people, dishes, clothes, etc., and the
wastewater from cooking.
   h.   HOST. The person designated by the park owner to do park management.
   i.   CO-HOST. The person designated by the park owner to do park management
in the absence of the host.
   j.   IMPROVED PUBLIC ROAD. A road that is improved with a minimum of gravel
surface and is regularly maintained by the town or NCDOT.
   k.   INDEPENDENT RV OR RECREATIONAL CAMPER TRAILER. One that has self
contained gray water and sanitary sewer holding tanks and potable water holding
tanks.
   l.   INDEPENDENT RV OR RECREATIONAL CAMPER PARK. One that only caters to
independent RV or recreational camper trailers.
   m.   OWNER. The lawful owner and person responsible for the operation and
upkeep of the recreational park. The OWNER may designate some of the park
operation and management to a host.
   n.   PARKING SPACE. A place to park a motor vehicle.
   o.   RECREATIONAL PARK. Land that is divided into rental spaces (with or
without utility hookups) under common ownership or management for the purpose
of temporarily locating recreational vehicles, recreational camper trailers or
tents for recreation purposes.
   p.   RECREATIONAL CAMPER TRAILER. An enclosed box trailer or a pop-up-
trailer designed to be pulled by a light duty truck or vehicle either with a
ball hitch or fifth wheel device with sleeping accommodations and not designed
primarily for use as a permanent dwelling.
   q.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) (“PARK MODEL”). A vehicle which is built on a
single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, is self-propelled or towed by a light duty truck, and is
not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters
for recreational, camping, travel and seasonal use. The basic entities are
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper and motor home. RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES are not subject to the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards. Further definitions and clarifications are found in The State of
North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
   r.   RV SITE. A campsite within a recreational park specifically designed
for placement of a recreational vehicle or recreational camper trailer.
   s.   SEWER HOOKUP. A place where sewer can be discharged as it is generated
from a recreational vehicle or recreational camper trailer while it is set up
in a recreational park.
   t.   SETBACK. The distance a campsite or other campground facility is
situated next to the campground perimeter property line.
   u.   TENT SITE. A campsite within a recreational park specifically designed
for placement of a tent or other non-vehicle sleeping apparatus.
   v.   WATER HOOKUP. The domestic water supply to a recreational vehicle while
it is set up in a RV site.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.2 PROCEDURE.
   General procedure and applicants’ responsibilities. The following general
description of the recreational park approval procedures are intended to aid
the users of this section and those persons desiring to develop a recreational
park in the Newport zoning jurisdiction in understanding the basic procedures,
sequence of events and responsibilities of the applicant in obtaining final
approval of the project.
   a.   Applicant contacts the Town Planning Department, 200 Howard Boulevard,
Newport, North Carolina 28570, arranges a pre-submission conference with the
Town Planner or Zoning Administrator.
   b.   The applicant should provide a sketch plan for discussion. The
applicant learns what the concerns and recommendations of the local officials
are.
   c.   The applicant completes an application and has a surveyed site plan,
landscape plan, storm water plan prepared.
   d.   The applicant submits the special use permit application along with the
filing fee. (See the Fee Schedule.)
   e.   The Planning Department assists the applicant with the application and
makes recommendations as to his or her interpretation of the process and design
standards. The Planning Department routes the application to any and all other
appropriate departments for their comments prior to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment (hereinafter “Board”) meeting.
   f.   The Town Engineer may need to get involved if there are drainage or
environmental issues. The applicant will be charged for any engineering review
fees.
   g.   The Town Planner will arrange for a meeting with the Board. The Town
Planner needs the complete application at least 30 days prior to the meeting in
order to notify other property owners and give notice to the news media of the
proposed development as required by other sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
   h.   If the Board approves the site plan, the applicant files it with the
Town Planner and begins construction of the park.
   i.   The developer (owner) must have approved environmental permits in hand
and obtain any required building permits (for buildings, electrical and the
like), prior to commencing work.
   j.   Upon completion and approval of construction, the Town Planner and
Building Inspector will issue a certificate of occupancy which authorizes the
park to open for business.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.3 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Recreational park applications shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared
by an architect, engineer or land surveyor Each application shall contain, at
the minimum, the following information:
   a.   The title and location of the proposed park, together with the names,
address and telephone numbers of the record owner(s) of the land and of the
applicant, and, if applicable, the name, address and phone numbers of any
architect, planner, surveyor, designer or persons responsible for the
preparation of the site plan and application and any authorized agent
representing the applicant;
   b.   The proposed use of the land and buildings;
   c.   Site plan drawing to a scale not less than one inch to 200 feet, which
shall show:
      1.   The location of all existing and proposed buildings, fences,
culverts, bridges, roads and any other structures of significance;
      2.   The boundaries of the property to be developed;
      3.   All area, if any, to be preserved as buffers or dedicated to a
public or private use for open space or public use;
      4.   All existing and proposed easements;
      5.   The existing and proposed water and sewer lines;
      6.   All means of vehicle and pedestrian ingress and egress to and from
the site and the size, location and direction of flow of driveways, streets and
roads, to include radii and curvature of proposed routes;
      7.   The location and direction of all drainage, streams, rivers and
storm water channels or ponds; and
      8.   If required by the Town Engineer or Town Planner, any other
information that may be pertinent to the design of the site.
   d.   The existing zoning district of the proposed development and any other
zoning district within 300 feet of the site;
   e.   Fire district in which the site is located;
   f.   Where needed to enhance aesthetics, ensure public safety, and protect
neighboring property, the park shall be enclosed by a fence, wall landscape
screening or other designs approved by the Administrator which will complement
the landscaping and assure compatibility with the adjacent land. In such cases,
landscaping plans shall describe the type, height and location of proposed
screens or fences; and
   g.   Filing fees will be established by the Town Council.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.4 APPROVAL PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of the complete application and site plan, the Zoning
Administrator shall assign a case number and, where a special use permit is
required from the Board, forward copies to the Secretary to the Board who will
arrange for the meeting with the Board. Other departments of the town and
outside agencies as applicable will be notified of the proposal and given
opportunities for comments. The Board will not ordinarily get involved with
detailed design review except for unusual circumstances such as approving
variances from the development standards (§
9-5.8). Rather, the Board will approve or disapprove the appropriateness of the
neighborhood location, will determine whether the application satisfies the
requirements for a special use permit, and impose any other requirements it
deems appropriate to protect the neighborhood, adjacent property, safety or any
other concern. Upon Board approval of the application for the special use
permit, the Town Planner will review the detailed design and assure that it
substantially agrees with the minimum requirements as stated herein, at which
time a certificate of occupancy will be issued to the operator of the facility.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.5 COMPLIANCE.
   The development of the recreational park shall conform to the approved
special use permit and its conditions and requirements, and the site plan as
approved. Any development, use or density which fails to substantially conform
to the special use permit and its conditions and requirements as approved shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may approve
minor alterations if in his or her opinion the alterations do not substantially
alter the original plan. When the Zoning Administrator determines that the
proposed alterations are of a substantial nature, the developer shall submit a
new application to be processed in accordance with this ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.6 OPERATION PERMIT.
   When the recreational park has been brought into compliance with the
approved plan, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a permit to operate. The
permit may be revoked by the Board for any substantial violation of permits
during a public meeting of the Board and after the owner has been given at
least 24 hours’ notice of the pending action. The Board may issue a provisional
permit to operate while the owner is exercising due diligence in an effort to
come into compliance with any requirements of the Board.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.6.1 PERIODIC INSPECTION.
   The Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may make periodic inspections
to verify that the park is in compliance with all original or amended permits.
The Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector may make any unannounced
inspections as deemed necessary to assure compliance, investigate complaints or
investigate suspected undesirable conditions.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.7 LOCATION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   General. Recreational parks shall be permitted only where allowed by
zoning classification. Variances shall not be given contrary to this section.
Parks shall not be permitted in any area found unsuitable for such development
because of poor or undesirable drainage, physical topography, soil
characteristics, public access or other features that may be harmful to the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   b.   Full-time camping. As a general rule, there will be no full-time
camping within an RV park except for the host and co-host. The purpose of the
host occupant shall be general supervision, to collect money and other duties
associated with day to day activities of the park. The maximum stay of any
guest or camping equipment shall be 14 consecutive calendar days. All camp
sites shall be kept in a clean, uncluttered condition at all times. A period of
not less than five days shall lapse before the guest RV, recreational camper
trailer or tent can return to the recreational park. It shall be the
responsibility of the park owner or host to keep records of such activity and
present them to the Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector or law enforcement
officer on demand.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.8 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   a.   Size. The maximum size of any recreational park may be determined by
the Board of Adjustment on a case by case basis.
   b.   Density. Density of the recreational park shall not exceed that which
can be accommodated by the site. A minimum of 8% of the gross site area shall
be set aside and/or developed as common use areas for open or enclosed
recreational facilities. (Common areas do not include campsites, roads,
buildings and permanent structures.)
   c.   Layout. The general layout and requirements shall be in accordance with
the following.
      1.   Setbacks shall observe the applicable zoning district requirements
pertaining to setbacks from property lines and public roads. Additional
setbacks and fencing may be required where a landscaped buffer is to protect
public safety, neighboring property or aesthetics.
      2.   Areas designated as camp sites shall be separated from adjoining
camp sites or interior park streets by a minimum of ten feet.
      3.   Each camp site shall be provided with a camp fire containment
system, charcoal or wood burning grill, a metal or wood type lantern hook pole
and a durable picnic table with seating for a minimum of six persons.
      4.   Each camp site shall be large enough to accommodate the RV or
recreational camper trailer with its awning extended and to provide at least 16
linear feet open area to the adjacent camp site.
   d.   Road systems. The road system shall be designed to meet the
requirements of the traveling public to include the following.
      1.   Recreational parks shall have access to an improved public road.
      2.   All park roads, access driveways, parking spaces and camp sites
shall have an adequate base, grading and surface to facilitate drainage and to
reduce dust. Cinder, gravel or a comparable non-dust contributing material
shall be used to provide an all weather surface.
      3.   One way interior roads shall not be less than 12 feet wide. Two way
interior roads shall not be less than 22 feet wide.
      4.   Turns shall be adequately designed for recreational traffic.
      5.   RV sites shall be designed to allow easy parking and access of RVs.
   e.   Parking. Parking spaces are necessary and required in addition to camp
sites. The following shall apply.
      1.   Off-road parking spaces shall be a minimum ten feet by 20 feet in
size.
      2.   Each camp site shall have a minimum of one off-road parking space.
      3.   The recreational park and its associated office shall have a minimum
of the following additional off-road parking area:
         (a)   Eight hundred square feet for registration; and
         (b)   One space per employee.
   f.   Sewer disposal and water supply. All full service recreational parks
shall discharge sewer into a sewer system and have a public water system both
approved by the town and/or the County Environmental Health Department as
appropriate.
      1.   Each recreational park which has 25 or more RV sites shall have
adequate and conveniently located sewer dumping stations designed and developed
to standards established by the town or County Environmental Health Department
as appropriate.
      2.   For recreational parks catering to tent camping and/or dependent
RVs, utility buildings providing separate toilets and showers for each sex
shall be provided at convenient intervals throughout the park. The use of
anything other than conventional toilet facilities, such as privies, shall be
approved by the Board and the County Environmental Health Department. Where RV
sites are not provided with individual sewer connections, utility (bath houses)
shall be provided within 800 feet of those spaces.
      3.   Bath house facilities shall be provided in accordance with the North
Carolina Building Code as amended. In the absence of a minimum facility
requirement in the Code, the minimum number of facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following chart:
 
Number of Sites Toilets
                Men Women
1—30          2   2
31—45         2   3
 
 
Number of Sites Toilets
                Men Women
46—60         2   4
61—80         3   5
81—100        3   6
 
 
Number of Sites Urinals Sinks
                        Men Women
1—45          1       3   3
46—60         2       3   3
61—80         2       4   4
81—100        3       4   4
 
 
Number of Sites Shower
                Men Women
1—30          2   2
31—45         3   3
46—60         4   4
61—80         6   6
81—100        7   7
 
      4.   Bath houses may be disbursed throughout the park in order to satisfy
the 800-feet distance from camp sites and the total numbers of facilities
within the house may be divided among the houses so long as the ratios of
persons to facilities are maintained. However, each bath house must have at
least one male and one female accessible facility separated from each other.
      5.   The bath houses shall be constructed as an emergency shelter for
severe weather such as thunderstorms and tornadoes. They can be constructed out
of heavy timber or re-enforced masonry. The total net open floor area for
persons to congregate shall be a minimum of 500 square feet. The Town Building
Inspector may require the bath house to be designed by an architect or engineer
when he or she is unable to ascertain that the proposed building design meets
these standards. When such a facility is constructed, a clear and legible sign
shall be posted in a conspicuous place to advise the camping public of the
place of refuge.
      6.   Handicap facilities will be designed and provided in accordance with
North Carolina Building Code.
      7.   Areas of the park catering only to independent self-contained units
shall provide for each sex, at least one toilet, hand washing sink and shower.
      8.   Water service risers shall be protected from freezing and shall not
be located in such a manner as to be contaminated by sewage. Sewer risers shall
be capped when not in use and be so constructed so as to prevent entrance of
storm water.
   g.   Solid waste. The storage, collection and disposal of solid waste in the
recreational park shall be the responsibility of the park owner and conform
with the minimum standards set forth by the Town of Newport and the County
Environmental Health Department. Approved solid waste containers shall be
located not more than 200 feet from any camp site.
   h.   Electrical and other hookups. Electrical hookups may be provided to
each camp site. Other services, such as TV cable, may be permitted and
installed in accordance with the Building Code.
   i.   Miscellaneous general. The entire recreational park shall be designed
and laid out as a planned unit to ensure continuity. These standards are not
intended to be all inclusive, but are minimum requirements. Alternate designs
are encouraged to meet the intent of well organized recreational parks.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-5.9 RULES.
   a.   No domestic animals or pets shall be allowed to run at large.
   b.   The owner or a responsible host or co-host shall be in charge at all
times. The owner or host’s phone number and any other emergency phone numbers
shall be posted.
   c.   In any park containing 50 or more camp sites, a host or co-host shall
be available on-site at all times that the park is occupied and shall have the
authority to mitigate emergency situations. For parks of less than 50 camp
sites that do not have an on-site full-time host, there shall be installed a
working emergency phone that will dial 911. The phone shall be installed in an
easily accessible area.
   d.   There shall be a 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. noise curfew within the park.
The noise curfew is intended to deter and allow the host to mitigate loud
music, parties, noisy generators and the like.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6 TALL STRUCTURES; GENERAL.
   TALL STRUCTURES are defined as but not limited to: steeples; towers; smoke
chimneys; wind activated devices; wind energy facilities; high rise buildings,
etc., that exceed 70 feet above grade.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1 WIND ENERGY FACILITIES (SPECIAL USE).
   a.   No person shall undertake construction, operation or expansion
activities associated with a wind energy facility, hereafter referred to as
(WEF), without first obtaining a special use permit from the town.
   b.   Before applying to the town for a permit pertaining to a WEF, the
applicant shall submit an application and obtain a permit in accordance with
G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 21C, as amended. The requirements herein are in addition to
G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 21C.
   c.   The applicant to the town shall include a copy of all permit
application information, reports and studies, required in § 9-6.1b. above as a
part of the WEF application to the Town of Newport.
   Note
      A small system WEF (not to exceed 70 feet in height) is considered to be
an accessory use and is not regulated under this section. Small systems may be
subject to other sections of this ordinance. A small system is one further
described as one where the name plate electrical rating does not exceed 25
kilowatts (kW) per turbine. Only one such unit shall be installed on a parcel
of land associated with a house, or other establishment that does not have its
primary purpose the production of electricity for, or selling electricity back
to, the public grid in order to be to be considered an accessory use, small
system.
   d.   Location of WEF.
      1.   All WEFs covered under this part shall be allowed only within a land
use zone permitting the facility listed in Article VII of this ordinance.
      2.   A tall structure temporarily erected solely for the purpose of
scientific data collection at the proposed site will not require approval of a
WEF application. A building permit shall be require for such structure. Each
temporary structure shall comply with the dimensional requirements of this
article and any other applicable ordinances, and if it exceeds 200 feet above
grade, shall comply with FAA height requirements. A copy of the FAA
determination report as a result of filing FAA Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed
Construction or Alteration of an object that may affect a navigable airspace
shall be submitted with a building permit application for the structure. The
temporary structure may not display any advertising signs, may not be
illuminated except as required by the FAA or Department of Defense, and must be
removed no later than two years of the date of its certificate of completion.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2435.jpg]
   Example: Utility-Scale Wind Energy Facility (WEF)
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1a APPLICATION AND ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS.
   a.    Pre-application requirements.
      1.   Before a WEF building permit may be submitted, the applicant must
first consult with the Planning Department and review all requirements of the
project for consistency with this ordinance.
      2.   The applicant shall first submit a “sketch plan” to illustrate and
discuss the proposed WEF.
      3.   The Planning Department may, with authority of Town Manager, seek
expert consultation and assistance with reviewing the permit application.
   b.   Formal application. The applicant, owner and all successors shall be
responsible for full compliance with the provisions contained within the
special use permit issued herein.
      1.   Any application submitted hereunder shall contain appropriate
confirmation of compliance with all federal, state and local statutes, rules
and ordinances, and shall contain all other permits required to be issued by
any other governmental body having jurisdiction thereof. Any application
submitted hereunder shall be forwarded to the Commanding Officer, Marine Corps
Air Station Cherry Point, in order to provide for review and comment concerning
any possible impacts on the operations and mission of Marine Corps Air Station
Cherry Point, and no application submitted shall be deemed complete until such
time as said review is completed and such written comments are received.
      2.   Should there be a conflict with other regulations or requirements as
amended from time to time, the stricter regulation will apply.
   c.   Application and administrative fees.
      When the Planning Department determines that the requirements herein are
satisfied, The applicant may submit the formal application along with all
financial requirements and fees.
      The Planning Director or designee shall submit the required documents to
the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Adjustment so that meetings can be
scheduled for their review and consideration.
      1.   The applicant shall pay for any and all cost associated with the
evaluation of the plans for the proposed facility. See paragraph d. below.
      2.   Special use permit, plans review fee. $1,000 (non-refundable).
      3.   Building permits fees for construction of any and all buildings,
structures including the WEF. $3 per $1,000 construction cost.
   d.   Escrow account.
      1.   The applicant shall establish an escrow account under the following
procedures.
      2.   This escrow account will be setup by the applicant. This escrow
account will be at a financial institution approved by the town, solely in the
name of the town, to be managed by the Town Treasurer. The applicant will make
an initial deposit of $50,000. Failure to provide notice and proof of deposit
to the town escrow account shall cause the application to be deemed
insufficient.
      3.   Any interest accruing to the escrow account shall stay with the
account and be considered new principle.
      4.   If the WEF application is denied, all escrow account funds will be
returned to the applicant, less related expenses incurred by the town. The
money will be returned, along with a statement as to these costs, within 30
days of the application being formally denied.
      5.   This escrow account will be maintained during the life of the WEF by
the applicant/owner/operator. The applicant/owner/operator will replenish any
escrow funds used by the town within 14 days of being sent written notification
(and explanation) of said withdrawals. Failure to maintain the escrow account
at $50,000, shall be cause for revocation (or denial of renewal) of the WEF
conditional use permit.
      6.   The applicant shall reimburse the town for all incurred oversight
costs related to the WEF. These expenses include, but are not limited to,
amounts required for building permits and through overseeing decommissioning
including, but limited to, e.g. administration, engineering, expert health and
wildlife impact evaluations, handling complaints, etc. This reimbursement will
be from the escrow account.
      7.   If the WEF facility is decommissioned to the satisfaction of the
town, all escrow funds will be returned to the applicant/owner/operator, less
related expenses incurred by the town. The money will be returned, along with a
statement as to these costs, within 30 days of the decommissioning process
being completed.
   e.   The Planning Director or designee shall review the application with the
applicant for requirements and information required in this ordinance. The
review and special use permit process shall proceed as provided in Article I, §
1-14 of this article once the application is found to be complete.
   f.   Zoning Board of Adjustment actions.
      1.   After receipt of the permit application shall set a date and time
for a public hearing as set forth in Article I of this ordinance;
      2.   At the conclusion of the public hearing on the matter, the Board of
Adjustment may:
         a.   Defer deliberation or consideration of the matter until another
meeting to seek further guidance, legal counsel, etc.; or
         b.   Deliberate and/or consider the matter at that meeting.
      3.   The Board shall review the application with the applicant regards to
compliance with zoning regulations, compatibility with the neighborhood, the
health, safety, economic aspect and environmental impact on nearby areas. The
Board after making finding(s) of fact may:
         (a)   Deny the application;
         (b)   Approve the application; or
         (c)   Approve the application with modifications and/or make any other
determination that would be in the best interest of the town.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1b MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Wind energy facility setback. WEF shall be setback from non-
participating property lines, federal highway, state highway and/or public road
for at least 5,000 feet and have a maximum height above highest adjacent grade
of 275 feet.
   Note
      1.   Setback shall be measured from its outermost extension (whether
blade tip, nacelle/turbine housing, or tower/pole edge) that is nearest the
subject property line adjacent to private property, public or private right-of-
way. There is a setback of 1,000 feet from the Croatan National Forest, so as
to minimize the adverse effect of catastrophic failure from debris and fire
hazard to the forest.
      2.   No portion of any wind turbine blade shall be closer than 25 feet
from any part of the ground that surrounds any WEF.
   b.   North Carolina Building Code requirements. All structures within and
associated with the WEF shall be designed and constructed to comply with the
North Carolina Building Code(s) to include certification of compliance by a
registered professional engineer that the facility is designed and will be
installed to meet the minimum wind design of 130 mph.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1c LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES.
   Note
   Environmental issues associated with shadow flicker, blade glint,
catastrophic tower, turbine or blade failure or fire are perceived not to be a
significant concern so long as the setback requirements required herein are
adhered to.
   a.   Noise. No WEF or its generators, equipment or apparatus shall produce
noise above 35 decibels (dba) for more than five times within seven consecutive
days as measured at any property line of non-participating landowners, the
applicant and/or owner shall shut down the WEF within one business day of being
informed to do so by the Town Planning Director or designee. The facility shall
remain shut down until it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Planning Director or designee that the facility can be operated so as to not
exceed 35 decibels (dba) as measured at any non- participating property line.
   b.   Decommissioning or abandonment. Separate and apart from the escrow
account requirement herein, the owner/operator or his, her or its successors
shall provide surety for the guarantee of decommissioning, removal of the
facilities and restoring the property back to an acceptable condition after
removal:
      1.   Should the owner/operator decide to decommission any turbine, he,
she or it shall send written notification to the town, within 30 days of making
such a decision;
      2.   If any turbine does not produce electricity for 180 consecutive
days, said turbine is automatically considered to be decommissioned. It is the
responsibility of the owner/operator to inform the town when such a situation
arises. The owner/operator may appeal that determination to the Board of
Adjustment;
      3.   Absent any waver by the Board of Adjustment, the decommissioning
process will start for any decommissioned turbine, within 120 days of it being
decommissioned; and
      4.   Any violation of the decommissioning procedure for any individual
turbine will result in the loss of the special use permit for the WEF, until
the Board of Adjustment determines that the owner/operator is in compliance.
   c.   Surety for decommissioning of WEFs.
      1.   The applicant shall place with the town an acceptable letter-of-
credit, bond or other form of security that is sufficient to cover the cost of
removal and restoration at the end of the WEF’s useful life.
      2.   Such surety shall be at least $500,000 for each wind turbine and
$75,000 for each associated building.
      3.   The surety shall be used by the town to assure faithful performance
of the terms and conditions of the permit, as well as to serve as a surety to
prevent the taxpayers from bearing the cost of removal and restoration in the
event of the abandonment or cessation of use.
      4.   The full amount of surety shall remain in full force and effect
until any and all necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site
to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the WEF, as determined
by the Town Planning Department.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1d LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The holder of a permit for a large or utility WEF shall secure and maintain
for the duration of the permit, public liability insurance, as follows.
      1.   Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and
property damage with $1,000,000 per occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate, which
shall specifically include the town and its officers, Councils, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional named
insureds. The developer shall indemnify the town against any claims made
against it arising from the operation, maintenance and/or decommissioning of
the WEF.
      2.   The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best’s
rating of “A”.
         a.   The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating
the insurance company to furnish the town with at least 30 days’ prior written
notice in advance of a cancellation.
         b.   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be
delivered to the town at least 15 days before the expiration of insurance that
such policies are to renew or replace.
         c.   No more than 15 days after the grant of the permit and before
construction is initiated, the permit holder shall deliver to the town a copy
of each of the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the
required amounts.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1e REAL PROPERTY VALUE PROTECTION REQUIREMENT.
   a.   The WEF owner (applicant) or his, her or its successor shall assure the
Town of Newport that there will be no loss in real property value due to the
WEF.
   b.   To legally support this claim, the applicant shall hereby consent to
this real property value protection agreement (“agreement”). This agreement
provides assurance to nonparticipating real property owners near the WEF (not
lessors to the applicant), that they have some protections from real property
values losses due to the WEF.
   c.   The applicant guarantees that the property values of all real property
partially or fully within two miles of the WEF, will not be adversely affected
by the WEF. The two miles shall be within the town zoning and planning
jurisdiction. Any real property owner(s) included in that area who believe that
their property may have been devalued due to the WEF, may elect to exercise the
following option.
   d.   All appraiser costs are paid by the applicant from the escrow account.
The applicant and the property owner shall each select a licensed appraiser.
Each appraiser shall provide a detailed written explanation of the reduction in
value to the real property (“diminution value”), if any, caused by the
proximity to the WEF. This shall be determined by calculating the difference
between the current fair market value of the real property (assuming no WEF was
proposed or constructed), and the fair market value at the time of exercising
this option.
      1.   If the higher of the diminution valuations submitted is equal to or
less than 25% more than the other, the two values shall be averaged (“average
diminution value”: ADV).
      2.   If one of the diminution valuations submitted is more than 25%
higher than the other, then the two appraisers will select a third licensed
appraiser who shall present to the applicant and property owner a written
appraisal report as to the diminution value for the real property. The parties
agree that the resulting average of the two highest diminution valuations shall
constitute the ADV.
      3.   In either case, the property owner may elect to receive payment from
the WEF owner of the ADV. The applicant is required to make this payment within
60 days of receiving said written election from property owner, to have such
payment made.
   e.   Other agreement conditions.
      1.   If a property owner wants to exercise this option, he, she or it
must do so within ten years of the WEF receiving final approval from the town.
      2.   A property owner may elect to exercise this option only once.
      3.   The applicant and the property owner may accept mutually agreeable
modifications of this agreement, however, the applicant is not allowed to put
other conditions on a financial settlement (e.g., confidentiality). If the
property owner accepts some payment for property value loss, based on an
alternative method, then that is considered an exercise of this option.
      4.   This agreement applies to the property owner of record as of the
first notification of intent to apply for a WEF permit by the applicant to
DENR, as required by HB-484, is not transferable to subsequent property owners.
      5.   The property owner of record as of the first notification of intent
to apply for a WEF permit by the applicant to DENR, as required by HB-484, must
reasonably maintain the property from that time, until he, she or it chooses to
elect this option.
      6.   The property owner must permit access to the property by the
appraisers, as needed to perform the appraisals.
      7.   The property owner must inform the appraisers of all known defects
of the property as may be required by law, as well as all consequential
modifications or changes to the property subsequent to the first notification
of intent to apply for a WEF permit by the applicant to DENR, as required by
HB-484.
      8.   This agreement will be guaranteed by the applicant (and all its
successors and assigns), for ten years following the WEF receiving final
approval from the town, by providing a bond (or other surety), in an amount
determined to be acceptable by the town.
      9.   Payment by the applicant (per § 9-6.1(e)d.3.) not made within 60
days will accrue an interest penalty. This will be 12% annually, from the date
of the written election from the property owner.
      10.   For any litigation regarding this matter, all reasonable legal fees
and court costs will be paid by the applicant.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1f SECURITY AND SAFETY OF WEFs.
   a.   All WEFs shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured so as to prevent
unauthorized access.
   b.   WEF shall be installed in such a manner that it is readily accessible
only to persons authorized to operate or service it.
   c.   The WEF shall be made accessible to the Newport Fire and Rescue Squad
by providing an entry key box or other suitable emergency entry system on a 24/
7 basis. The emergency entry system shall be approved by the Newport Fire
Official.
   d.   Whenever construction or maintenance is being conducted at the WEF, the
owner/operator shall assure that properly trained and equipped personnel are on
site to perform rescue and emergency aid to anyone working within the facility.
   e.   In order for the Newport Fire and Rescue Squad to provide emergency aid
for rescue and/or fire to the WEF, the owner/operator shall offer semi-annual
training to the Fire and Rescue Squad at no cost to the town. If any special
equipment is needed for the Fire and Rescue Squad to provide reasonable service
to the WEF, the owner/operator of the WEF shall provide such equipment and
training for its use at no cost to the town. The Newport Fire Chief may elect
to coordinate with the Carteret County Emergency Manager to have other fire and
rescue units join in with the training.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-6.1g RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY TO INSPECT WEFs.
   In order to verify that the holder of a permit for a WEF and any and all
subsequent owners or operators, have placed and constructed such facility in
accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, Building and Zoning
Codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the
town may inspect all facets of said permit holder, owners, operators
construction, modification, and maintenance of such facilities, including all
other owner’s, operator’s structures and facilities constructed or located on
the site.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (WTS) DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Wireless telecommunication services development shall be subject to the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.1 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT REVIEW/APPROVAL.
   Except as otherwise provided for as permitted uses in other sections of this
ordinance, WTS development shall be subject to Board of Adjustment review/
approval. Site plans shall be submitted in accordance with Board of Adjustment
rules.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARD.
   a.   As a general rule, there is no height limit for towers unless the
construction falls within the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 14 C.F.R.
Part 77 obstructions to navigation rules which is briefly stated herein.
   b.   The following circumstances shall be filed with the FAA, Form 7460-1,
Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration at least 45 days prior to the
proposed construction or alteration and prior to filing for a building permit
or special use permit with the town. The applicant should refer to the full FAA
14 C.F.R. Part 77 for any other requirements prior to the application
submittal:
      1.   Any proposed construction or alteration that is more than 200 feet
AGL at its site:
      2.   Any construction or alteration that exceeds an imaginary surface
extending outward and upward at any of the following slopes:
         (a)   One hundred to one for a horizontal distance of 20,000 feet from
the nearest point of the nearest runway of each airport in paragraph b. of this
section with its longest runway more than 3,200 feet in actual length,
excluding heliports;
         (b)   Fifty to one for a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the
nearest point of the nearest runway of each airport described in paragraph b.
of this section with its longest runway no more than 3,200 feet in actual
length, excluding heliports; and
         (c)   Twenty-five to one for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from
the nearest point of the nearest landing and takeoff area of each heliport
described in paragraph b. of this section:
            a.   Any highway, railroad or other traverse way for mobile
objects, of a height which, if adjusted upward 17 feet from an interstate
highway that is part of the National System of Military and Interstate Highways
where over crossings are designed for a minimum of 17 feet vehicle distance, 15
feet from any other public roadway, ten feet or the height of the highest
mobile object that would normally transverse the road, whichever is greater,
for a private road 23 feet from a railroad, and for a waterway or other
traverse way not previously mentioned, any amount equal to the height of the
highest mobile object that would normally traverse it, would exceed a standard
of paragraph 1. or 2. of this section; and
            b.   Any construction or alteration on any of the following
airports or heliports:
               (1)   A public use airport listed in the airport/facility
directory;
               (2)   A military airport under construction, or an airport under
construction that will be available for public use;
               (3)   An airport operated by a federal agency or the DOD; and
               (4)   An airport or heliport with at least one FAA-approved
instrument approach procedure.
   c.   You do not need to file notice for construction or alteration of:
      (1)   Any object that will be shielded by existing structures of a
permanent and substantial nature or by natural terrain or topographic features
of equal or greater height, and will be located in congested area of a city,
town or settlement where the shielded structure will not adversely affect
safety in air navigation;
      (2)   Any air navigation facility, airport visual approach or landing
aid, aircraft arresting device or meteorological device meeting FAA-approved
siting criteria or an appropriate military service siting criteria on military
airports, the location and height of which are fixed by its functional purpose;
      (3)   Any construction or alteration for which is required by any other
FAA regulation; and
      (4)   Any antenna structure of 20 feet or less in height, except one that
would increase the height of another antenna structure.
   d.   The Inspections Department, or Board of Adjustment as appropriate,
after reviewing comments from the FAA and the officials of any affected
airport, may review and act on the application for the building permit.
   e.   If any adverse comments are received from a federal, state or local
agency, the permit application shall be denied or modified as appropriate to
the extent necessary of mitigating the adverse condition.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.2.1 SETBACKS.
   All new developed pursuant to §
9-7.2 shall observe the following setbacks.
   a.   All WTS towers shall meet the minimum principal building setback for
the district in which located.
   b.   All accessory equipment structures shall meet the accessory building
and structures setback requirements of the district in which located.
   c.   Where the WTS development adjoins a residential district, the tower and
other structures shall honor the setback requirement of the adjacent
residential district.
   d.   For towers that have design collapse points, setbacks shall be required
for the collapse zone of the structure.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.2.2 FENCING.
   WTS development may be required to have an eight foot fence capable of
preventing unauthorized entry.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.2.3 BUFFER AND SCREENING.
   WTS development shall comply with the buffer and screening requirement of
Article XII.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.2.4 LIGHTS.
   No wireless telecommunication tower or antenna shall have affixed or
attached to it in any way except during time of repair or installation, any
lights, reflectors, flashers, day-time strobes or steady night time light or
other illumination devices, except as required by the Federal Aviation
Administration and/or the Federal Communications Commission. This restriction
against lights shall not apply to towers which have been combined with light
standards for illumination of ball fields, parking lots, playgrounds or other
similar uses.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.2.5 SIGNS, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
   The use of any portion of a tower for signs or advertising, other than
required signs, shall be prohibited. Billboards and off-premise business signs,
including digital billboards, are not permitted within the jurisdiction of the
town.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014; Ord. 2023-02, passed 6-8-2023)
§ 9-7.2.6 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR DAMAGED TOWERS.
   a.   Any WTS tower and/or antenna including those existing on the effective
date of this ordinance that is not used for one year shall be deemed abandoned
and the property owner shall remove the tower and/or antennas. If the property
owner fails to remove the tower, system and/or antenna after the time
prescribed, it may be removed by the town in accordance with the North Carolina
General Statutes dealing with abandoned structures. The costs of such removal
shall be collected as prescribed by the state statutes dealing with abandoned
structures. Damaged towers or towers otherwise deemed by the Building Inspector
to be dangerous or hazardous to persons or property shall be immediately
repaired or removed.
   b.   The Board of Adjustment may extend the time for removal where the owner
can show cause not to declare the structure abandoned, such as, if the owner is
actively seeking additional customers or systems to be installed at the site.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-7.3 EXCEPTIONS TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT REVIEW/APPROVAL.
   The following WTS development shall not require Board of Adjustment
consideration. Development standards as depicted in §
9-7.2 shall apply where appropriate. Review/approval shall be subject to the
administrative review and approval by the Zoning Administrator and staff:
   a.   WTS antenna co-located on an existing WTS tower;
   b.   WTS antenna located on an existing utility pole, transmission tower,
water tank, utility power poles or similar utility structure whether or not
they serve a different purpose within all zoning districts;
   c.   WTS antenna, towers and/or facilities located in an RO, CD, CH, LI or
IW Zoning District; and
   d.   G.S. § 160A-383.3 requires reasonable accommodation of amateur radio
antenna. The following wireless communication activities are exempt from zoning
approval: amateur radio; citizens band (CB); Mars radio; Civil Air Patrol
towers and antennas except those that fall under the requirements of §
9-7.2 Development Standards.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-8 OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   These provisions shall apply to long-term or permanent facilities.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-8.1 MINIATURE GOLF COURSE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   a.   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for safe and
orderly development of miniature golf courses in the town.
   b.   Driveways. The location and design of driveways shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Department to assure their safety.
   c.   Setbacks. All waiting and play areas shall be setback a minimum
distance of 40 feet from the principal street.
   d.   Lighting. No lighting shall be permitted to shine on any adjacent
property or street. A lighting plan prepared by an engineer or electrical
utility company shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review and
approval.
   e.   Loudspeakers. If located within 100 feet of a residential zone, must be
off after 10:00 p.m.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-8.2 AMUSEMENT PARK RIDES AND THEME PARKS.
   Amusement parks and rides not limited to the following: go cart and similar
small scale vehicles and racing; and water slides.
   a.   Town staff review and recommendations will be considered by the Board
of Adjustment in its determination and approval or disapproval of the project.
   b.   In granting a special use permit, the Board of Adjustment may impose
such reasonable and additional stipulations, conditions or safeguards and may
consider items in §
9-8.1 as, in its judgment, will enhance the siting of the proposed project.
   c.   The special use will comply with all other applicable development
standards found elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance.
   d.   The special use will be in substantial harmony with the area in which
it is to be located.
   e.   The special use will not be injurious to adjoining property.
   f.   The special use will contribute to the economic vitality and promote
the general welfare of the community.
   g.   The special use will not discourage or negate the use of surrounding
property for use(s) permitted by right.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-8.3 LARGE SCALE RECREATIONAL FACILITIES.
   Large scale recreation facilities may consist of, but are not limited to,
theme parks, vehicle race tracks, arenas, stadiums and facilities for car or
boat shows and the like. These facilities may be indoors or out of doors.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-9 SOLAR FARM FACILITIES (SPECIAL USE).
   a.   Also known as photovoltaic (PV) panels or solar collectors, hereafter
referred to as “SFF”, are permitted as a special use permit for systems that
generate more than 15 kilowatts of direct current (DC) electrical energy for
the primary purpose of supplying the utility grid.
   Note
      1.   Refer to Article VIII of this ordinance for systems that generate
less than 15 kilowatts of electrical energy or is not for the primary purpose
of supplying the utility power grid.
      2.   SFFs or the like that produce hot water, electricity or other energy
for no more than one single- or two-family residential dwellings, business use
if considered accessory uses, are not regulated under this section.
   b.   The Board of Adjustment, when considering special use permitting shall
act favorably only requests for systems allowed as special uses within zoning
districts permitting such systems in Article VII of this ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2437.jpg]
   Example: Solar Farm Facility (SFF)
   c.   The applicant, owner and successors shall be responsible for full
compliance with the provisions of this section and any other permit
requirements contained within the special use permit issued herein.
   d.   Application requirements and administrative fees.
      1.   The applicant shall review the project requirements with the Newport
Planning and Inspections Department for compliance with the requirements of
this ordinance;
      2.   The written application shall at a minimum contain all information
required by this ordinance, along with:
         i.   Name and address of owner;
         ii.   Site plan to scale, showing the planned locations of all
structures, fencing, gates, vegetative buffering, security lighting and any
other detail required; and
         iii.   Payment of the application fee.
      3.   The applicant shall pay for any and all cost associated with the
evaluation of the plans for the proposed facility;
      4.   Special use permit, plans review fee: $500 (non-refundable); and
      5.   Building permits fees for construction of any and all buildings,
structures including the SFF is $3 per $1,000 construction cost.
   e.   Escrow account.
      1.   The applicant shall establish an escrow account under the following
procedures.
      2.   This escrow account will be setup by the applicant at the time of
the SFF permit application. This escrow account will be at a financial
institution approved by the town, solely in the name of the town, to be managed
by the Town Treasurer. The applicant will make an initial deposit of $10,000.
Failure to provide notice and proof of deposit to the town escrow account shall
cause the application to be deemed insufficient.
      3.   Any interest accruing to the escrow account shall stay with the
account and be considered new principle.
      4.   If the SFF application is denied, all escrow account funds will be
returned to the applicant, less related expenses incurred by the town. The
money will be returned, along with a statement as to these costs, within 30
days of the application being formally denied.
      5.   This escrow account will be maintained during the life of the SFF by
the applicant/owner/operator. The applicant/owner/operator will replenish any
escrow funds used by the town within 14 days of being sent written notification
(and explanation) of said withdrawals. Failure to maintain the escrow account
at $10,000, shall be cause for revocation (or denial of renewal) of the SFF
special use permit.
      6.   The applicant shall reimburse the town for all town-incurred costs
related to the SFF. These expenses include, but are not limited to, amounts
required for administrative, engineering, expert consulting, handling
complaints, building permits and overseeing decommissioning. This reimbursement
will be from the escrow account.
      7.   If the SFF facility is decommissioned to the satisfaction of the
town, all escrow funds will be returned to the applicant/owner/operator, less
related expenses incurred by the town. The money will be returned, along with a
statement as to these costs, within 30 days of the decommissioning process
being completed.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-9.1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The following development standards are considered minimum requirements to
be considered for approval. The Board may impose further requirements deemed to
be appropriate for the neighborhood or area to be served.
   a.   All SFF sites shall be fenced around the exterior of the solar farm
with an opaque or semi- opaque fence of earth tone colors which shall be at
least six feet in height and shall additionally have at least three strands of
barbed wire run above such six feet.
   b.   All fences shall be constructed so as to substantially lessen the
likelihood of entry into a solar farm by unauthorized individuals.
   c.   The fencing and barbed wire required herein shall be maintained in good
condition. Failure to maintain the fencing and barbed wire required hereunder
shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
   d.   The fencing and barbed wire requirements herein shall continue
notwithstanding the fact that a SFF is no longer operational and/or falls into
disuse unless and until the SFF is dismantled and removed from the parcel or
parcels of land upon which it was constructed.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-9.2 GATES, LOCKS AND OTHER SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   All gates to fences shall be at least six feet high and shall have at
least three strands of barbed wire run along the top and be provided with locks
which shall remain locked at all times when the SFF is not occupied or
monitored by the owner or operator.
   b.   Facilities shall be installed in such a manner that they are readily
accessible only to persons authorized to operate or service them.
   c.   The facilities shall be made accessible to the Newport Fire and Rescue
Squad by providing an entry key box or other suitable emergency entry system on
a 24/7 basis. The emergency entry system shall be approved by the Newport Fire
Official.
   d.   Whenever construction or maintenance is being conducted at the SFF, the
owner/operator shall assure that properly trained and equipped personnel are on
site to perform rescue and emergency aid to anyone working within the facility.
   e.   In order for the Newport Fire and Rescue Squad to provide emergency aid
for rescue and/or fire to the SFF, the owner/operator shall offer semi-annual
training to the Fire and Rescue Squad at no cost to the town. If any special
equipment is needed for the Fire and Rescue Squad to provide reasonable service
to the SFF, the owner/operator of the SFF shall provide such equipment and
training for its use at no cost to the town. The Newport Fire Chief may elect
to coordinate with the Carteret County Emergency Manager to have other fire and
rescue units join in with the training.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-9.3 SETBACK.
   Every SFF shall be setback at least 50 feet from all nonparticipating
property lines and the high water mark of navigable stream.
   a.   Setbacks shall be measured from the interior of the fencing and gates
which surround the perimeter of the equipment and structures.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
§ 9-9.4 EVERGREEN VEGETATIVE BUFFER.
   A continuous evergreen vegetative buffer shall be present and maintained at
all times along the outside of the perimeter of the fencing. The fence shall be
located along the area adjacent to any residential developed property or
property that is or can be developed as residential, along any road between the
SFF and residential property or any other non-compatible property as determined
by the Board.
   a.   The buffering and design and operation of the solar equipment shall be
installed and operated in such a manner as not to cause “solar reflections”
and/or other nuisances to adjacent or nearby non-participating property.
   b.   The vegetative buffer “shrubbery” when planted shall be at a minimum of
four feet in height and 32 inches wide across the bottom and planted no more
than six feet apart on center. The plants shall be of a species that will be
expected to mature to a minimum of six feet in height within 36 months of
planting. Each plant shall be of the evergreen species. There shall be
established at least one “over story” tree every 33 feet along the buffer line.
Natural forest or vegetation may be used to satisfy this requirement. The
entire vegetative buffer shall be maintained at a minimum of 75% opacity.
   c.   The vegetative buffer requirements shall comply with Article XII of
this ordinance as modified herein. The buffer shall continue notwithstanding
the fact that the SFF is no longer operational and/or falls into disuse unless
and until such SFF is dismantled and removed.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2013-02, passed 11-14-2013; Ord. Z2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014)
ARTICLE X: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
§ 10-1 PURPOSE.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 10-2 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES PERMITTED.
   Temporary structures shall be permitted, including, but not limited to, the
following.
   a.   On construction sites.
      1.   Temporary structures and storage areas are permitted on construction
sites for the duration of the construction activity.
      2.   Should construction stop or become abandoned for a period of 90
days, then all temporary structures and storage areas are to be removed from
the site.
   b.   Temporary storage.
      1.   Temporary portable storage containers may be located on residential
or commercial property in connection with moving or relocation of personal
property.
      2.   The placement of such storage container shall not exceed 90 days.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 10-2.1 THE USE OF OPEN LAND FOR MEETING OR RECREATION.
   a.   Circus or carnival, rodeo, horse show, car and boat show, church tent
revival, sand lot ball fields and the like, or the sale of Christmas trees,
baked goods or collected clothing and the like, temporary structures may be
erected such as tents, portable bleachers, rest room facilities and concession
stands; and
   b.   Zoning permits for temporary uses may be reviewed and issued annually,
the Zoning Administrator may determine that a temporary use should be
considered by the Board of Adjustment for renewal as a permanent use.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 10-2.2 EMERGENCY RELIEF FROM THE TERMS OF THIS ORDINANCE.
   a.   In case of fire, flood, hurricane, tornado and the like, and where the
Mayor has declared an emergency or disaster, certain provisions of this
ordinance may be temporarily suspended for the duration of the emergency. Such
temporary relief may be to allow a manufactured home or other recreational
dwelling to be placed and occupied on a residential lot, not otherwise
permitted, for a reasonable time to allow the damaged dwelling to be repaired.
A copy of the emergency declaration shall accompany the temporary use permit
issued by the Zoning Administrator.
   b.   A temporary permit may be approved by the Zoning Administrator for the
installation and occupancy of a manufactured home or recreation vehicle on a
lot zoned R-10, R-15, R-20, or R-20A, where a dwelling has been damaged by
fire, flood or the like, for up to 12 months, to allow the repair or
reconstruction of the damaged dwelling. A recreation vehicle may be occupied in
any zone for only the above purpose. The permit may be extended up to six
months if construction on the property is not complete within the original 12-
month period.
   c.   Permit fees will be suspended for emergency repairs and temporary
dwellings. Where substantial damage or replacement of the dwelling, building(s)
or structures, or new construction is required, full permit fees as normal
construction will be paid. Where extreme financial hardship may arise as a
result of the emergency damage, the Council may suspend or reduce all fees as
it deems appropriate on an individual basis. This temporary relief does not
grant relief from the repair, replacement and new construction to comply with
all other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or the North Carolina Building
Code.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2019-01, passed 6-13-2019)
ARTICLE XI: GENERAL AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 11-1 WALLS AND FENCES.
   a.   The setback requirements of these regulations shall not prohibit any
necessary retaining wall or prohibit any planted buffer strip, fence or wall.
However, no fence or wall shall exceed a height of four feet in any front or
side yard forward of the front building line.
   b.   Fences and planted buffer strips may encroach inside utility and
drainage easements provided that any encroachment will not damage or impede the
use of the easement for utilities, drainage or other intended use of the
easement. Should at any time the utilities, drainage or other appropriate use
of the easement requires maintenance, construction or access, the encroachment
shall be immediately removed by the owner or agent at the expense of the owner
or agent. Should the encroachment not be immediately removed, then the town,
utility or any other one entitled to the use of the easement may cause the
removal of the encroachment to the extent necessary and shall not be liable for
any damages caused by the removal.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-1.1 HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS.
   a.   In no case shall any fence, wall, hedge or screen planting be located
or constructed so as to cause a hazard to the movement of vehicles or
pedestrians, as determined by the Director of Public Works or Zoning
Administrator.
   b.   Barbed wire and electrified fences are prohibited in all residential
districts or within 15 feet thereof, except in R-20 District or when higher
than five feet above grade, such as top strand of a fence where protection or
security is clearly required for uses such as utility facilities, and approved
by the Zoning Administrator. Pet or animal containment electric pulse type
fences may be permitted on the owner’s side of a fence or barrier such as a
wood stockade type fence so long as reasonable care is provided to not be an
attractive nuisance or hazard to persons on the opposite side of the fence.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-2 STRUCTURES EXCLUDED FROM HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways,
tanks, HVAC systems or other similar appurtenances required to operate and/or
maintain a building, skylights, amateur radio and citizens band radio towers.
Any radio towers in commercial or industrial districts, steeples, flag poles,
chimneys, satellite dish antennas, telecommunication services antennas in
stealth format in residential districts, water tanks, silos and similar
structures excluding signs may be erected above the height limits specified
herein; however, no penthouse or roof structure or any space above the height
limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing human occupancy.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-3 SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD.
   Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance,
which has an area or a width, which is less than required by this ordinance,
shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-3.1 ADJOINING LOTS.
   Where two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in one
ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance, and such lots
individually are less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the
minimum width required in the district in which they are located, then such
group of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum
permitted area and width for the district in which located.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-3.2 LOTS NOT MEETING SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as set forth in § 11-3.1 above, in any district in which single-
family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of the
adoption of these regulations which has an area, depth or a width which is less
than required by these regulations may be used as a building site for a single-
family dwelling.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-3.3 SIDE YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Except as set forth in §
11-3.1 above, where a lot has a width less than that required in the district
in which it is located, then the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to
reduce the side yard requirements for such lot provided that no side yard shall
be less than eight feet wide. No side yard shall be required for townhouse
units from the newly created lot line dividing a townhouse in compliance with
Article III, §
3-4.1 of this ordinance.
   b.   The location of required yards on irregular shaped lots shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator. The determination will be based on the
spirit and intent of this ordinance to achieve an appropriate spacing and
location of buildings on individual lots.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-4 RESERVED FOR FUTURE CODIFICATION.
§ 11-5 SEDIMENTATION AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.
   a.   All developers of a tract, where one or more acre is disturbed, shall
apply to North Carolina Department of Environmental and Natural Resources,
Division of Land Quality, 127 Cardinal Drive Extension, Wilmington, North
Carolina 28405, for a sedimentation, erosion and storm water control permit.
   b.   Permits from the town shall not be issued for land disturbing
activities that exceed one acre until sedimentation control permits or
exemptions have been obtained.
   c.   Permits issued by the Town of Newport do not exempt any project from
the requirements or permits of any other office, i.e.: U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers; CAMA (Major or Minor); or Division of Environmental Management
(DEM).
   d.   The following controls may be above and beyond that required by DEM or
other offices.
      1.   Erosion control shall be practiced on sites less than one acre.
      2.   All graded slopes and fills will be on a three to one slope minimum
(three feet of run to every one foot rise) unless substantiated by good
engineering design and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      3.   Silt fences shall be used where sheet flow will create an erosion
problem. Silt fences will not be allowed to control erosion in a channel flow
situation.
      4.   A filter check dam and sump will be required to control erosion in a
channel flow situation.
      5.   A gravel construction exit is required at all points where
construction traffic encounters a paved road.
      6.   Sediment shall be controlled on site by an approved method, at all
cost, regardless of who is responsible.
      7.   Spoil from any site shall be disposed of in an approved landfill.
      8.   All denuded areas shall be stabilized within 30 days of completion
of any land-disturbing activity or prior to issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
   e.   The soil erosion and sedimentation controls are performance orientated
and are the minimum required for the protection of the natural resources and
adjoining properties. If following the commencement of the project it is
determined that the planned controls are inadequate, the Zoning Administrator
may require revisions of the plan and its implementation to ensure compliance
with this chapter.
   f.   During the development of a site, the person conducting the land-
disturbing activity shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent
erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the approved plan or
any provision of this ordinance or the Act. After site development, the
landowner or person in possession or control of the land shall install and/or
maintain all necessary permanent erosion and sediment control measures except
those measures installed within a road or street right-of-way or easement
accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency.
   g.   Where permanent maintenance of sedimentation and storm water runoff
systems are approved by DEM, the Town Council may impose additional
requirements for detention ponds and drainage ditches to minimize flooding and
to assure continued maintenance which may, but are not limited to:
      1.   Require dedication to the public; and
      2.   Require and/or approve a homeowners association.
   h.   Notwithstanding previous provisions when it is determined that severe
off-site erosion and/or sedimentation occur as a result of any land-disturbing
activity, regardless of the size of the site, remedial action shall be taken
within a reasonable time period after notification. Notification of violation
shall be submitted in writing by the Zoning Administrator and receipted by the
owner or agent responsible for the damage.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-6 OUTDOOR MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
   All uses and operations except activities customarily conducted out of doors
such as service stations, parking, loading, etc., shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building unless specific approval is granted through site
plan review for outside display or maintenance. This prohibition shall not
prohibit the sidewalk display of goods during normal store hours provided that
all display items and/or merchandise whether for sale or not is removed from
the front yard or is not visible to the street after hours of operation.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 11-7 HABITABLE TRAILERS.
   The use of camp cars, campers, manufactured homes, recreation vehicles,
travel coaches or travel trailers for commercial, industrial or professional
purposes is prohibited. All above named vehicles, when occupied, shall be
located within an approved manufactured home park. OCCUPIED shall mean  any
full- or part-time habitation for any purpose. Manufactured (mobile homes)
shall not be stored, kept or maintained whether or not occupied, on any lot in
any zoning district not permitting such manufactured home. The following
exceptions shall apply:
   a.   Recreation vehicles or tents as listed above, except manufactured
homes, may be occupied in conjunction with any residential dwelling such as for
guests accommodations for a period not to exceed 30 days. The Zoning
Administrator may permit one 30-day extension;
   b.   Trailers used in conjunction with temporary, recurring outdoor or open
land commercial uses, such as charitable activities, Christmas tree sales,
recreation or entertainment activities upon approval of the Zoning
Administrator;
   c.   Trailers used as construction shacks or on-site field offices at a
construction site upon approval of the Building Inspector;
   d.   Nothing in this section shall be intended to exclude home occupations
as an accessory use in a manufactured home within an authorized manufactured
home park or lot;
   e.   Manufactured homes may be permitted on lots zoned R-20 and R-20MH;
   f.   Only one manufactured home may be permitted on the approved lot and a
manufactured home shall not be permitted on a lot in conjunction with any other
residential house. This does not preclude two or more manufactured homes from
being connected together to form one single-family dwelling unit;
   g.   No person shall install or cause the installation of any manufactured
home (mobile home) within the zoning jurisdiction of the town unless the
manufactured home is Wind Zone III rated;
   Exception
      The exception to this part is found in North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes § 3.4.6 which exempts homes manufactured prior to July 13,
1994 from the Wind Zone III requirement. However, manufactured homes
manufactured prior to July 13, 1994 shall be rated Wind Zone II. Wind Zone I
homes shall not be permitted unless exempted per § 3.4.4 of the North Carolina
Regulations for Manufactured Homes.
   h.   A manufactured (mobile home) that is wind rated less than Zone III and
manufactured after July 13, 1994 and is legally installed within the town’s
jurisdiction may be moved or relocated from one dwelling location to another
permitted dwelling location within an approved zoning jurisdiction;
   i.   The Building Inspector may make an inspection of the manufactured home
prior to issuing a permit to locate or install the manufactured home within the
town’s jurisdiction to determine if the home is in compliance with the
ordinance dealing with minimum housing standards and the unit can be properly
set up. The Building Inspector may deny the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy on the basis of noncompliance with the Minimum Housing Standards
Ordinance, any other relevant town ordinance or North Carolina Building Code;
and
   j.   Manufactured homes (mobile homes) shall not be used as storage units or
in any other manner not originally intended.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
ARTICLE XII: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING
§ 12-1 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING.
§ 12-1.1 ADMINISTRATIVE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The Town of Newport is blessed with a diverse and abundant cover of trees
and vegetation and such cover is of general aesthetic value to the town. The
appearance of the Town of Newport contributes ecologically and aesthetically to
the growth and economic prosperity of the town. Therefore, it is necessary to
protect, preserve and restore this valuable asset. The intent and purpose of
this article is as follows:
   a.   To aid in stabilizing the environment’s ecological balance by
contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration,
groundwater recharge and storm water runoff retardation, while at the same time
aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement;
   b.   To encourage the preservation of existing trees and desirable
vegetation;
   c.   To assist in providing clean air;
   d.   To provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of the town;
   e.   To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and
private investment;
   f.   To preserve, protect and restore the unique identity and environment of
the town and preserve the economic base attracted to the town by such factors;
   g.   To conserve energy; and to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare; and
   h.   To provide habitat for living things that might not otherwise occur or
be found in urban and suburban environments.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.2 APPLICATION AND PERMITTING.
   a.   An application for development, other than a single-family house on an
existing lot, shall be accompanied by a landscape site plan and filed with the
Zoning Administrator. Said application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as
established in the Town Fee Schedule.
   b.   A building permit shall not be issued until the site plan has been
submitted and approved. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until
the landscaping is completed in accordance with the approved landscape plan.
   c.   Where the development project is large enough to require a NCDENR
permit for sedimentation and erosion controls, the developer shall furnish the
Planning Department with two copies of the DEM application to include storm
water management design drawings. The Town Manager may require a review and
recommendation for approval or modification of the storm water design by the
Town Engineer or other designated person. The engineering review cost shall be
charged to and paid by the developer. Full payment shall be made prior to any
construction permits issued by the town.
   d.   Where conditions do not permit immediate planting and/or landscaping is
not completed when requesting a certificate of occupancy, the owner may post a
bond as provided herein to guarantee completion.
   e.   If the Zoning Administrator is furnished with a bond equal to 250% of
the cost of the total required planting (including labor) and a signed
statement by the developer or business owner of the following conditions, then
a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. The required bond must be
in the form of a cashier’s or certified check, or a letter of credit from an
approved lending institution, made payable to the Town of Newport. Conditions
for bonding:
      1.   The site must be prepared to conform to the landscaping ordinance
with the exception of the actual installation of the plants;
      2.   Planting must be installed and approved within three months from the
date a temporary certificate of occupancy is issued or bond will be forfeited
to the town. Additional time may be granted by the Planning Board for unusual
circumstances. The owner will be subject to civil penalties for continued
violation of the Zoning Ordinance; and
      3.   The cost estimate is to be prepared by a qualified landscape
contractor or nurseryman using prevailing material and labor costs. All cost
estimates must receive approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.3 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   On a corner lot, nothing, except as herein provided, shall be erected,
placed, planted or continued to exceed the height of three feet or be lower
than eight feet, which inhibits the visibility of a motor vehicle operator
within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way of two
streets or railroads, or of a street and a railroad, and a diagonal line, line
of vision (L.O.V.), which intersects the right-of-way lines at two points each
25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way lines.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.4 LANDSCAPE RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS.
§ 12-1.4.1 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following trees may be incorporated within the landscape but will not be
given credit for the minimum required tree in the front yard:
      1.   Trees that are “tropical” type species, such as palm tree;
      2.   “Bradford” pear tree;
      3.   Dogwood tree; and
      4.   Crape myrtle tree.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.4.2 PROHIBITED PLANTS.
   The following plants are specifically prohibited from use to meet the
landscaping requirements of the Town of Newport:
      1.   Poison ivy, poison sumac, poison oak or any other plant poisonous to
touch;
      2.   Yucca, Spanish bayonet, Adams needle, cactus or any other plant
harmful to touch;
      3.   Railroad or kudzu vine;
      4.   Avoid nuisance or harmful plants and incongruous plant choices; and
      5.   Any other plant determined by the Zoning Administrator to be a
nuisance or excessively subject to diseases.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.5 REQUIREMENT CONFLICTS.
   Whenever a site has conflicting requirements, that with the most stringent
requirements will be enforced.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.6 WAIVER OF SCREENING REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER EXCEPTIONS.
   a.   Where screening is already provided or when unusual topography or
elevation of a site, or the size of the parcel involved, or the presence of
screening on abutting property would make the strict adherence to the ordinance
serve no useful purpose, the Zoning Administrator may waive the requirements
for screening as long as the spirit and intent of this ordinance are adhered
to. This section does not negate the necessity for establishing screening for
uses abutting vacant property.
   b.   In older areas of the CD Zone where there is not adequate property
available. Where property is available then landscaping is required to the
extent possible.
   c.   The Town Planner or Zoning Administrator may consider minor variations
from the explicit requirements of this part where a better architectural plan
can be demonstrated. There may be cases where it is not practical or desirable
and landscape would be ineffective and/or would interfere with traffic or
pedestrian safety to adhere to the strict interpretation of this part and so
long as the spirit and intent of this part is satisfied.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.7 LANDSCAPING INSTALLATION.
   a.   All landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanship-like manner
and according to accepted, good planting practices and procedures.
   b.   Plants shall require protection from vehicular encroachment.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.8 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL CRITERIA.
   Landscaping, screening and buffering shall not interfere or damage off-site
properties and must conform to any other town erosion control or drainage
requirements. Any situation inconsistent with this requirement shall be
remedied at the expense of the property owner causing the problem.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-1.9 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   a.   The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued proper
maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials.
   b.   All unhealthy, 50% or more dead or completely dead plant shall be
replaced with originally specified plants or approved substitutions within one
year.
   c.   Any violation will be noted and property owners will have 90 days in
which to correct all violations, except in those cases when plant material
replacement should be delayed because of seasonal factors until the next
planting season.
   d.   Failure of the owner to provide maintenance as described above shall
constitute a violation of the Newport Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-2. BUFFERS AND SCREENING.
   a.   Any nonresidential use established after the effective date of these
regulations which abuts a residential district or land occupied by residential
use permitted by these regulations, or other incompatible uses or wherever
screening is required, shall provide and maintain along said property line a
continuous visual buffer. A buffer shall be a minimum five feet wide. The
purpose of the buffer is for separation, or for reducing noise, glare, visual
or other nuisance, and/or other undesirable effects. An undeveloped or forested
area along the property line that can be maintained may be given credit for the
buffer requirement.
   b.   The vegetative buffer shall contain evergreen shrubs spaced not more
than five feet apart, and not less than one row of dense shrubs planted at an
initial height of at least five feet plus one evergreen or deciduous tree
minimum two-inch caliper size per 30 feet of lineal boundary or fraction
thereof.
   Note
   Refer to the following illustration situations for guidance in interpreting
the requirements of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2439.jpg]
   Situation (1)
   For situation (1), most commonly used when less intensive office or
commercial districts abut residential or apartment districts. Shall consist of
plants with minimum height at planting of two to three feet and reaching a
height of eight to ten feet at maturity. The intent of this category is to
provide dense landscaping to visually and physically separate uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2441.jpg]
   Situation (2)
   For situation (2), most commonly used when industrial districts abut
residential districts or apartment districts. Shall consist of evergreen
plants, branching to the ground, with a minimum height at installation of five
to six feet and reaching a height of 20 feet at maturity. The intent of this
category is to provide for medium height and dense landscaping to visually and
physically separate uses. The width of the planting area shall be 25 feet,
unless otherwise specified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2443.jpg]
   Situation (3)
   For situation (3), most commonly used to provide tall landscaping to
visually and physically separate incompatible uses. Shall consist of plants,
branching to the ground, with a minimum height at installation of five to six
feet and reaching an ultimate minimum height of 30 feet at maturity.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2445.jpg]
   Situation (4)
   In situation (4), most commonly used when business districts abut
residential districts or apartment development or where it is determined that
more stringent buffering is required. Shall consist of evergreen trees
branching to the ground or a combination of trees and shrubs. The intent of
this category is to provide landscaping with sufficient density, mass and
height to physically and visually separate uses. Planting is encouraged to be
innovative in terms of spacing and linear arrangement to allow the widest
possible variation for visual enhancement while separating uses. Plantings
should not encroach onto adjacent properties. The width of the planting area
shall be 15 feet, unless otherwise specified.
   c.   When a vegetative buffer is deemed inappropriate, the Zoning
Administrator may allow either a durable masonry wall or wooden fence designed
to be compatible with the character of adjacent properties. Within residential
districts, walls and fences must be at least five feet in height but no greater
than ten feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot line of
adjoining properties.
   d.   Public utilities and similar uses, such as antenna tower, pump
stations, etc., that are normally unmanned, need only fence around the
immediate area of the facility unless the Zoning Administrator determines that
screening the entire area is required.
   e.   Unless otherwise provided, buffer materials shall be installed to
provide a minimum of 70% summer opacity, between one foot above finished ground
level of the vehicle use area being screened or of the landscape buffer between
uncomplimentary uses to the top of the required planting, hedge, fence, wall or
earth mound within four years after the installation.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-2.1 INCREASE IN BUFFERING.
   In instances of incompatible uses, or significant use intensity or density
changes, a buffer area may be required with screening structures, landforms
and/or vegetation as prescribed by the Board of Adjustment or Planning Board as
appropriate.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-3 MINIMUM REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.
§ 12-3.1 WHERE LANDSCAPE MATERIALS ARE REQUIRED.
   a.   This and following sections describe the minimum requirements that
shall be met in regard to interior and perimeter landscaping for vehicle use
areas, landscape buffers relating to incompatible land uses and zones,
additional landscaping requirements and screening of garbage containers.
   b.   In all zones, uncovered area shall be landscaped. This requirement
pertains to all new developments.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-3.2 EXISTING DEVELOPED SITES.
   a.   When any of the following occurs to preexisting situations, then
landscaping shall be incorporated as specified herein to the maximum extent
possible:
      1.   Structural additions of more than 10% of the total gross floor area
of all existing buildings are to be undertaken;
      2.   An existing structure or land use is to be reused for a different
principal use; or
      3.   Existing vehicle use areas on the premises do not comply with this
subsection. In the event that such an existing vehicle use area is unable to
comply with these requirements without reducing the number of existing parking
spaces, such vehicle use areas shall comply to the maximum extent possible
without loss of existing parking spaces.
   b.   Existing landscape material shall be shown on the required plan, and
any material in satisfactory condition may be used to satisfy these
requirements in whole or in part when such material meets the requirements and
achieves the objectives of this ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-4 RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING OTHER THAN MULTI-FAMILY OR PUD DEVELOPMENT.
   For single-family or two-family development, this section does not address
the requirement for side yard or rear yard landscaping.
   a.   Trees. All new construction of single residential lots or subdivision
lots. The minimum planting size of eight feet high at the time of installation,
two-inch-caliper, planted every 30 feet on center of lineal boundary of street
frontage for a minimum of two trees in the front yard.
   b.   Existing trees may be retained and credit may be given provided the
trees are healthy and in good condition, and adequate tree protection practices
are followed. This pertains to only the front yard.
   c.   Only canopy type trees can be utilized for minimum credit. Trees should
be placed so as not to interfere with underground or overhead utility lines.
   d.   To encourage creativity, trees may be randomly spaced within the front
yard as long as the total number of trees required is utilized.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER STRUCTURES LANDSCAPING.
§ 12-5.1 PARKING LOTS.
   A PARKING LOT is any area where motor vehicles are stored for the purpose of
temporary, daily or overnight off-street parking. The parking lot and
foundation landscaping section applies to the following:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2447.jpg]
   Sample of Internal Parking Lot Landscaping
      1.   Any public or private parking lot with ten or more spaces;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2449.jpg]
   Note: Paving Treatment, Benches and Trash Receptacles Assist in Creating a
Pedestrian
   Friendly Entrance Area
      2.   Existing parking lots whose enlargement or reconstruction will
increase it to ten or more spaces;
      3.   Interior coverage requirements consists of planted areas within the
perimeter of the parking lot;
      4.   The minimum landscape area permitted shall be 64 square feet, with
four-foot minimum dimension to all trees from edge of pavement where vehicles
overhang;
      5.   Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide
and break up the expanse of pavement and at strategic points to guide travel
flow and direction;
      6.   In order to encourage the required landscaped areas to be properly
dispensed, no required landscape area shall be larger than 350 square feet in
vehicle use areas under 30,000 square feet in size and no required area shall
be larger than 1,500 square feet in vehicle use areas over 30,000 square feet;
      7.   Landscape areas larger than above are permitted as long as the
additional area is in excess of the required minimum;
      8.   Required interior landscaping located as herein provided shall be in
addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements;
      9.   One tree is required for every 150 square feet of planted area;
      10.   Trees must be a minimum of two-inch-caliper and eight feet tall at
time of planting;
      11.   Only canopy type trees can be utilized, not those typically
considered ornamental and under story trees. Trees should be placed so as not
to interfere with overhead utility lines or parking lot lighting;
      12.   Trees must be planted in a minimum 64 square-foot area;
      13.   Islands must provide a minimum four-foot distance from the tree
trunk to any curb and sized to accommodate the tree growth. Vegetative
landscaped islands shall be located in the vehicle accommodation area at the
end of parking bays, inside medians or between parking spaces;
      14.   All plantings shall be distributed throughout the vehicle
accommodation area where practical;
      15.   Existing trees may be retained and credit may be given provided the
trees are healthy and in good condition, and adequate tree protection practices
are followed;
      16.   Coverage areas may incorporate turf, grasses, rocks, pebbles, sand
or other approved materials;
      17.   Shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height or spread and
minimum five gallon container at time of planting; and
      18.   Interior coverage landscaping is required along drive aisles that
connect different sections of parking areas.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.2 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Street frontage requirements consists of a planting strip, made up of
trees and shrubs, located between the abutting edge of the sidewalk and parking
lot curb line, or where there is no sidewalk, between the public right-of-way
line and the parking lot curb line.
   b.   The street frontage planting area must be a minimum five feet in width.
   c.   Where the street frontage requirements conflict with adequate sight
distances required at driveways and street intersections, the provisions of
Article XI of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2459.jpg]
   Example of Street Frontage
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.3 SHRUBS, BERMS, WALLS AND FENCES.
   The street frontage area must contain one or a combination of the following
features.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.3.1 SHRUBS.
   a.   One shrub per four linear feet must be provided. (Example: 25 shrubs
per 100 feet.) Seventy percent of species utilized must be evergreens.
   b.   To encourage creativity, shrubs may be grouped or randomly spaced as
long as the total number of shrubs required is utilized.
   c.   Shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height at time of planting.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.3.2 BERMS.
   Where berms are used, they shall be undulating and/or meandering with a
maximum height of four feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2457.jpg]
   Example of Landscape Berm
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.3.3 WALLS AND FENCES.
   a.   In lieu of shrubs, a wall or fence may be utilized which conforms to
the minimum fencing standards found in the Town Zoning Ordinance. (Chain link
fences may not be used unless it is proven to be necessary for security.)
   b.   Walls and fences shall be a minimum of three feet in height.
   c.   Walls should be made of the same or compatible material and color as
the principal structure in terms of texture and quality.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.4 BUILDING FOUNDATION PERIMETER PLANTING.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2451.jpg]
   Example 1 of Landscaped Commercial/Public Building
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2453.jpg]
   Example 2 of Landscaped Commercial/Public Building
   a.   Foundation plantings are required for all commercial, public,
industrial buildings and structures. The requirements for foundation planting
are as follows.
   b.   A minimum of 50% of any side of a building facing a public right-of-way
must be planted.
   c.   Plantings must be placed adjacent to building sides or provided in
planters near building sides.
   d.   Planted areas must be a minimum of three feet in width excluding a
minimum two-foot wide strip along the curb for vehicular overhang, unless wheel
stops are used. If trees are utilized, the planting area should be sized for
the tree growth.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.4.1 SHRUBS.
   a.   Shrubs planted immediately adjacent to the building shall be a minimum
of 18 inches in height at time of planting.
   b.   Shrubs planted in elevated planters located near the building should be
a minimum of 15 to 18 inches in height or spread and minimum three gallon
container at time of planting.
   c.   One shrub is required for every 15 square feet of total required
landscaped area.
   d.   Foundation plantings should be grouped and maintained so as not to
block or obstruct windows and doors.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5 OUT OF DOORS DISPLAY AREAS.
   A display area is an area generally considered accessible to the public
including auto/truck sales, leasing and rental lots, recreational vehicles
sales, trailer sales lots, etc.
   Planting requirements for display areas are:
   a.   Interior coverage requirements consists of planting areas within the
perimeter of the display area;
   b.   Street frontage requirements consists of a planting area, made up of
trees and shrubs, located between the abutting edge of the sidewalk and display
area curb line, or where there is no sidewalk, between the right-of-way line
and the display area curb line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2463.jpg]
   Example 1 of a Display Area for Vehicle Sales Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2461.jpg]
   Example 2 of a Display Area for Manufactured Homes
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.1 INTERIOR COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   All interior coverage areas may be planted with turf grasses, ground
covers or ornamental shrubs.
   b.   Shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height or spread and minimum
three gallon container at time of planting.
   c.   Ground covers may also consist of rocks, pebbles, sand or other
approved materials.
   d.   Islands must provide a minimum four-foot distance from the tree trunk
to any curb and sized to accommodate the tree growth.
   e.   In display areas of less than 30,000 square feet, no planting area
exceeding 350 square feet shall be given credit toward satisfying the interior
coverage requirement, except where trees are retained and protected during
construction.
   f.   In display areas 30,000 square feet or greater, no planting area
exceeding 1,500 square feet shall be given credit toward satisfying the
interior coverage requirement, except where trees are retained and protected
during construction.
   g.   In no case shall entrance islands be credited with more than 350 square
feet toward satisfying the interior coverage requirements.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.2 TREES.
   The tree requirements must conform to the following specifications and
standards at time of planting:
   a.   Trees must be planted in a minimum 64 square foot area;
   b.   One tree is required for every 150 square feet of planted area;
   c.   Trees must be a minimum of two to two and one-half inch-caliper at time
of planting;
   d.   Only canopy type trees can be utilized, not those typically considered
ornamental and under story trees. Trees should be placed so as not to interfere
with overhead utility lines or parking lot lighting; and
   e.   Existing trees may be retained and credit may be given provided the
trees are healthy and in good condition, and adequate tree protection practices
are followed.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.3 PLANTINGS WHICH MAY NOT COUNT TOWARD MEETING INTERIOR COVERAGE
REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Plantings required for screening along the perimeter of the site;
   b.   Plantings required by the street frontage requirements or foundation
requirements of this ordinance;
   c.   Plantings required for the screening of dumpsters and loading docks;
and
   d.   Plantings required for buffering between uses.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.4 STREET FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Street frontage planted areas must be a minimum five feet in width.
   b.   Trees and shrubs are required in the planting area. In lieu of shrubs,
a wall or fence a minimum of three feet in height may be utilized. Berms, a
minimum of three feet in height, that meander and/or undulate, may also be used
in lieu of shrubs.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.5 EXCEPTIONS FOR THE STREET FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   Where street frontage requirements conflict with adequate sight
distances required at driveways and street intersections, the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance shall apply; and
   b.   Sight distance requirements as specified under other sections of this
ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.6 TREES.
   a.   The tree requirements must conform to the following specifications and
standards at time of planting. To encourage creativity, trees may be grouped or
randomly spaced as long as the total number of trees required are utilized.
   b.   Minimum of “medium” size with 25 feet spacing and one and one-fourth-
to one and one- half-inch-caliper (six to eight feet in height).
   c.   Additionally existing trees may be retained and given credit provided
the trees are healthy and in good condition and adequate tree protection
practices are followed.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.5.7 SHRUBS, BERMS, WALLS AND FENCES.
   a.   The street frontage area must contain one or a combination of the
following features:
   b.   One shrub per four linear feet must be provided. (Example: 25 shrubs
per 100 feet.) Seventy percent of species utilized must be evergreen.
   c.   Shrubs shall be minimum of 24 inches in height at time of planting.
   d.   To encourage creativity, shrubs may be grouped or randomly spaced as
long as the total number of shrubs required is utilized.
   Berms
   e.   Berms shall be undulating and/or meandering with a minimum height of
three feet and a maximum height of four feet.
   f.   Berms that are planted and mulched shall not exceed a slope ratio of
two to one. This requires a minimum 12-foot base width for a three foot high
berm.
   g.   Berms covered with turf grass shall not exceed a slope ratio of three
to one. This requires a minimum 18-foot base width for a three foot high berm.
   h.   In lieu of shrubs, a wall or fence which conforms to the minimum
fencing standards found in §
11-1 may be used. (Chain link fences may not be used.)
   i.   Walls and fences shall be a minimum of three feet in height.
   j.   Walls should be made of the same or compatible material and color as
the principal structure in terms of texture and quality.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2465.jpg]
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.6 DUMPSTERS AND TRASH RECEPTACLES AREA.
   Dumpsters and/or trash receptacles shall be screened from view by the
following combination.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.6.1 SOLID FENCE OR WALL.
   a.   A solid fence or wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height.
   b.   The fence or wall shall be made of the same or compatible material and
color of the principal structure in terms of texture and quality.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2475.jpg]
   Example 1 of Landscaped Dumpster
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2473.jpg]
   Example 2 of Landscaped Dumpster
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.6.2 PLANTS.
   a.   Shrubs shall be planted at a minimum of 48 inches in height at time of
planting.
   b.   Shrubs shall be planted a maximum of four feet on center.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.7 LOADING DOCKS.
   a.   A LOADING DOCK is a platformed space within the building or that
protrudes from the building for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks.
   b.   Loading docks not screened by an intervening building shall be screened
from view its entire length, except for necessary access.
   c.   Screening should be accomplished by the following combination.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.7.1 SOLID FENCE OR WALL.
   a.   A solid fence or wall shall be a minimum of six feet in height.
   b.   The fence or wall shall be made of the same or compatible material and
color of the principal structure in terms of texture and quality.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-5.7.2 EVERGREEN PLANTS.
   a.   Evergreen plants which are expected to reach six feet or greater within
three years of planting shall be provided.
   b.   The plants shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height when planted.
   c.   The plants shall be planted a maximum of four feet on center.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2471.jpg]
   Typical Screening Diagram of Loading Dock
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 12-6 FREESTANDING SIGN LANDSCAPING.
   A minimum of 75 square feet of planted area shall be provided around any
freestanding sign. Planting material shall include a combination of:
   a.   Grass, ground cover, low shrubs not exceeding a height of three feet at
maturity or design elements used in conjunction with the sign not exceeding the
three foot height limit;
   b.   All plant materials shall be placed in a defined planting area which
shall be a minimum of six feet in width. All plantings shall be maintained so
as not to obstruct the view of the sign face on either side, nor shall any
materials used for landscaping encroach onto adjacent properties;
   c.   All plant materials utilized to fulfill the freestanding sign planting
requirement shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Department;
   d.   Freestanding sign landscaping shall be designed so as to be compatible
with parking lot plantings in order to help achieve the goal of a unified
project design; and
   e.   Freestanding sign landscaping area shall be included as a credit in the
calculations for any area required for parking lot landscaping.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2469.jpg]
   Example 1 of Landscaped Freestanding Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2467.jpg]
   Example 2 of Landscaped Freestanding Sign
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
ARTICLE XIII: OFF-STREET PARKING AND ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   a.   Scope of provisions. Except as provided in this section, an application
for a building permit for a multi-family, commercial or industrial use shall
include a site plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking
and access. The plan may include landscaping. An occupancy permit shall not be
issued unless the required off-street parking and access have been provided in
accordance with those shown on the approved plan.
   b.   Off-street parking required. In all districts at the time any building
or structure is constructed or enlarged, or the use is changed or increased in
intensity, off-street parking spaces for automobiles and/or bicycles shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements herein. Said spaces shall be
located on the lot containing the use itself; provided, however, in unusual or
extraordinary circumstances the Zoning Administrator may grant approval to
allow a portion or all of the required spaces to be located on a lot which is
accessible to the lot containing the use itself. The approval shall be based on
the accessibility of the lot. In order to merit favorable consideration, the
applicant must provide evidence to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator
that a suitable long-term lease or other legal agreement can be executed and
recorded which would guarantee that the lot containing the use has the
irrevocable right to utilize the adjacent lot for off-street automobile and/or
bicycle parking purposes.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-2 PROHIBITION OF REDUCTION IN SIZE AND NUMBER OF SPACES.
   Parking space requirements of this article shall not be reduced in size or
number, modified or transferred to another use without proper zoning and/or
building permits. When parking spaces are a special use permit, the owner must
have received a variance from the Board of Adjustment. In order to receive a
variance, the lot owner must demonstrate that the tenant(s) or occupant(s) of
the subject lot will not: (1) need the number of parking spaces required by
this article for that general type of use(s); and (2) that the area subject to
the reduction in size and/or number of parking spaces can be utilized for
landscaping or other aesthetic amenities not otherwise required by this
article.
   Exception
   The off-street parking requirements within the CD District may be exempted
in part where it is found that it is impracticable to provide all parking
requirements of this part.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-3 REQUIRED BICYCLE SPACES.
   Bicycle parking spaces, as set forth in the design criteria shall equal in
number to 2% of the total number of parking spaces required as set forth in §
13-5 with a minimum of one bicycle parking space. This requirement shall be in
addition to the requirement for automobile parking. This requirement may be
administratively waived by the Zoning Administrator in those unique instances
where it is clearly demonstrated that bicycle parking is inappropriate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2477.jpg]
   Example: Bicycle Parking Facility in a Shopping Center
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-4 ACCESSIBLE HANDICAPPED PROVISIONS.
   Parking lots, ramps, walks, bridges, entrances and the like shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code
dealing with making buildings and facilities accessible to and usable by
persons with disabilities, as from time to time amended, in addition to minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-5 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING TABLE.
Minimum Off-Street Parking Table
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Minimum Off-Street Parking Table
Use                                     Minimum Off-Street Parking
Animal hospital, commercial kennels,    1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of floor
passenger transportation, broadcasting  area with a minimum of 10 spaces
studios
                                        2 spaces for each dwelling unit; there
                                        shall be convenient open parking spaces
Apartment or multi-family               for guests equal in total to a minimum
                                        of 15% of parking spaces required for
                                        the project
Auditorium, theater, sports arena,      1 space for 3 seats in the large
assembly halls, church, funeral homes,  assembly area; 18 inches counts for 1
mortuaries, restaurants                 seat for benches
Automobile service garages, retail      One space for each 200 square feet of
stores, shopping malls, industrial and  gross floor and with a minimum of 5
manufacturing area plants, office,      spaces
bank, post office and similar uses
Bar and tavern                          At least 1 space per each 2 persons
                                        seating capacity
                                        5 spaces per alley plus requirements
Bowling alley                           for any other use associated with the
                                        establishment such as restaurant, etc.
College or university, vocational,      At least 1 space per 3 students plus 1
technical, industrial and trade schools space per employee for any work shift
                                        1 space per 2 patient beds plus 1 space
Convalescent/nursing or care home       for each employee (nurse, attendants,
                                        etc.) plus 1 space for each staff or
                                        visiting doctor
Dance halls, skating rinks, assembly    1 for each 25 square feet of gross
halls without fixed seats, exhibition   floor area used for assembly or dancing
halls, restaurants, club or lodge
Furniture, appliances and floor         1 space for each 600 square feet of
covering stores, automotive and boat    non-storage area
sales/service
                                        4 spaces for each hole plus
Golf course                             requirements for any other use
                                        associated with the golf course,
                                        restaurant, etc.
                                        1 space for each 1 bed plus 1 space for
Hospital                                each 2 employees (nurses, attendants,
                                        etc.) plus 1 space for each staff or
                                        visiting doctor
                                        1 space for each employee and 6 spaces
Kindergarten nursery or day care        for drive-in off-street drop off and
                                        pickup
                                        1 for each employee for shift of
Laboratories, research and testing      greatest employment plus 1 space for
facility                                each 5,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
                                        plus 1 for each company vehicle used
                                        and stored on site
Library                                 1 space for each 300 sq. ft.
Medical and dental offices or clinic    1 space for each 150 sq. ft. of floor
                                        area with 10 spaces minimum
                                        1 space for each unit plus 1 space for
                                        each 2 employees plus requirements for
Motel, hotel                            any other use associated with the
                                        establishment; residence type inns
                                        shall provide 1.25 spaces per unit
 
Minimum Off-Street Parking Table
Use Minimum Off-Street Parking
Minimum Off-Street Parking Table
Use                                 Minimum Off-Street Parking
                                    No less than 10 spaces and 1 additional
Museum and art galleries            space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area
                                    or fraction thereof in excess of 1,000
                                    sq. ft.
Printing or publishing              1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of floor
                                    area
Roominghouse/boarding house         1 space for each guest room, plus 2
                                    additional spaces for the owner
School                               
                                    1 space for each teacher, employee and
                                    administrative personnel, plus 5 visitor
   (A) Elementary and junior     spaces, plus 1 bus space for each 100
                                    students, plus safe and convenient
                                    loading and unloading students
                                    1 space for each teacher, employee and
                                    administrative personnel, plus 5 visitor
   (B) High school               spaces, plus 1 bus space for each 50
                                    students, plus 1 space for each 4
                                    students
Service or repair establishments,   At least 1 space per employee on maximum
motion picture studio, plumbing,    working shift, minimum 5 spaces
heating establishment
Service station, convenience store  1 space for each employee, but no fewer
                                    than 10 spaces
                                    1 space for each 5,000 sq. ft. of gross
Warehouse, wholesale establishments floor area plus 1 for each company
                                    vehicle used and stored on site
 
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-6 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   Where practical, every use shall provide space for loading and unloading of
vehicles off the street or public alley.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-6.1 SPACES APPROPRIATE TO FUNCTION.
   Off-street loading spaces must be provided as appropriate to function and
scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses.
   The table is not all inclusive. There may be uses that are not listed or not
equivalent. For those uses, the Planning Department may make a determination of
the nearest and best number of parking spaces for the proposed use.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-6.2 DESIGN OF LOADING SPACES.
   a.   Off-street loading spaces must be designed and constructed so that all
maneuvering of vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely
within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces must be designed so
as not to interfere with the normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on
public right-of-way.
   b.   Where more than one tenant or use is included within any building or on
any one lot, the requirements shall be the sum total of the loading and
unloading requirements for all of the various tenants or uses. Generally
speaking, loading and unloading requirements for a building shall be based on
the most common requirements for uses in the zone in which such building is
located, except where use areas are distinctively separated by building form.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-7 PARKING DESIGN CRITERIA.
   Minimum parking lot and parking area design and dimension criteria shall be
as follows.
   a.   The minimum width of a one-way drive shall be 12 feet or as required by
the Building Code.
   b.   Except as permitted in the parking space dimension chart, the minimum
width of a two-way drive shall be 18 feet except where required by the Building
Code for fire lanes and accessibility for firefighting equipment, etc.
   c.   Tandem parking will generally not be permitted to satisfy parking
requirements except where appropriate for developments of single- or two-family
units.
   d.   Bicycle parking facilities shall be conveniently located adjacent to
on-site bicycle circulation pedestrian routes and shall be provided with
durable and functional bicycle racks.
   e.   Parking stalls and interior driveways shall have at least the following
dimensions:
 
Type of Parking Width of Stall Depth of Stall
90 deg.         11 ft.         20 ft.
60 deg.         10 ft.         25 ft.
45 deg.         10 ft.         30 ft.
 
 
Minimum Driveway Width
90 deg. parking 23 ft.
60 deg. parking 18 ft.
45 deg. parking 12 ft.
 
   f.   The minimum number of accessible parking spaces shall be determined and
installed in accordance with the North Carolina Building Code.
   g.   Islands. Parking lanes shall be separated with planting islands, wheel
stops or painted lines so as to provide clear avenues of travel.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
§ 13-8 DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF PARKING SPACES.
   Every lot or parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking
area, including a commercial parking lot and an automobile or trailer sales
lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements.
   a.   Separation from walkways, sidewalks and streets. All off-street
parking, loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks
and streets.
   b.   Surfacing. Any off-street parking area shall be surfaced with a
material providing a durable, all weather, dustless surface (e.g., asphalt or
concrete paving), shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface
water accumulated within the area, not damage adjacent properties or streets,
and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading,
unloading, parking and storage of automobiles. Pervious pavement are acceptable
as well as those with open cells seeded with grass and any other surface
approved by the Planning Department.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013)
ARTICLE XIV: SIGNS
§ 14-0 DEFINITIONS.
   These definitions are intended to relate to this article and are expressions
of common dictionary terms.
   A-FRAME SIGN. Any upright support frame in the form of a triangle with
steeply angled sides that meet at the top in the shape of the letter “A” which
conveys a message. For purposes of this definition, sandwich board signs are
included in this definition.
   APPURTENANT. (adj.) Appertaining or belonging.
             (n.) Appurtenance.
   CONTENT NEUTRAL. To not regulate or determine the sign’s qualification based
on message conveyed or poster content.
   NON-APPURTENANT. It denotes in general simple negation or absence of, as not
a part of.
   PERMANENT SIGNS. Signs not intended to be temporary. All signs not exempted
by other parts of this ordinance.
   PREMISES. A distinct portion of real estate; land with its appurtenances, as
buildings.
   SIGN. Any letters, pictorial representation, symbol, emblem, flag, banner,
illuminated or animated device, displayed in any manner whatsoever, which
directs attention of persons to such device, and which is located within view
of the general public from a public way. Customary graphics found on soft drink
and newspaper dispensers and similar machines shall not be considered as SIGNS.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, handbill or poster that is placed for a limited
period of time.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this section is to support and compliment the various land
uses allowed in the town, by the adoption of regulations concerning placement,
number, location, size, appearance, illumination, and animation of signs. The
erection of signs is controlled and regulated in order to promote the health,
safety, welfare, convenience, and enjoyment of travel on streets, and to also
protect the public investment in such streets, and promote the creation of an
attractive visual environment that promotes a healthy economy by:
   a.   Permitting businesses to inform, identify and communicate effectively;
   b.   Directing the general public through the use of signs while maintaining
attractive and harmonious application of signs on the building and sites;
   c.   Protecting and enhancing the physical appearance of the community;
   d.   Regulating the design, placement and scale of the signs;
   e.   Fostering public safety along public and private streets by assuring
that the signs are in a safe and appropriate location;
   f.   Assuring that the information displayed on a sign is clearly visible,
conspicuous, legible and readable so that the sign achieves the intended
purpose without endangering the public or creating a distraction to motor
vehicle drivers;
   g.   Promote the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs and
displays; the safety of persons and land by providing that signs do not create
traffic hazards or hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay, or
abandonment; the efficient transfer of general public and commercial
identification or information, and maintain a viable business community
throughout the year by improving the legibility and effectiveness of signs;
   h.   Protect the public welfare, as well as land values, by preserving the
aesthetic qualities of the town;
   i.   Preserve the town’s environment from excessive and obtrusive signs; and
   j.   Enhance the image, appearance, and economic vitality of the community.
      1.   The use of drawings and illustrations in this document is intended
to illustrate and simplify the meaning of its content and in no way endorses or
encourages the product or services used in such illustration.
      2.   The United States Supreme Court (cite as: 576 (2015)) published an
Opinion on July 17, 2015 that requires all regulated signs by any local
government to be “content neutral”. The amendments in this section reflect the
Supreme Court opinion.
         a.   There are limited exceptions to the “content neutral” opinion
such as, but not limited to, signs dealing with urgent public matter, safety
and public information.
         b.   To summarize the Supreme Court’s ruling, this list is not all
inclusive and is provided as examples of rules that may distinguish among signs
based on content-neutral criteria:
            1.   Rules regulating the size of signs;
            2.   Rules regulating the locations in which signs may be placed.
These rules may distinguish between freestanding signs and those attached to
buildings;
            3.   Rules which differentiate between signs with fixed messages
and electronic signs with messages that change;
            4.   Rules that differentiate between placement of signs on private
property and public property;
            5.   Rules which differ between the placement of signs on
commercial and residential property;
            6.   Rules differing between on-premises and off-premises signs;
            7.   Rules restricting the total number of signs allowed per mile
of roadway; and
            8.   Rules imposing time restrictions on signs advertising a one-
time event.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016; Ord. 2023-
02, passed 6-8-2023)
§ 14-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   a.   All signs within the town’s jurisdictional area shall be covered by
these sign regulations. Freestanding and permanent sign structures shall be
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the 130 mph wind design
provisions the North Carolina Building Code as may be amended from time to
time. All other signs, such as portable signs, shall be firmly anchored to the
ground so as to prevent overturning, or creating a hazard to property or
persons. The anchoring will generally be “auger” type anchors or anchors with
equivalent holding power.
   b.   A permitted on-premises (appurtenant) sign may display any message
within the provisions of this article.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-2.1 SIGN PROGRAM.
   a.   A coordinated sign program is preferred for properties with multiple
tenants.
   b.   A coordination sign program consists of a detailed plan in written and
graphic form, which outlines the size, number, location, lighting, color, etc.
of all signs within the complex. Once a sign program is established, signs
conforming to an approved program can be authorized “over the counter” without
further application or fees.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-2.2 TRAFFIC SAFETY.
   No sign shall be erected or continue that:
      1.   Obstructs the sight distance of motorists proceeding on or
approaching adjacent streets, alleys, driveways or parking areas;
      2.   Obstructs the sight of pedestrians proceeding on or approaching
adjacent sidewalks or pedestrian ways;
      3.   Would tend by its location, color or nature to be confused with or
obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals or would tend to be confused with
a flashing traffic light or an emergency vehicle. Automobile warning or
flashing signs shall not be utilized as commercial attention-seizing devices;
      4.   Uses admonitions such as “stop”, “go”, “slow”, “danger”, etc. which
might be confused with traffic directional signals and signs;
      5.   Is a sign which contains thereon one or more flashing lights or is
animated; and
      6.   Is located in or projects into the right-of-way of any public
street.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-2.3 SIGN SAFETY.
   a.   No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a driveway
located on private property shall be situated at a height of less than 12 feet
above the surface of the said driveway, or in such a manner as it would impede
the passage of any fire or rescue apparatus, whichever is higher. Clearance
shall be clearly marked with three-inch minimum letters and numerals.
   b.   No sign suspended over or projecting into the area above a public
sidewalk or pedestrian way shall be situated at a height of less than eight
feet above the surface of said sidewalk or pedestrian way.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-3 ADMINISTRATION, FILING PROCEDURE AND PERMITS.
§ 14-3.1 ADMINISTRATION.
   a.   Unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance, no sign or sign
structure, regardless of its cost of construction, shall be erected, replaced,
relocated, constructed, changed or altered until after a permit for the same
has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
   b.   Each “permitted” sign shall display the permit number and name of
responsible person on the sign structure. The identification shall be visible
and readable from ground level where practical.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-3.2 FILING PROCEDURE.
   Applications for permits to erect, hang, place, paint or alter the structure
of a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the Zoning Administrator.
Each application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the following:
   a.   Area of the sign;
   b.   Size, character, general layout and designs proposed for painted
display;
   c.   The method and type of illumination, if any;
   d.   The location proposed for such signs in relation to property lines,
zoning district boundaries, right-of-way lines and existing signs;
   e.   If conditions warrant it, the Zoning Administrator may require such
additional information as will enable him or her to determine if such sign is
to be erected in conformance with these regulations; and
   f.   The building permit number shall be located on the structure of each
sign and be legible from the ground.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-4 MAINTENANCE.
   a.   Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe, shows obvious lack of
maintenance, abandonment or endangers the safety of a building or the public,
the Zoning Administrator shall order that such sign be made safe, repaired or
removed. A period of 30 days following receipt of said order by the person,
firm or corporation owning or using the sign shall be allowed for compliance.
Upon failure to comply with the order to repair or remove the sign, the Zoning
Administrator may cause the sign to be removed and any and all expenses
incurred shall be at the expense of the owner, lessee and/or property owner to
which the sign is located or the Zoning Administrator may impose civil or
criminal penalties as provided by this ordinance.
   b.   The Building Inspector/Zoning Administrator, without notice, may cause
any unsafe or insecure sign to be immediately removed if, in his or her
opinion, the sign presents an immediate peril to life and limb or property
damage.
   c.   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to remove and discard
any sign located upon public rights-of-way or public property without notice if
the Zoning Administrator determines it to be in violation of this section.
   d.   Reference G.S. § 136-131.2 Modernization of Outdoor Advertising
Devices.
      1.   Any sign which is in effect with a valid permit issued by the
Department of Transportation, may make any repair or reconstruction of the
structure so long as the square footage of the advertising surface area is not
increased. As used in this section, reconstruction includes the change of an
existing monopole outdoor advertising structure to a new monopole structure
which would otherwise be in violation of this section.
      2.   For the sign to qualify for the above stated exemption, the DOT
permit must have been issued prior to the enactment of this section.
       3.   Refer to G.S. § 136-133.1 Outdoor Advertising Vegetation Cutting
and Removal Requirements.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-5 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   If the sign is not specifically permitted in this section, the sign is
prohibited.
   a.   Neither the sign structure itself nor whatever appears on it is a
business within the meaning of “business”.
   b.   Any sign which becomes non-appurtenant shall be removed by the owner of
the premises where the sign is located no later than 180 days of said change.
Where the owner or lessor of the premises is seeking a new tenant, such signs
may remain in place for not more than 180 days from the date of vacancy.
Extensions of time may be granted by the Administrator when adequate proof is
given, substantiated to warrant more time in the judgment of the Zoning
Administrator based on facts showing cogent reasons for the requested extension
not the result of the applicant’s delay.
   c.   No sign shall be attached to or painted on any telephone pole, light
pole, street or highway sign post or structure or other human-made object not
intended to support a sign or any tree, rock or other natural object.
   d.   Signs on street furniture, such as benches, waste receptacles,
fountains, phone booths, etc., are prohibited except to display a logotype.
   e.   No sign lighting is allowed which switches on and off intermittently,
changes intensity and/or color, or otherwise creates an illusion of flashing or
movement, except where permitted in §
14-10c. Customary holiday lighting and decorations from November 1 through
January 1 shall be exempt from this prohibition.
   f.   Wind activated devices are prohibited with the following exception:
      1.   On-premises flags and pennants are permitted on commercial and
industrial property;
      2.   Pennants and flags, not to exceed 32 square feet, flown on R zoned
property; and
      3.   The appearance of the flag shall be maintained. Torn, faded or
tattered flags and pennants as determined by the Zoning Department shall be
immediately removed or replaced.
   g.   Any sign located or designed so as to intentionally or effectively deny
any adjoining property owner reasonable visual access to an existing sign is
prohibited.
   h.   Any sign which does not comply with the terms, conditions and
provisions contained in this ordinance is prohibited.
   i.   No portable or nonstructural signs shall be allowed except those
permitted as temporary signs in this article. For purposes of this ordinance, a
sign shall be considered as nonstructural if it has no permanently mounted,
self-supporting structure or is not an integral part of a building to which it
is accessory.
   j.   No sign shall be attached to or placed against the outside of a
building in such a manner as to prevent egress through any door or window, nor
shall any sign or advertising display obstruct or be attached to a fire escape.
   k.   Any sign or sign structure that obstructs the view of, or may be
confused with, a traffic directional/safety sign.
   l.   Any sign painted on or attached to trees, other natural features,
utility poles or other human-made object the principal purpose of which is not
intended to support a sign.
   m.   Dilapidated signs.
   n.   Any sign which emits a sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or
vapor.
   o.   Billboards and off-premise business signs, including digital
billboards, are not permitted within the jurisdiction of the town.
   p.   Signs that exhibit statements, suggestive words, or pictures of an
obscene or pornographic nature.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016; Ord. 2023-
02, passed 6-8-2023)
§ 14-5.1 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   a.   No sign shall obstruct the view of motor vehicle operators entering a
public roadway from any driveway, street or alley.
   b.   Signs located within 50 feet from any road intersection or driveway
shall not exceed three feet above the average grade, unless the bottom of the
sign poster structure is at least seven feet above the adjacent street
pavement, and the supporting structure(s) are designed so as not to obstruct
the view of intersecting traffic. Landscaping shall be designed and maintained
so as not to block the view of traffic.
   c.   The sign shall be set back at least five feet from any side property
line unless installed by a town official or NCDOT.
   d.   Temporary mobile signs are also included within this provision.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-6 ILLUMINATION.
   a.   Illumination devices, such as, but not limited to, flood or spot lights
shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays of illumination from
being cast upon neighboring buildings or vehicles approaching from any
direction.
   b.   All bare light bulbs and all flood lights intended to illuminate a sign
shall be directed toward the face of the sign so as to eliminate glare or
nuisance to adjacent property and vehicular traffic.
   c.   No sign illumination system shall contain or utilize any beacon, spot,
search, stroboscopic light, laser or reflector which is visible from any public
right-of-way or adjacent property; nor shall such lights be operated outside
except as authorized by law. For amusement parks, beacon, spot, search or
stroboscopic lights or reflectors are permitted. Should any light, such as
laser, become a nuisance to motorists and/or aircraft or other property owners,
as determined by the Zoning Administrator, then such light shall be immediately
extinguished.
   d.   Signs within 100 feet of residential districts shall be shielded from
casting glare light into said district.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-7 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   a.   All signs or advertising structures located in districts where they are
not permitted under the terms of these regulations are hereby declared to be
nonconforming uses.
   b.   Should any sign become nonconforming, due to the passage of this or any
previous ordinance, extension of zoning jurisdiction or other amendments of
this ordinance, the sign may continue to exist. However, the nonconforming sign
shall not be replaced if removed, destroyed or damaged over 50% of the sign
replacement cost, unless it is replaced in conformity with this ordinance.
   c.   Signs with blinking, flashing lights shall come into conformity within
60 days of it becoming nonconforming and notification by the Zoning
Administrator.
   d.   All nonconforming signs shall immediately come under the provisions and
requirements of §
14-2.2 Traffic Safety and §
14-4 Maintenance.
   e.   Any legal nonconforming sign not otherwise regulated by this ordinance
may continue after the effective date of this ordinance if properly maintained
provided that nonconforming signs shall not be:
      1.   Changed to or replaced with another nonconforming sign. This
prohibition does not prevent the change of the sign’s content;
      2.   Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life;
      3.   Expanded;
      4.   Relocated;
      5.   Reestablished, reconstructed or replaced if the repair, replacement
or construction exceeds 50% of the sign structure value at the time of such
damage or destruction of such sign; and
      6.   Modified in any way that would increase the degree of nonconformity
of such sign.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-8 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
§ 14-8.1 TEMPORARY SIGNS WHICH DO NOT REQUIRE A PERMIT.
   a.   The following temporary signs may be erected, hung or placed without a
permit from the Zoning Administrator and shall not be illuminated, to include
LED type signs, unless otherwise specified. These signs are not exempted from
the safety, setback or maintenance provisions of this article. Temporary signs
shall be located entirely on private property with the permission of the
property owner.
      1.   In a nonresidential zoning district, the maximum number of signs per
parcel of property is four and the maximum area of the sign shall not exceed
four square feet and the maximum height above ground is four feet. Such signs
are not permitted on public property unless permitted elsewhere in this part.
      2.   In a residential zoned district, a maximum of four signs per lot.
Each sign may have two faces, for a maximum area per face of four square feet.
The maximum height above the surface of the street unless placed in a window is
four feet. Such signs are not permitted on public property unless permitted
elsewhere in this part.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-8.2 ROADSIDE “PICK YOUR OWN” SIGNS.
   a.   (G.S. § 136-129) Roadside “pick your own” signs are permitted along any
state highway right-of-way that advertises the sale of any fruit or vegetable
crop by the owner at a roadside stand or by having the purchaser to pick the
crop on the property on which the crop is grown if:
      1.   The sign is no more than two feet long on any side;
      2.   The sign is located on the property owned or leased by the grower
where crop is grown;
      3.   The grower is also the seller; and
      4.   The sign is kept in place by the grower for no more than 30 days.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-8.3 SIGNS ON VEHICLES.
   a.   Signs on a truck, bus, car or other motorized vehicle, trailers and
equipment are allowed provided the following conditions are adhered to:
      1.   Primary purpose of such vehicle is not the display of signs;
      2.   Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered
and licensed to operate on public streets when applicable; and
      3.   Vehicles and equipment are not used primarily as static displays
advertising.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-8.4 PUBLIC INTEREST SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS.
   a.   Public signs. Signs in the interest of, erected by, or on the order of,
a public officer in the performance of his or her public duty, such as
directional, regulatory, warning and information signs for events of public
interest such as a public hearing, rezoning announcement or general election;
   b.   Boundary signs for zoning and subdivision jurisdiction boundaries;
   c.   Memorial signs, tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when
cut into any building surface structure or affixed flat against a structure;
   d.   Official signs, such as traffic-control, parking restrictions,
information and notice and historical markers;
   e.   Street or road name signs, provided that the name does not conflict
with the emergency E911 identification system;
   f.   “No trespassing”, “No dumping”, “No loitering” and similar signs not
exceeding two square feet in area;
   g.   For the purpose of the Enhanced E-911 System, signs not exceeding two
square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers,
names of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises and if
residential, not to exceed nine feet above the surface of the street; and
      These signs may be unlighted or provided with indirect illumination.
   h.   Legal notices, identification, information or directional signs erected
or required by governmental bodies;
    i.   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings;
   j.   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property;
   k.   Signs located within a building, not intended for view by persons
located on the outside;
   l.   Public service signs may be displayed that identify public services or
conveniences, such as restrooms, telephones, state vehicle inspection, credit
cards accepted, hours of operation, vacancies; provided that the total area of
such signs displayed to any one street does not exceed four square feet;
   m.   Within commercial and industrial occupant zones, uses may have window
signs in addition to otherwise permitted building mounted and freestanding
signs;
   n.   Recreation sponsor signs shall not be installed to attract attention to
passersby outside of the park area. These signs are normally installed inside
the playing field fence, scoreboard, etc., and shall not exceed 32 square feet
per sign;
   o.   Political campaign signs. Refer to G.S. § 136-32 for signs placed upon
any highway. Signs announcing candidates seeking public political office and
data pertaining thereto shall be permitted up to a total area of 32 square
feet. These signs shall be confined within private property and shall not
encroach into the visibility triangle at street intersections. These signs may
be displayed within 30 days of one stop early voting and ending ten days after
the election for which intended. In cases where a final election follows a
primary election, those candidates who won in the primary election may continue
to display their signs during the interim period and up to ten days after the
final election; and
   p.   Direction or information signs of a public or quasi-public nature shall
not exceed 12 square feet in area:
      1.   Identification signs, such as the name or location of the town,
hospital, community center, public or private school, church, synagogue or
other place of worship;
      2.   Organizational signs, such as the name of a place of meeting or an
official or civic body such as the Chamber of Commerce, service club or
fraternal organization; and
      3.   Preferred truck route to an industrial or commercial complex or
similar purpose.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-9 TEMPORARY SIGNS, IN OTHER THAN RESIDENTIAL ZONES, WHICH REQUIRE A
PERMIT.
   a.   Any sign structures that exceed 32 square feet in area. The sign
structure shall not exceed 48 square feet.
      1.   A permit may be issued for a 120-day period.
      2.   The number of permits shall be limited to two a year per property.
   b.   Temporary signs shall be of a type readily relocated whether or not
they are permanently attached to a building, structure or on the ground. The
term includes signs on wheels or on portable structures, tent signs, A-frame
signs and similar devices.
   c.   S.L. 2015-246, G.S. § 160A-381, Construction Site, “fence wraps”
displaying signage associated with the construction site is exempt from zoning
regulation for signage until a certificate of occupancy is issued for the final
portion of any construction site or 24 months from the time the fence wrap was
installed, whichever is shorter. If construction is not completed at the end of
24 months from the time the fence wrap was installed, the town may regulate the
signage but shall continue to allow fence wrap materials to be affixed to the
perimeter fencing. No fence wrap affixed pursuant to this subsection may
display any advertising other than sponsored by a person directly involved in
the construction project and for which monetary compensation for the
advertisement is not paid or required.
   d.   Shall not incorporate LED, electro-mechanical, electronic or similar
type poster information.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-10 PERMANENT SIGNS WHICH REQUIRE A PERMIT.
   a.   The following signs may be erected, hung, placed or structurally
altered only after a permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
   b.   Directional signs and signs indicating entrances, drive through, exits,
service and parking areas are permitted on private property where numbers and
locations are approved by the Zoning Administrator, so long as the signs do not
exceed four square feet in area, excluding logo, and are for the sole purpose
of traffic control and safety. These signs may incorporate the business logo.
Maximum height above the vehicle travel way of four feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2493.jpg]
   Example of a Directional Sign with Logo
   c.   Signs which are capable of changing their poster information by means
of mechanical or electrical switching may be permitted provided that the rate
of poster information change is not more frequent than 15 minutes and the
complete change must take place within five seconds or less with no animation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2491.jpg]
   d.    Electro-mechanical and/or electronic, light emitting diode (LED) type
signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted poster display area permitted
within the associated zoning district and in no case exceed 48 square feet of
electronic poster display area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2489.jpg]
   Illustrations of Changeable Copy Signs, Both Manual and Electronic
   e.   The electronic sign shall be able to adjust its brightness to the
ambient light regardless of the time of day.
   f.   The sign shall not scroll or be animated.
   g.   No more than one sign per street front of any premises shall contain
changeable copy with the exception of subordinate establishments taking
advantage of the additional independent eight square foot display panels. The
aggregate area of the main and subordinate display area shall not exceed 48
square feet.
   h.   Permanent subdivision signs. Permanent tract, subdivision or
neighborhood signs situated at the street entrance or entrances to the
appurtenant tract or neighborhood shall be permitted at the discretion of the
Town Council with the recommendations of the Planning Board. The sign shall
contain only the name of the said tract, neighborhood or subdivision, and:
      1.   Shall consist of landscaped, decorative masonry walls or structures
and may be illuminated with flood lights or provided with interior
illumination; and
      2.   For subdivisions with more than ten lots, two subdivision entrance
signs per principal entrance are allowed. Each shall not exceed an area of 20
square feet and not exceed a height above the road pavement of seven feet. If
installed within a divided intersection or island, it shall not be closer than
20 feet to the intersection of another street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2487.jpg]
   Example 1: Subdivision Sign
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2485.jpg]
   Example 2: Subdivision Sign
      3.   For subdivisions fewer than ten lots, one subdivision identification
sign is allowed. Such sign shall not exceed 20 feet in area nor five feet in
height.
      4.   Multi- family structures and group developments are permitted
development identification sign(s) not to exceed 64 square feet in area. Only
one freestanding sign per street frontage not to exceed ten feet in height.
      5.   The above requirements may be varied by the Planning Board as to
size and placement if the sign is incorporated within an approved subdivision
entrance way, gatehouse or portal.
      6.   Hotels, motels, inns and lodges shall be permitted business
identification signs, which signs shall not exceed a combined area of 100
square feet. Only one freestanding sign per street frontage is allowed not to
exceed the maximum height of freestanding signs in the district.
   i.   Barber pole. In addition to any other signs authorized by the
provisions of this ordinance, any barber shop shall be entitled to display a
barber pole.
   j.   Wall signs. Each business is permitted a wall sign on the primary and
secondary face of the building.
      1.   The basic allowance for wall signs shall be limited to two square
feet of sign area for each linear foot of building or tenant space for the
primary elevation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2483.jpg]
These Pictures Illustrate Signs for a Single Tenant and Are in Scale with the
Tenant Space and Affords Flexibility and Opportunity for Creative Design
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2481.jpg]
      2.   The basic allowance for wall signs shall be limited to one square
foot of sign area for each linear foot of building or tenant space for the
secondary elevation.
      3.   Each tenant may have multiple wall signs so long as the sign area
does not exceed the allowances established herein.
      4.   The wall sign(s) shall not be greater than 80% of the length of the
tenant space or the length of the building frontage.
      5.   The area of any wall sign may be increased by 25% when the building
is set back at least 200 feet from the public right-of-way and may be further
increased by an additional 25% for each additional 200 feet of setback, or
fraction hereof, up to a maximum increase of 100%.
      6.   No sign shall be displayed or extend above the roof line or top of
parapet of which said sign is located.
   k.   Projection signs are permitted in addition to the allowance of wall
signs when designed and placed for the purpose of identifying the business
along the same side of the street as the business they seek or under a
continuous rain canopy projecting from the building. The sign shall not exceed
eight square feet per sign face. The bottom of the sign shall not extend below
eight feet above the sidewalk; the sign shall not exceed six feet beyond the
wall face of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2479.jpg]
Sample of Projection Signs   Sample Under Canopy Signs
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-11 ON-PREMISES PERMANENT FREESTANDING SIGNS.
   a.   On-premises permanently installed freestanding appurtenant signs are
permitted for each business or establishment which are on separate parcels, to
which the business owner has exclusive right of possession, in commercial and
industrial zones. Their maximum height, area and setback will vary depending on
the vehicle speed limit of the highway and/or linear street frontage location
as set forth below.
      1.   Twenty percent of the poster information shall be continuously
devoted to the on- premises establishment to which the sign is appurtenant.
   b.   Size and height computation. The sign area shall include the frame, if
any, but shall not include:
      1.   A pole or other structural support unless such pole or structure
support is internally illuminated or otherwise designed to constitute a display
device, or a part of a display device;
      2.    Architectural features that are either part of the building or part
of the freestanding structure, and not an integral part of the sign, and which
may consist of landscaping, building or structural forms complementing the site
in general;
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2497.jpg]
Example of a Low Freestanding Sign Properly Placed and Is Visible to Passing
Vehicles
      3.   When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so both faces
cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the same sign
structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of the larger of
the two faces; and
      4.   When the sign has more than two display surfaces, the area of the
sign shall be the area of the largest display surfaces that are visible from
any single direction.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2495.jpg]
The Area of a Sign, with More than Two Faces, Would Be Calculated at the Area
of the Largest Rectangular Plane of the Panels That Are Visible from Any Single
Location
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-11.1 COMMERCIAL ZONE ALONG TWO LANE, 35 AND 45 MPH ROADS.
   a.   Maximum height of poster information is 12 feet measured above mean
grade perpendicular to the primary street to which the sign is constructed.
Where the sign property is higher than the primary highway or street, the sign
may be 12 feet above the property average grade. The Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to determine that additional sign height is warranted (above
the lower grade) to assure that the sign has visibility equal to other signs
along the street. Alternatively, the sign shall not be granted extra height by
measuring the height from an “artificial” site feature that has raised the base
of the sign substantially above the grade of the adjacent street.
   b.   Front or side yard setback, nearest portion of the sign to the property
line, 0.0 feet.
   c.   Maximum area of poster information is 32 square feet for a single
establishment on a parcel of land that is less than 100 linear feet of road
frontage. The same sign may be enlarged by eight square feet for each
additional establishment to a maximum of 64 square feet of poster information.
The height may be increased by two feet if the additional 32 square feet is
utilized.
   d.   The maximum area of the sign on a parcel of land larger than 100 linear
feet of road frontage is 50 square feet which may be enlarged by eight square
feet for each establishment to a maximum of 64 square feet.
      The height may be increased by two feet if the additional 14 square feet
is utilized.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-11.2 COMMERCIAL ZONE ALONG A 55 MPH ROAD.
   a.   Maximum height of poster information is 16 feet above mean grade
measured perpendicular to the primary street to which the sign is constructed.
Where the sign property is higher than the primary highway or street, the sign
may be 16 feet above the property average grade. The Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to determine that additional sign height is warranted (above
the lower grade) to assure that the sign has visibility equal to other signs
along the street. Alternatively, the sign shall not be granted extra height by
measuring the height from an “artificial” site feature that has raised the base
of the sign substantially above the grade of the adjacent street.
   b.   Front or side yard setback, nearest portion of the sign to the property
line, 0.0 feet.
   c.   Maximum area of poster information is 50 square feet for a single
establishment on a parcel of land that is less than 100 linear feet of road
frontage. The same sign may be enlarged by eight square feet for each
additional establishment to a maximum of 82 square feet of poster information.
The height may be increased by two feet if the additional 32 square feet is
utilized.
   d.   The maximum area of the sign on a parcel of land larger than 100 linear
feet of road frontage is 64 square feet which may be enlarged by eight square
feet for each additional establishment to a maximum of 96 square feet. The
height may be increased by two feet if the additional 32 square feet is
utilized.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-11.3 SHOPPING CENTERS.
   a.   Shopping center signage is preferred to be approved along with site
plan review. A SHOPPING CENTER is defined for this part as five or more
commercial establishments on a parcel of land.
   b.   All freestanding signs, including those for out-parcels shall be
consolidated to minimize the number and clutter of freestanding signs.
   c.   Shopping centers with more than 300 linear feet of road frontage may
have more than one freestanding sign, provided that they are spaced at least
100 feet apart along the road measured from the center of the signs.
   d.   These additional signs shall not exceed 64 square feet of poster
information per side.
   e.   Shopping centers that front U.S. Highway 70 may have one monument or
freestanding sign that may contain multiple poster panels for primary and
subordinate establishments.
   f.   If the sign is located within 50 feet of the entrance driveway, it
shall be set back at least seven feet from the front property line otherwise,
the sign may be located up to the property line.
   g.   If the sign is located within 50 feet of the entrance driveway
intersection of the primary street, the bottom of the sign structure shall be
no closer than seven feet above the ground. and the sign support post or poles
shall not obstruct the view of on-coming traffic along the primary street.
Landscaping shall be maintained so as not to exceed three feet high and not to
obstruct the view of on-coming traffic.
   h.   This sign may be a monument type if located further than 50 feet from
the entrance intersection so long as not to obstruct the view of on-coming
traffic along the primary street.
   i.   For shopping centers that are larger than 50,000 square feet in
building area, the freestanding sign may not exceed 196 square feet in poster
area. The allowable area of one freestanding sign may be computed as one square
foot per linear foot or principal footage and shall not exceed 300 square feet,
except for the larger commercial centers with two freestanding signs as
referenced above. Allowable square footage for combined freestanding signs
shall not exceed 300 square feet.
   j.   For shopping centers equal to or less than 50,000 square feet in
building area, the freestanding sign may not exceed 132 square feet in poster
area.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-11.4 INDUSTRIAL PARK SIGN.
   a.   For an industrial park containing ten or more acres of land area, one
park identification sign for each principal entrance or frontage not to exceed
two faces neither of which shall exceed 100 square feet of surface area. Parks
less than ten acres may display a sign not larger than 32 square feet.
   b.   Each establishment may display signs such as permitted on commercial
establishments.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
§ 14-11.5 SPECIAL USE SIGN.
   Contemporaneous with or subsequent to the granting of a special use permit,
the Board of Adjustment may authorize identification signs appurtenant to the
special use and may impose additional restrictions on their size, height,
shape, color, lighting and location. The Board shall not authorize a sign that
exceeds the requirements of the use if it were located in a permitted use zone
elsewhere in this article.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. Z2016-03, passed 7-14-2016)
ARTICLE XV: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15-1 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   a.   In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry
out the purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, these
regulations shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise
affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, deed restrictions or
other agreements between parties. Wherever the provisions of these regulations
impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or require a
larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other
ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants, deed
restrictions or other agreements between parties, the provisions of these
regulations shall govern.
   b.   All of the provisions of this part are hereby made applicable to the
erection, construction and use of buildings by the State of North Carolina and
its political subdivisions (G.S. § 160A-392).
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-2 ZONING AFFECTS ALL LAND AND BUILDINGS.
   No land, building or structure shall be used, no structure shall be erected,
and no existing structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered, except
in conformity with these regulations.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-3 ONLY ONE PRINCIPAL USE UPON ANY LOT.
   There shall be no more than one principal use upon any lot in a residential
zone.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-4 REDUCTION OR CHANGE IN LOT SIZE.
   No lot shall be reduced or changed in size so that the total area, minimum
frontage, front, side or rear setbacks, lot area per dwelling unit, or other
dimensions, areas or open spaces required by these regulations are not
maintained. No lot shall be reduced in size so as to produce an additional lot,
reduce a remaining lot which is not in conformity with these regulations,
unless said lots are combined with other land to produce a conforming lot or
unless the nonconforming lot is needed and accepted for public use.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-4.1 TOWNHOUSE.
   a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, the individual
dwelling units of attached single-family dwellings which are, or have been,
constructed in compliance with the terms of this ordinance, which qualify as
townhouse as defined by the North Carolina Building Code, may be conveyed as
separate units so that each may be individually owned. Each such conveyance
shall consist of the unit, including the portion of the lot on which it is
constructed, a portion of the lot which lies between the unit and the public
street on which it fronts, and a portion of the lot which lies between the unit
and the back line of the lot on which the townhouse is constructed. In the case
of end units, the conveyance shall include the remainder of said lot to the
side lot line. This provision is commonly called, “zero lot line”.
   b.   The dimensional requirements, if any, including area, front, side and
rear yard, shall be determined by the zoning classification applicable to the
particular site. Said dimensional requirements shall be applied to the overall
structure, as opposed to the individual townhouse units, as if the individual
units were going to be owner occupied or rented, as opposed to being sold as
separate townhouse units.
   c.   Prior to issuing any building permits under this part, the Town Council
shall approve the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions for the
dwellings.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-5 MAINTENANCE OF OPEN SPACES, PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.
   a.   No yard shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in
conformity with these regulations. No yard for one principal building shall be
considered as a yard for any other principal building. Shrubbery, driveways,
walks, parking lots, retaining walls, fences, trellis, curbs, ornamental
objects and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be encroachments on
yards.
   b.   Certain architectural features may project into required yards or
courts as follows: cornices; canopies; fuel islands; awnings; and fire escapes.
Outside stairways may project no more than three feet into the side or rear
yard setback. Eaves shall be allowed to project into a minimum required yard no
more than 24 inches.
   c.   Within commercial, industrial or public use zones, accessory items such
as listed below are permitted where the following conditions are adhered to:
      1.   The use is not located within the normal vehicle travel lane, if it
will impede normal traffic flow or reduce the minimum required parking spaces;
      2.   The use does not adversely impair visibility either on premises,
travel way or other property. Accessory dispensing machines or uses may be
located at the curb accessible from the business side of the curb which will
not require pedestrian or vehicle traffic to encroach on or occupy any part of
a street right-of-way to use the machine; and
      3.    Typical permitted machines are vehicle air dispensing or vacuum
cleaners, newspaper, soft drink vending machines, bank teller and ice vending.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2924.png]
   Example of Accessory Permitted Use: Vehicle Air Pump Is in Setback
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2922.png]
   Example of Permitted Use: Fuel Island and Canopy in Setback
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3cf5df13339a88525c1de8edea123db75ef5ee89/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2920.png]
   Example of Large Vending Machine in Setback
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-6 STREET ACCESS.
   No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut at least 35 feet
on an open street which is either a public street, a dedicated right-of-way or
an alley, unless such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this
ordinance.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-7 LOTS WITH MULTIPLE FRONTAGES.
   In the case of a corner lot having frontage on two or more streets, all
buildings shall be setback from each such street a distance equal to the
minimum front yard requirement for the district. In a commercial or industrial
zone, if a building is constructed on a lot having frontage on two streets but
not at an intersection, a setback from the secondary street may be reduced to
one-half of the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is
located but not in conflict with the fire lane requirements of the Building
Code.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 15-8 USES PROHIBITED.
   If either a use or class of uses is not specifically indicated as being
permitted in a district, either as a matter of right or as a special or
conditional use, then such use or class of uses shall be prohibited in such
district.
(Ord. Z2013-01, passed 9-12-2013; Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
ARTICLE XVI: SUBDIVISIONS
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Any land area subject to the provisions of this chapter which lies within
the floodway, and other land deemed by the Planning Board to be unsuitable
shall be prohibited for residential occupancy or for other use that may
jeopardize life, health or property, or which may increase the danger to life
on property from flood hazard.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   The following standards for design shall be minimum requirements. Where
other official engineering and public works, standards, and specifications are
more stringent, such higher standards shall be used.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.1 ALLEYS.
   a.   Alleys may be required where it is found that access requirements of
Article XIII of the Zoning Ordinance are not adequate.
   b.   The width of an alley serving commercial and industrial areas shall not
be less than 20 feet. Deadend alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround
facilities at the deadend as determined by the Planning Board.
   c.   Alleys are not permitted in residential districts except where the
Planning Board determines that special conditions warrant a secondary means of
access.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.2 BLOCKS.
   a.   Blocks shall be laid out with special attention given to the type of
use contemplated.
   b.   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet or be less than 400 feet.
Blocks shall not be more than 1,000 feet unless there is an approved pedestrian
alley of not less than six feet wide dividing the blocks.
   c.   Blocks shall have a sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of
minimum depth. Blocks may consist of single tier lots where such are required
to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or
nonresidential uses.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.3 BUFFER STRIPS.
   The Council may require in residential districts that a buffer strip of at
least 50 feet in depth, in addition to the normal lot depth required, be
provided adjacent to all railroads, limited access highways and commercial
developments. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall have the
following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved
for the planting of trees or shrubs by the owner; the building of structures
thereon is prohibited."
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.4 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   a.   The minimum building setback or the distance between the street right-
of-way line and the building line shall not be less than that prescribed in the
zoning district of the subdivision.
   b.   Where the lack of vehicle parking is a concern, the town shall require
additional setback requirements so as to accommodate additional vehicle parking
on the lot.
   c.   Double vehicle driveway width may be required, along with the
requirements of paragraph b. above. The driveway may be required to be paved
with a hard surface material so as to be in keeping with the intended character
of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.5 CUL-DE-SAC.
   A cul-de-sac shall not exceed 800 feet in length measured from the entrance
to the center of the turnaround. A street designed to be permanently closed
shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround. Adequate sewer and water
line right-of-way shall be reserved to eliminate water line deadends and to
provide sewage outfall.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.6 EASEMENTS.
   a.   Easements shall be provided where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream. There shall be provided a storm
easement or drainage right-of-way substantially in conformity with the lines of
such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
   b.   Easements for utilities shall be provided. Easements not less than ten
feet wide, centered on lot lines for both underground and above ground
facilities, for use by both public and private utilities shall be provided
along each lot line.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.7 ROAD GRADES.
   Road grades in accordance with NCDOT Subdivisions Roads Manual.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.8 HORIZONTAL CURVES.
   Horizontal curves in roads in accordance with NCDOT Subdivisions Roads
Manual.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.9 ROAD INTERSECTIONS.
   Road intersections in accordance with NCDOT Subdivisions Roads Manual.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.10 LOTS.
   Lots shall be laid out as follows.
   a.   Minimum lot width at the street, lot sites, shapes and locations shall
be made with due regard to topographic conditions, contemplated use and the
surrounding area. Each lot shall front for a distance of at least 50 feet on a
public street, except that the minimum road frontage shall be 35 feet in the
turning radius of a cul-de-sac.
   b.   Community water and sewer available. Where the town public water and
sewer facilities or public water and sewer facilities licensed as such by the
North Carolina Utilities Commission and meeting the town's design and
engineering standards are available, every lot shall contain not less than the
area prescribed in the zoning district in which the subdivision exists.
   c.   Community water and sewer not available. Residential lots not served by
the town public water and sewer facilities or public water and sewer facilities
licensed by the North Carolina Utilities Commission and meeting the town's
design and engineering standards, shall be at least 20,000 square feet in area,
not less than 100 feet wide at the building line nor less than 150 feet deep.
   d.   Community water available. Residential lots served by town public water
facilities or public water facilities licensed by the North Carolina Utilities
Commission and meeting the town's design and engineering standards, but not
public sewer, shall be at least 15,000 square feet in area, not less than 90
feet wide at the building line nor less than 150 feet deep. Every lot shall
contain not less than the area prescribed in the zoning district for the
appropriate zone or zones in which the subdivision exists.
   e.   Corner residential lots. The lot line with the shortest street frontage
shall be increased by ten feet more than otherwise required in order to provide
adequate space to meet side setback requirements.
   f.   Double frontage lots. Double frontage or reverse frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to separate residential development from through
traffic or nonresidential uses.
   g.   Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
or radial to street lines.
   h.   Commercial or industrial uses. Lots are not required for commercial or
industrial uses but when provided they shall be adequate to provide for off-
street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
   i.   Minimum lot size. In no instance shall the area of a residential lot be
less than the size determined to be adequate by the County Health Department
after investigation of soil conditions, proposed individual disposal system and
depth of ground water. All lots shall conform to the zoning districts in which
the subdivision exists.
   j.   Flag lots.
      1.   Flag lots as defined by §
4-3, are allowed only within Zoning Districts R-20, R-20A and R-15.
      2.   The flag pole which is the entrance of the lot shall front a public
street, road or right-of-way by a minimum of 35 feet. The entrance way "pole"
shall maintain the 35 foot minimum width throughout its entire length until it
joins the main "flag" body. The main body is considered to start where its
width is as wide as the required minimum lot width in the district.
      3.   The flag pole and flag portion of the lot shall not be separate
parcels and shall not be used as access to other parcels of land. The flag pole
shall not be included as part of the required minimum lot area in the district.
      4.   The address of the dwelling located on a flag lot shall be clearly
visible from the street which the flag lot accesses.
      5.   Where the neighborhood and lot are provided with public water
service, a fire hydrant may be required and located within 500 feet of the
dwelling at the discretion of the fire official. If the hydrant is required to
be located on the main body of the flag lot or flag pole portion of the lot,
the expense will be born by the property owner.
      6.   The front of the dwelling shall be oriented toward the entrance
"pole". It is to be assumed that the "pole" extends through the lot. This
should orient the flag lot dwelling side yard towards the rear yard of the
front "parent" lot.
      7.   To allow the street fronting parent lot to be fenced for its entire
back and side yard to the maximum allowed in the district, the maximum height
for front yard setback fence requirement for the parent lot shall be measured
from the street right-of-way at the flag entrance to the front yard setback
distance of the parent lot required in the district, or to the front yard
setback of the adjacent dwelling on the parent lot, whichever is further from
the road.
      8.   Flag lots shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board for
all subdivisions.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.11 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS.
   Pedestrian easements or walkways shall be provided through the interior of
blocks having a length greater than 1,000 feet. Pedestrian easements shall be
at least six feet wide and shall be laid out along property lines. The walkways
shall be paved.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.12 RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PAVEMENT WIDTHS.
   The minimum right-of-way and pavement width shall be in accordance with the
North Carolina Division of Highways Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction
Standards Manual.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-2.13 STREETS.
   a.   Character. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and
location of all streets shall conform to all of the elements of the official
plans for the community and shall be designed in accordance with the provisions
of NCDOT Manual referred to in §
7-3.6b.
   b.   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so that use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
   c.   Private streets. There shall be no private streets platted in any
subdivision except where located in a subdivision with a homeowners association
which is responsible for street maintenance, in a commercial development, or in
the ETJ where offered for dedication to the public. Where the development roads
are to remain private roads, the following words shall appear on the recorded
plat:
      "All roads in this development shall remain private roads to be
maintained by the developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or
maintained by the town."
   d.   Proposed street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in
alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the assigned name of
the existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate
or be phonetically similar to existing street names. The subdivider shall have
all proposed street names approved by the County E-911 Supervisor.
   e.   Street pattern and adjacent property. The street pattern shall be such
as to cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The Planning
Board may require the dedication of a street right-of-way to facilitate the
development of adjacent properties.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   a.   Final plats for all subdivisions shall not be approved until all
required improvements listed in this section have been installed or the
subdivider has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Town Council as provided
in §
7-2 below that such improvements will be installed.
   b.   All improvements shall be made in conformity with the requirements and
standards set forth in this chapter and other specifications and policies at
the developer's expense.
   c.   All improvements shall be inspected and approved by the Zoning
Administrator, or his or her representative, as conforming to the requirements
of the town.
   d.   All improvement specifications of the town are on file in the office of
the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4 REQUIREMENTS.
§ 16-4.1 PERMANENT SURVEY REFERENCE MARKERS.
   Permanent survey reference markers shall be installed in all subdivisions in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 39, Art. 5A and the following requirements.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.2 PERMANENT CONCRETE MONUMENTS.
   Permanent concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, three feet
long, shall be placed at not less than two corners of the subdivision, provided
that additional monuments shall be placed where necessary so that no point
within the subdivision lies more than 500 feet from a monument. Two or more of
the required monuments shall be designated as control corners. The top of each
monument shall have an indented cross metal pin or metal plate to identify the
location of the point. All monuments will be shown on the final plat.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.3 STEEL OR IRON MARKERS.
   Steel or iron markers shall be set at all lot corners and at all other
survey points not marked by monuments. Such markers shall be set at points of
curvature, points of tangency, reference points, and points of intersection.
Survey markers shall be at least three-fourths inches in diameter and shall be
sunk vertically into the ground until the top is approximately four inches
above the finished grade, except in sidewalks, streets and other similar
surfaces where the markers shall be flush with such surface. In the interest of
safety, steel or iron markers may be installed flush with the ground surface
provided the point is also marked with a wooden survey stake until all lots
adjoining the point are sold.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.4 ELECTRICAL AND TELEPHONE SERVICES.
   All electrical, telephone, cable TV and other such utilities shall be
underground.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5 OPEN SPACE RESERVATION FOR PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS OR RECREATIONAL.
   Every person or corporation that subdivides land for residential purposes
under the requirements of this ordinance shall also be required to dedicate a
portion of such land, to provide cash in lieu of land payment, or to provide a
combination of land, cash and facility development acceptable to the town for
the purpose of developing park, recreation and open space sites to serve the
residents of the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located or in the
immediate area of the subdivision.
   a.   The Planning Board shall consider and make recommendations to the Town
Council whether to accept a dedication of land or to require a fee in lieu of
dedication.
   b.   Land set aside for parks and recreational purposes will be dedicated to
the town by proper conveyance of title. Said conveyance shall be indicated on
the final plat for recording and any deeds shall accompany the final plat for
consideration by the Town Council. The developer shall improve the land set
aside with landscaping. The developer may be required to provide recreation
equipment and facilities as the town deems appropriate for the use of the
recreation land. If a fee in lieu of land is proposed, the fee shall accompany
the final plat submitted to the Council.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5.1 PRIVATE OWNERSHIP OF PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
   Private ownership of parks and recreation areas for subdivisions or multi-
family developments are authorized under these regulations subject to the
following stipulations.
   a.   A duly organized ownership association is created to provide for
management and maintenance, or in the case of multi-family developments,
management and maintenance is the obligation of the developer or property
owner.
   b.   In the event of dissolution or financial incapability of a private
ownership organization to properly manage and/or maintain its private
facilities, those areas will be dedicated and conveyed to the town. Language
providing for this conditional conveyance shall be included in the
organizational instruments of the private ownership association and a deed
shall be executed to the town conveying the land and the facilities located
thereon to the town, conditioned, however, that the private ownership
organization or the developer or owner, as the case may be, of the land and
facilities shall have the full right to occupy, possess, maintain and control
such land and facilities so long as the organization, developer or owner is in
existence and is exercising the responsibility for maintenance and control of
the land and facilities.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5.2 DULY RECORDED INSTRUMENTS.
   Park and recreational use of the land set aside is protected by duly
recorded instruments. Restrictions and covenants running with the land can not
be voiced or amended by the owner or ownership association without the prior
written consent of the town and a deed shall be executed to the town conveying
the land and the facilities located thereon to the town, conditioned, however
that the private ownership organization or the developer or owner, as the case
may be, of the land and facilities shall have the full right to occupy,
possess, maintain and control such land and facilities so long as the
organization, developer or owner is in existence and is exercising the
responsibility for maintenance and control of the land and facilities.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5.3 AREA DEVOTED TO PARKS AND RECREATION.
   The area devoted to parks and recreational purposes is equal to or exceeds
the area required under these regulations. Exemptions:
   a.   The division of a parcel of land into one new lot is exempt from this
part; and
   b.   Industrial and commercial subdivisions, without any residential, are
exempt from this part.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5.4 FORMULA FOR AREA SET ASIDE.
   The following formula which addresses number, type and density of dwelling
units will be used to determine the amount of area to be set aside for park and
recreational purposes:
 
(NDU) x (2.4 3 AFS) x (.008) x (VDF) = Acres Set Aside
Example 1. For a 33 lot, 12-acre subdivision.
33 x 2.43 x 0.008 x 1.2 = 0.76 acres (33,105 sq. ft.)
NDU = Number of dwelling units.
AFS = Average family size (latest census).
VDF = Variable density factor.
 
VARIABLE DENSITY FACTOR TABLE
Acreage Average per Dwelling Unit VDF
0.0-0.1                           1.8
0.1-0.2                           1.6
0.2-0.3                           1.4
0.3-0.4                           1.2
0.4-0.5                           1.0
0.5-0.6                           0.9
0.6-0.7                           0.8
0.7-0.8                           0.7
0.8-0.9                           0.6
0.9 over                          0.5
 
      1.   The average acre per dwelling unit is computed by dividing the
combined total acreage of all dwelling units or lots by the number of dwelling
units or lots. For computation purposes, land dedicated or reserved for
purposes such as streets, alleys and purposes other than residential shall not
be used in determining average acreage. In no case shall a developer be
required to dedicate more than 30% of the acreage of a development.
         Example 1. For a 33 lot 12 acre subdivision.
         12 acres ÷ 33 = 0.36 acre average. Reference to the chart shows a 1.2
VDF
      2.   Variable density factor is designed to provide an adjustment to
subdivision plats which contain average lot sizes of one-half acres and above.
This adjustment is used since subdivisions with larger lots contain more open
space and thus fewer lots and greater park acreage. Conversely, those
subdivision plats that create lots or units which average less than two-fifths
acres are adjusted due to the density of development and the inherent increased
demand for more public recreation and park land. The adjustments for large lots
or for small lots are based on a sliding scale reflecting degree of density.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5.5 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING SUITABILITY.
   Criteria for evaluating suitability of proposed recreation, parks and open
space areas shall include, but not be limited to, the following as determined
by the Council.
   a.   Unity. The dedicated land shall be a single parcel except where it is
determined that two or more parcels would be in the public interest. The
Planning Board may request that the parcels be connected and may also require
at least a 30-foot path width in addition to the land requirements.
   b.   Location. The dedicated land shall be located so as to serve the
recreation needs of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision. General
public access shall not be restricted from the recreation area.
   c.   Shape. Topography and soils of the dedicated land shall be such as to
be suitable for parking and active recreation. Lakes and marsh may not be
included in computing dedicated land area unless acceptable to the Planning
Board. Land area less than two and one-half contiguous acres shall not be
considered as suitable for land set aside.
   d.   Accessibility. Public access to the dedicated land shall be provided
either by an abutting street or public easement. Such public easement shall be
at least 30 feet in width. The proposed land set aside shall be located as
remote from a building lot as possible. Consideration shall be given to the
location, screening, or buffering so as not to cause a nuisance to the
residential area. If adequate protection to the residential area can not be
provided, then the offer for land set aside shall be denied and a fee in lieu
of land set aside shall be required.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.5.6 FEES IN LIEU OF LAND SET ASIDE.
   In the event that it is determined by the town that the area, topography,
geology, access or location of the area to be set aside does not conform to the
park and recreational objectives of the town or appropriately meet the
immediate and future needs of the residents due to the availability of adjacent
facilities, the town may elect to waive the set aside of land for dedication by
accepting a fee in lieu of the dedication of land subject to the following:
   a.   Determination of fee. The amount of the fee to be accepted in lieu of
land dedication shall be determined by multiplying the required acreage times
the tax value of the land to be subdivided.
         Example 1. Tax value at the time of submittal of preliminary plat to
the Planning Board:
         $6,000 per acre x 0.76 acres = $4,560
   b.   Payment of required fees shall be by cash or certified check, payable
to the town. Payment must be made before final plat approval is granted by the
town.
   c.   Funds collected in lieu of land set aside shall be maintained in a
separate interest bearing account by the town in a recreation reserve fund for
use only to acquire additional land or expand or improve existing recreational
facilities.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.6 PAVING AND STREET IMPROVEMENT.
   a.   The subdivider of any subdivision shall clear and grade all streets to
their full right-of-way width so as to provide adequate shoulders and
pedestrian walkways.
   b.   All streets shall be designed, constructed and paved in accordance with
the Division of Highways, North Carolina Department of Transportation,
Subdivision Roads, Minimum Construction Standards Manual, current edition.
   c.   Streets within the corporate limits shall be provided with curb and
gutter except where, at the option of the Town Council, engineering design
philosophy recommends against curb and gutter because environmental and storm
water controls would be best managed with other types of street design. The
town may require streets within the extraterritorial jurisdiction to have curb
and gutter.
   d.   The subdivider may be required to provide street/road(s) connection to
the property line to serve an adjacent tract of land for future development and
may be required to interconnect with an adjacent development's road system.
   e.   The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost and installation of
the road foundation, paving and/or any other road improvements.
   f.   If a street has a potential for being a collector street, or minor
street, the Council may require the installation of traffic calming devices.
The devices shall be approved by the Council upon recommendation by planning
staff and the Police Chief.
   g.   All collector roads, service roads and local residential subdivision
roads shall be provided with double stripe paint markings so as to delineate
travel lanes.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   a.   Municipal or community system. For subdivisions within the corporate
limits of the town, the subdivider shall connect to the sewer system of the
town in order to provide sewer service to every lot within the subdivision.
Sewer systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Public
Utilities Handbook Technical Specifications Water/Sewer Improvements for the
Town of Newport, state and federal environmental rules and other such
specifications as may be required by the town.
   b.   Where it is necessary to construct sewage lift stations, the developer
shall also provide the necessary land. The station shall be floodproofed,
fenced and landscaped to the satisfaction of the town. The design of the
station not limited solely to the size of pumps, alarm system and the like,
shall be to the satisfaction of the town. All sewage lift stations shall be
provided with an auto-start, standby power generator of sufficient capacity to
operate the lift station during power outages. The fuel type and capacity will
be determined by the town. Should the developer desire to utilize an existing
lift station, the developer shall pay for any engineering and/or increased
capacity costs to the lift station, to include any new alarm system and an
auto-start standby power generator.
   c.   Individual disposal systems. Where the subdivision is not serviced by
the town or a community system, the individual disposal system shall be
approved by the County Environmental Health Department or appropriate state
agency. All proposed lots shall be evaluated for approval and a letter shall
indicate by lot number its potential for approval and where improvements will
be required for final approval.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.8 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be required along any street where considerable pedestrian
traffic is expected, as determined by the Town Planning Board or Town Council,
especially in the vicinity of schools, parks and commercial activity. Sidewalks
shall be constructed on street right-of-way and installed in accordance with
town policy.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.9 STREET LIGHTS.
   Before final approval of a subdivision plat, the subdivider shall present a
street lighting plan, developed in accordance with town policy, to the Planning
Board for its approval. Street lights shall be installed at each intersection,
the dead end of cul-de-sacs and within 500 feet of each other. Public street
lighting fixture installation fees, if any, shall be paid by the developer.
Rental fees on the fixtures inside the town limits shall be paid by the town.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.10 STREET NAME MARKERS.
   a.   The developer shall provide street name markers at all subdivision
street intersections and at any other point within the subdivision deemed
necessary by the town. Approved regulation street name signage consists of
metal pipe poles with street names on metal plates. Material specifications,
attachment devices and coloration shall be those officially adopted for use by
the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
   b.   Use of non-regulation street signs.
      1.   The Town Council may approve non-regulation street signs where the
developer desires to use distinctive street signage as a tenant of initial
marketing and aesthetics design under the following conditions. The developer
will provide for the funding and eventual erection of regulation street name
signs.
      2.   Compliance options.
         a.   Prior to final approval, the developer may:
            1.   Deposit with the town the amount of money required to purchase
the regulation street signs necessary for the subdivision or phase for which
plat approval is required. The amount of money to be deposited with the town
shall be based on the estimated cost of materials as determined by the Town
Manager; or
            2.   Deliver to the Town Manager the poles, mounting apparatus and
street name plates required for the subdivision or phase for which plat
approval is required.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.11 TREES AND PRESERVATION OF NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   It is required that trees be planted in all subdivisions where there is a
lack of natural trees along the streets. The plan for tree planting shall be
submitted to the Planning Board at the time of presentation of the preliminary
plan. Trees planted should be located inside the property lines where they are
less subject to injury, decrease the chance of motor accidents and enjoy more
favorable conditions for growth. At least one tree planted every 30 lineal feet
along the front property line generally will be accepted. The size and type of
trees are specified in
Appendix A-1, Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.12 SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS.
   a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
   b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   d.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivisions that
are located within a Flood Zone A as depicted on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, federal insurance rate map (FIRM) and the design shall be
consistent with the town's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   e.   In all subdivisions where land disturbing activity is one acre or more,
the subdivider shall submit for and receive a sedimentation and storm water
control permit from the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and
Community Development. In addition, the developer shall comply with other
conditions that may be more stringent as specified in this ordinance.
   f.   Surface water drainage shall not empty into a sanitary sewer. Where in
the opinion of the Planning Board a public storm water sewer is reasonably
accessible (within 100 feet of an existing storm water sewer and feasible from
an elevation viewpoint upon the recommendation of a registered engineer), and
before a subdivision is approved and accepted, the subdivider shall connect
with the public storm sewer system. He or she shall provide all grading and all
structures necessary to carry the water to the storm drainage system.
   g.   Where a storm drainage system is not accessible, the subdivider shall
do all grading and provide all drainage structures necessary to properly carry
the water to locations which are acceptable to the town.
   h.   When consistent with the minimum requirements of the Division of
Environmental Management for storm water controls, all drainage ditches shall
be paved, approved conduit construction and/or otherwise enclosed. Exceptions
that may be considered by the Town Council are:
      1.   Where good engineering data suggests and recommendations are made
not to enclose or pave;
      2.   Where an open ditch is to have side slopes of three to one or
greater, prove that vegetation can be maintained on the ditch slopes and it
will not become a high maintenance item;
      3.   Where an open ditch will not be an attractive nuisance; and
      4.   Where the open ditch will not adversely detract from the appearance
of the subdivision, such as the possibility of noxious weeds, snakes, vermin or
other nuisances.
   i.   Where the possibility exists for the subdivision drainage water to
adversely affect other drainage ditches down stream, such as to load the
ditches beyond their design capacity which may cause flooding or erosion, the
developer shall provide sufficient engineering study to determine the impact.
Where an adverse impact is determined to exist, as substantiated by the Town
Engineer and the Public Works Department, the subdivider shall mitigate, at his
or her expense, the drainage problem to the satisfaction of the town.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.13 WATER SUPPLY.
   a.   Every lot in every subdivision shall be provided with a water supply
system which is ample for the needs of the type of development proposed. Every
lot in every subdivision within the corporate limits shall be supplied with
water from the town. For subdivisions outside of the corporate limits, water
may be made available in accordance with current policy and ordinances of the
town. The water system shall be designed and installed in accordance with
Public Utilities Handbook Technical Specifications Water/Sewer Improvements for
the Town of Newport, state and federal environmental rules and other such
specifications as may be required by the town.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
   b.   Every lot in every subdivision served by a community water system shall
be served by a fire hydrant that is located no more than 500 feet from the lot
measured along the centerline of the street(s).
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.14 HOUSE NUMBERS.
   House numbers are required for each lot within the subdivision. The
identification numbers shall be as follows.
   a.   Six-inch minimum block letters shall be painted or otherwise indelibly
mounted on the street curb, vertical face, or where no curb and gutter exist,
shall be located on the edge of the street paving, centrally located on the
front of the lot. Where paint is used, it shall be of the reflective traffic
type.
   b.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided a three-inch minimum size house
number installed in a prominent location in the vicinity of the main entrance
visible to the main street.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-4.15 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   The developer shall refer to the Zoning Ordinance for subdivision signs,
landscaping and other development standards.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-5 NO SERVICE OR PERMIT UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town, nor shall any street
lighting, water or sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of
land, nor shall any permit be issued by any administrative agency or department
of the town for the construction of any building or other improvements
requiring a permit, unless and until the requirements set forth in this
ordinance have been complied with and the same approved by the town.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-6 COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAND DEVELOPMENT AND THOROUGHFARE PLANS, SCHOOL
SITES.
   a.   When a tract of land to be subdivided embraces any part of a proposed
major or minor thoroughfare as depicted in the thoroughfare plan, the proposed
street way shall be platted and dedicated by the subdivider in the location and
at the width specified in the plan.
   b.   If the Town Council has approved a comprehensive land use plan, which
has located sites for public schools, and a developer has submitted a
subdivision plan which includes one of these sites, the subdivider can be
required to reserve the land for such schools, provided that the school board
has indicated that it is interested in buying the land. The school board then
has 18 months to decide whether to buy the land at the fair market value, after
which, if it hasn't bought the land, the subdivider may treat the land as if
freed from the reservation.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-7 TOWN COSTS WHEN OVERSIZE FACILITIES ARE REQUIRED.
   Whenever the Town Council requires that the developer install improvements
or facilities that are either larger, more costly or not normally required by
these regulations, the municipality shall pay 100% of the extra cost. The
subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of the cost of
construction that would equal the cost of an improvement required to serve only
the subdivision, as determined by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-8 PENALTY.
   The following penalties as provided in G.S. § 160A-375 shall be applicable.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-8.1 TRANSFER OR SELL ILLEGAL SUBDIVISION, CLASS 2 MISDEMEANOR (G.S. §
160D-807).
   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within the planning jurisdiction granted to the municipality who transfers or
sells such land by reference to a plat showing a subdivision of such land
before such plat has been approved by said Town Council and recorded in the
Office of the Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and
the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
transaction from such penalties. The town, through its own Town Attorney or
other official designated by its Town Council, may enjoin such transfer or sale
by action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance or
sale of land, and the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an
injunction and order requiring the offending party to comply with the
subdivision ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 16-8.2 BUILDING PERMITS DENIED.
   Building permits may be denied for lots that have been illegally subdivided.
In addition to other remedies the town may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
APPENDIX A-1: DEFINITIONS
   For the purpose of this Zoning and Unified Development Ordinance, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. Any detached minor building in the rear of the main
building consisting of masonry, metal, or frame walls and roof, one or two
stories in height used as an adjunct to the use of a principal building.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or
building.
   ADDITION. An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building
or structure.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Decisions made in the implementation,
administration, or enforcement of development regulations that involve the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards set forth in
this ordinance. These are sometimes referred to as ministerial decisions or
administrative determinations.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. A proceeding to gather facts needed to make an
administrative decision.
   ALTERATIONS. Any addition to the height or depth of a building; any change
in the location of any of the exterior walls of a building; or any increase in
the interior accommodations of a building.
   AMUSEMENTS, INDOOR. Establishments that provide commercial recreation
activities primarily outdoors such as miniature golf establishments, go-cart
facilities, theme parks, carnivals, fair grounds, paintball parks, and water
parks.
   AMUSEMENTS, OUTDOOR. Establishments that provide commercial recreation
activities completely within an enclosed structure such as video arcades,
skating rinks, roller rinks, and bowling alleys.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility which is used to house or contain animals and
which is owned, operated, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society,
animal welfare society, or other nonprofit or government organization devoted
to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals.
   APPEAL. A request from a review of the Ordinance Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope.
   BAR/TAVERN/NIGHTCLUB. A business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-
site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars,
taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate
to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Entertainment including live music,
dancing, comedy, etc. may be included.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A private home that offers bed and breakfast
accommodations to guests.
   BEDROOM. See SLEEPING ROOM.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling, or portion thereof, which contains rooms,
provided by the owner or operator, which are designed to be used or intended to
be used, let or hired out for occupancy to more than three persons, whether
compensation is paid directly or indirectly. By definition, boarding house
includes guest house or rooming house.
   BONA FIDE FARM PURPOSES. Agricultural activities as set forth in G.S. §
160D-903.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance from grade to the highest finished
roof surface in the case of flat roofs or to a point at the average height of
the highest roof having a pitch. Height of a building in stories does not
include basements, except as may be specifically provided for in this
ordinance.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot on which said building is situated.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum required distance
between a structure or activity and the property line or street right-of-way
line.
   CALIPER. A standard trunk diameter measurement for trees taken six inches
above ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size and 12 inches above
ground for larger sizes.
   CAMPGROUND. A lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which campsites for
trailers, tents, or RVs are permitted for the purpose of temporary habitation
for the travelling or vacationing public.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A statement, signed by an administrative officer
of the town, setting forth that the building, structure or use complies with
this ordinance and that the same may be used for the purposes stated therein.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A statement, signed by the Ordinance
Administrator, setting forth either that a building or structure complies with
the provisions of this ordinance, or that a building, structure, or parcel of
land may lawfully be utilized for specified uses, or both.
   CHARTER. As defined in G.S. § 160A-1(2).
   CITY. As defined in G.S. § 160A-1(2).
   CIVIC MEETING FACILITY. Non-profit membership organizations such as alumni
associations, booster clubs, scouting organizations, ethnic associations,
social clubs, fraternal lodge and veterans' membership organizations primarily
engaged in promoting the civic and social interests of their members. The uses
often include meeting and storage facilities.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A comprehensive plan that has been officially adopted by
the governing board pursuant to G.S. § 160D-501.
   CONDITIONAL ZONING. A legislative zoning map amendment with site-specific
conditions incorporated into the zoning map amendment.
   CULTURAL OF COMMUNITY FACILITY. A facility designed to promote cultural
advancement and serve the community such as live theater, dance or music
establishments, art galleries, museums, libraries, and similar facilities.
   DAY TREATMENT CENTER. A state-licensed facility providing behavioral health
treatment programs, outpatient care, substance abuse treatment, and treatment
of mental or nervous disorders. This does not include the residence of patients
or consumers.
   DECISION-MAKING BOARD. A governing board, planning board, board of
adjustment, or other board assigned to make quasi-judicial decisions under this
ordinance.
   DETERMINATION. A written, final, and binding order, requirement, or
determination regarding an administrative decision.
   DEVELOPER. A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment
authority, who undertakes any development and who is the landowner of the
property to be developed or who has been authorized by the landowner to
undertake development on that property.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following:
      1.   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation,
substantial repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure.
      2.   The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of land.
      3.   The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. 160D-802.
      4.   The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the
intensity of use of land.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this ordinance that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project, or
development proposal. Development approvals include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits, variances, and
certificates of appropriateness. The term also includes all other regulatory
approvals required by regulations adopted pursuant to this ordinance, including
plat approvals, permits issued, development agreements entered into, and
building permits issued.
   DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. A unified development ordinance, zoning regulation,
subdivision regulation, erosion and sedimentation control regulation,
floodplain or flood damage prevention regulation, mountain ridge protection
regulation, stormwater control regulation, wireless telecommunication facility
regulation, historic preservation or landmark regulation, housing code, State
Building Code enforcement, or any other regulation adopted pursuant to this
ordinance, or a local act or charter that regulates land use or development.
   DIAMETER-AT-BREAST-HEIGHT (DBH). The tree trunk diameter measured in inches
at a height of four and one-half feet above ground level.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § l30A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used,
and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith. For the purposes of G.S. Chapter 160D, Article 12, the term
does not include any manufactured home, mobile home, or recreational vehicle,
if used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose.
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY. A dwelling, either detached or attached, located on the
same lot as the principal single-family dwelling unit, and is secondary and
incidental to the use of the property as single-family residential.
   DWELLING, DUPLEX. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two
families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof used or designed as a
dwelling for three or more families living independently of each other with
separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each, including apartments and
condominiums.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
one family.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   EQUESTRIAN FACILITIES, COMMERCIAL. A commercial establishment which provides
horse boarding, training, riding lessons, and other equestrian services. Such
facilities may include competition arenas and medical treatment services.
   EVIDENTIARY HEARING. A hearing to gather competent, material, and
substantial evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision
required by a development regulation adopted under this ordinance.
   FAMILIAL RELATIONSHIP. For purposes of this ordinance, a "close familial
relationship" means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or
grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
household.
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A home meeting the North Carolina Uniform Residential
Building Code, as amended, with support and supervisory personnel that provides
room and board, personal care and habilitation services for adults in a family
environment for six or fewer resident persons with disabilities. Person with
disabilities means a person with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional,
or mental disability including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral
palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances
and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally ill persons who are
dangerous to others as defined in G.S. § 122C-3(11).
   FRONTAGE. All the property abutting on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets, measured along the street line.
   GOVERNING BOARD. The Newport Town Council.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The interior floor area of a building exclusive of
stairways, storage closets, and elevator shafts.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment
or supplemental income purposes which is clearly incidental and subordinate to
the use of the dwelling as a residence and which does not alter or change the
exterior residential character or appearance of the premises except for
compliance with appropriate provisions of the North Carolina State Building
Code and the Americans with Disabilities Act as they relate to building
accessibility for the handicapped.
   INDUSTRY, HEAVY. Typically the largest facilities in a community, these
structures house complex operations, some of which may be continuous, and
include any non-residential use that requires a National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit for an industrial or stormwater discharge.
These uses include the use or storage of any hazardous materials or substances;
the mining or extraction of any minerals, ore, fossil fuels, or other materials
beneath the surface of the earth. These uses include the industry sectors of
the NAICS: oil and gas extraction; mining, mining support activities; food
manufacturing; textile mills; textile produce mills; leather & allied product
manufacturing; wood products manufacturing; paper manufacturing; petroleum and
coal products manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber
products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing; primary
metal manufacturing; fabricated metal product manufacturing; machinery
manufacturing; and transportation equipment manufacturing.
   INDUSTRY, LIGHT. Such facilities are typically designed to look and generate
impacts like a typical office building, but rely on special power, water, or
waste disposal systems for operation. Noise, odor, dust, and glare of each
operation are completely confined within an enclosed building, insofar as
practical. Such uses include medical and testing laboratories; facilities for
scientific research; facilities for the design, development, and testing of
electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical, computer and telecommunications
components in advance of product manufacturing; the assembly of products from
parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the
research and development activities; laundry/dry cleaning plants engaged
primarily in high volume laundry and garment services; carpet and upholstery
cleaners; diaper services; commercial laundries; the production of small
consumer goods such clothes, shoes, furniture, consumer electronics and home
appliances. These uses include the industry sectors of the NAICS: beverage and
tobacco manufacturing; apparel manufacturing; printing and related activities;
computer and electronic product manufacturing; electrical equipment, appliance,
and component manufacturing; furniture and related product manufacturing; and
miscellaneous manufacturing.
   JUNK/SALVAGE YARD. The use of more than 600 square feet of any lot for the
storage, keeping or accumulation of material, including scrap metals, waste
paper, rags, or other scrap materials, or used building materials, or for the
dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or
machinery or parts thereof.
   LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A document that grants authority to develop land in
order to ensure that proposed development complies with the standards of this
ordinance, and to otherwise protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of the Town of Newport.
   LANDOWNER/OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple. Absent evidence to
the contrary, a local government may rely on the county tax records to
determine who is a landowner. The landowner may authorize a person holding a
valid option, lease, or contract to purchase to act as his or her agent or
representative for the purpose of making applications for development
approvals.
   LANDFILL, BENEFICIAL. A sanitary landfill that is limited to receiving
stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood, uncontaminated earth or other
solid wastes as approved by the NC Division of Solid Waste Management.
   LANDFILL, LAND CLEARING AND INERT DEBRIS. A facility for the land disposal
of solid waste that is generated primarily from land clearing activities
including stumps, trees, limbs, brush, grass and other naturally occurring
vegetative material wastes.
   LANDFILL, MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (SANITARY). A facility for disposal of
household and commercial solid waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance
with G.S. § 130A-290.
   LEGISLATIVE DECISION. The adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation
under this ordinance or an applicable local act. The term also includes the
decision to approve, amend, or rescind a development agreement consistent with
the provisions of G.S. Chapter 160D, Article 10.
   LEGISLATIVE HEARING. A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed
legislative decision.
   LIGHT MANUFACTURING WORKSHOP. The assembly, fabrication, production or
processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create
noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the
building and are visually undifferentiated from an office building or a
residentially-scaled garage. These typically involve the work of artisans or
craftsman.
   LOCAL ACT. As defined in G.S. § 160A-1(5).
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A city or county.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership, for development, or both. The word lot includes
plot, parcel, or tract.
   LOT AREA. The total area circumscribed by boundaries of a lot except that
when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot
extending into a public road or private right-of-way, then the lot boundary for
purposes of computing the lot area shall be the road right-of-way line, or if
the road right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel to and
30 feet from the center of the traveled portion of the road.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines.
   LOT LINES. The property lines bounding a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary line of a lot running along a road right-of-
way. If a lot has two property lines which are also road right-of-way lines
abutting different roads, then the front lot line shall be determined by the
property owner if the front property line has not been designated on a final
plat (minimum building lines are construed to designate the front lot line).
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has
been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Carteret County, or a
lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. A residential use in which more than two
manufactured homes are located on a single lot or tract of land.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A designated area of land within a manufactured
home park designed for the accommodation of a single manufactured home in
accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME. A structure as defined in G.S. § 143-145(7).
   MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit constructed with one or more components which
are prefabricated and which meets the construction requirements of the North
Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code as amended.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of the original version of this ordinance and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any legally existing structure which fails to
comply with the current provisions of this ordinance.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A structure or land lawfully occupied by an existing use
which does not conform with the permitted uses for the zoning district in which
it is situated, either at the effective date of this ordinance, or as a result
of subsequent amendments to this ordinance.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing or planned
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or other types of navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.
   NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety, health, or welfare of
an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or
unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any
navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public
or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private
institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, the State of North Carolina
and its agencies and political subdivisions, or other legal entity.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Cosmetic services such as hair and nail salons, barber
shops, clothing alterations, shoe repair, weight loss centers, and makeup
services.
   PET BOARDING SERVICE (KENNEL). A commercial establishment for the boarding
of domestic animals for which a fee is charged. Such establishments may include
incidental grooming services or sale of pet supplies.
   PET CARE SERVICES (NO KENNELS OR VET). A commercial establishment which
provides grooming and/or training services for domestic animals with no
provisions for overnight boarding or medical services.
   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION JURISDICTION. The geographic area
defined in G.S. Chapter 160D, Part 2 within which a city or county may
undertake planning and apply the development regulations authorized by G.S.
Chapter 160D.
   PLANNING BOARD. Any board or commission established pursuant to G.S. § 160D-
301.
   PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITY. Indoor or outdoor uses or structures for
active or passive recreation that are owned by private for-profit entities.
Such uses include, gymnasiums, natatoriums, fitness center, athletic equipment,
indoor running tracks, climbing facilities, court facilities, parks, pools,
ball fields, batting cages, skateboard parks, playgrounds, greenway trails,
driving ranges, tennis courts, riding stables, golf courses and their customary
accessory uses including, but not limited to, maintenance sheds, clubhouses
(with or without food service), restrooms, and picnic shelters.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services provided that make available the knowledge
and skills of their employees to sell expertise and perform professional,
scientific, and technical services to others such as legal services;
accounting, tax, bookkeeping, and payroll services; architectural, engineering,
and related services; graphic, industrial, and interior design services;
consulting services; research and development services; advertising, media, and
photography services; real estate services; investment banking, securities,
brokerages; and insurance-related services; and, medical services such as
physician's and dentist's offices.
   PROPERTY. All real property subject to land-use regulation by a local
government. The term includes any improvements or structures customarily
regarded as a part of real property.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM. An approved water supply system serving ten or
more connections including municipal and sanitary district water systems as
well as water systems designed to serve particular subdivisions at full
development.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISION. A decision involving the finding of facts regarding
a specific application of a development regulation and that requires the
exercise of discretion when applying the standards of the regulation. The term
includes, but is not limited to, decisions involving variances, special use
permits, certificates of appropriateness, and appeals of administrative
determinations. Decisions on the approval of subdivision plats and site plans
are quasi-judicial in nature if the regulation authorizes a decision-making
board to approve or deny the application based not only upon whether the
application complies with the specific requirements set forth in the
regulation, but also on whether the application complies with one or more
generally stated standards requiring a discretionary decision on the findings
to be made by the decision-making board.
   REAR SETBACK. A setback from an interior property line lying on the opposite
side of the lot from the front street setback.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis, designed
to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty vehicle, and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   SCREEN. Vegetation, fence, wall, berm, or a combination of any or all of
these which partially or completely blocks the view of and provides spatial
separation of a portion or all of a site from an adjacent property or right-of-
way.
   SHRUB, LARGE. An upright plant growing to a mature height of more than eight
feet for use as natural ornamentation or screening.
   SHRUB, MEDIUM. An upright plant growing to a mature height of four to eight
feet.
   SHRUB, SMALL. An upright plant growing to a mature height of less than four
feet.
   SIDE SETBACK. Any interior property line setback other than a rear setback.
   SIGN. Any object, display, or structure, or portion thereof, which is
located outdoors and is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location through the use of words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, colors, or illumination.
   SIGN AREA. Sign area shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle,
triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire
advertising copy area excluding architectural trim and structural members. In
computing area, only one side of a double-faced sign shall be considered.
   SIGN FACE. The surface of a sign where copy, messages, or advertisements are
attached for display to the public, including any parts of the sign structure
upon which such information is located. The surface area of the sign shall
include the sign's trim and border.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign supported by a sign structure placed in or upon
the ground which is independent of any other object for support.
   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign which was legally erected prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, but which does not conform to these regulations.
   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD). A sign, whether freestanding or
painted on or attached to a building, which directs attention to a business,
product, accommodation, service, event, or other activity which is conducted,
sold, offered, or provided at a location other than the premises where the sign
is located. On-premise business identification signs, temporary political
signs, directional signs 20 square feet or less in size, official signs, or
highway and historic markers shall not be considered outdoor advertising signs.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. An outdoor advertising display sign which is affixed to
any building wall or structure that extends beyond the building wall,
structure, building line or property line.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. The supporting poles, braces, struts, building or structure
to which an outdoor advertising sign or principal use sign is attached.
   SIGN, WALL. An outdoor advertising display sign that shall be affixed to the
wall of any building, when such sign shall project not more than 12 inches from
the building.
   SITE PLAN. A scaled drawing and supporting text showing the relationship
between lot lines and the existing or proposed uses, buildings, or structures
on the lot. The site plan may include site-specific details such as building
areas, building height and floor area, setbacks from lot lines and street
rights-of-way, intensities, densities, utility lines and locations, parking,
access points, roads, and stormwater control facilities that are depicted to
show compliance with all legally required development regulations that are
applicable to the project and the site plan review. A site plan approval based
solely upon application of objective standards is an administrative decision
and a site plan approval based in whole or in part upon the application of
standards involving judgment and discretion is a quasi-judicial decision. A
site plan may also be approved as part of a conditional zoning decision.
   SLEEPING ROOM. A room designated as a sleeping or bedroom on the plans and
permit application.
   SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling
unit are not sleeping units.
   SOLAR FARM. An electric generating facility, whose main purpose is to supply
utility scale electricity, consisting of one or more series of solar
collectors, for off-site use.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined as in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36).
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in
a particular zoning district upon presentation of competent, material, and
substantial evidence establishing compliance with one or more general standards
requiring that judgment and discretion be exercised as well as compliance with
specific standards. The term includes permits previously referred to as
conditional use permits or special exceptions.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvements, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvements was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings,
installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. An object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not
limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, and
overhead transmission lines.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land for the purpose of sale or development as
specified in G.S. § 160D-802.
   SUBDIVISION REGULATION. A subdivision regulation authorized by G.S. Chapter
160D, Article 8.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-
related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-
year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event,
on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. See definition of substantial improvement.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one year period whereby the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      1.   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
   SWEEPSTAKES FACILITY. Any business enterprise where persons utilize
computers, gaming terminals, or other electronic machines to conduct games of
chance, including sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandise or other items of
value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of such
distribution is determined by electronic games played or by predetermined odds.
This does not include any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina.
   TALL STRUCTURE. Any structure that is taller than 70 feet and is not
otherwise exempt from these regulations.
   TREE, CANOPY. A large tree growing to a height of 40 feet or more at
maturity, usually deciduous, and characterized by its ability to provide canopy
cover and shade.
   TREE, UNDERSTORY. A small to medium tree, growing to a mature height of 15
to 40 feet and characterized by specific aesthetic qualities, such as colorful
flowering, interesting bark or brilliant fall foliage.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which either land or a building or structure is,
or may be, occupied or maintained.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. A use which is permitted by right in a district.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the requirements of the ordinance by the Board
of Adjustment when strict enforcement of this ordinance would cause undue
hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the
variance is granted.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. A facility or establishment rendering surgical and
medical treatment to animals, which may include overnight accommodations for
purposes of recovery. Crematory facilities shall not be allowed in a
veterinarian establishment.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure, site feature or use to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WIND TURBINE. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator. Such a system might
include a nacelle, rotor, tower, pad transformer and other appurtenant
structures and/or facilities.
   YARD. An open space, other than a court, on a lot unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance.
   YARD, FRONT. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the front
line of the lot and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of the lot. Where a lot abuts more than one street, the Ordinance Administrator
shall determine the front yard for purposes of this ordinance.
   YARD, REAR. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line
of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side line of the
lot.
   YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building, situated between the building and the side lot line, and extending
from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.
   ZONING MAP AMENDMENT/REZONING. An amendment to a zoning regulation for the
purpose of changing the zoning district that is applied to a specified property
or properties. The term also includes (i) the initial application of zoning
when land is added to the territorial jurisdiction of a local government that
has previously adopted zoning regulations; and (ii) the application of an
overlay zoning district or a conditional zoning district. The term does not
include (i) the initial adoption of a zoning map by a local government; (ii)
the repeal of a zoning map and readoption of a new zoning map for the entire
planning and development regulation jurisdiction; or (iii) updating the zoning
map to incorporate amendments to the names of zoning districts made by zoning
text amendments where there are no changes in the boundaries of the zoning
district or land uses permitted in the district.
   ZONING REGULATION. A zoning regulation authorized by G.S. Chapter 160D,
Article 7.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
APPENDIX A-2: SUBDIVISION PLAT STANDARDS
Sketch Preliminary Final Minor Information
   A TITLE BLOCK CONTAINING
X      X           X     X     Subdivision name
       X           X     X     Name of property owner(s)
X      X           X     X     Location by township, county, and state
X      X           X     X     Date(s) survey was conducted and plat prepared
X      X           X     X     Numeric and graphic scale
                               Name, address, phone number, registration
       X           X     X     number, and seal of the registered land surveyor
                               and/or engineer who prepared the plat
   THE FOLLOWING DATA CONCERNING LOCATION AND LAND USE
X      X           X     X     Vicinity map
X      X           X     X     County and municipal boundaries
X      X           X     X     North arrow and orientation
                               The boundaries and dimensions of the tract or
X      X                       portion thereof to be subdivided distinctly and
                               accurately represented with all bearings and
                               distances shown
                               The exact boundary lines of the tract to be
                   X     X     subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and
                               bearings, and the location of existing boundary
                               lines of adjoining lands
       X           X     X     The names of adjoining subdivisions and/or
                               property owners
       X           X     X     Minimum building setback lines
                               The zoning classifications and minimum lot size
X      X           X     X     of the tract to be subdivided and adjoining
                               properties if applicable
X      X           X     X     The minimum lot size of the tract to be
                               subdivided
 
Sketch Preliminary Final Minor Information
   THE FOLLOWING DATA CONCERNING LOCATION AND LAND USE
X      X           X     X     Existing property lines on the tract to be
                               subdivided
                               Existing buildings or other structures,
       X           X     X     watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts,
                               storm drains, etc.
       X           X     X     Consecutively numbered lots and blocks
X      X           X     X     Ponds, lakes, streams, stream beds, and other
                               natural features affecting the site
X      X           X     X     The exact location of the flood hazard areas
                               from the town's adopted FIRMs or other FEMA maps
       X           X     X     Location of CAMA AEC's and 404 Wetlands
       X                       Major CAMA Permit, if required
X      X                       Natural buffers
       X           X     X     Greenways, sidewalks, and bicycle paths
X      X           X           Parks and recreation areas with specific type
                               indicated
X      X           X     X     Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public
                               use
X      X                       Areas to be used for purpose other than
                               residential with the purpose of each stated
                               The future ownership (dedication or reservation
                               for public use to government body, for owners to
       X           X     X     duly constituted homeowner's association or for
                               tenants remaining in sub divider's ownership) of
                               recreation and open space lands
   THE FOLLOWING DATA CONCERNING STREETS
X      X                       Proposed roads
X      X           X     X     Existing and platted roads on adjoining
                               properties
       X           X     X     Right-of-way, locations and dimensions
       X           X           Pavement widths
       X           X           Approximate grades
       X           X     X     Street length
 
Sketch Preliminary Final Minor Information
   THE FOLLOWING DATA CONCERNING STREETS
       X           X           Design engineering data for all corners and
                               curves
       X                       Typical road cross sections
       X           X           Proposed street names
                   X           Road maintenance agreement
       X           X           Street disclosure statement
   PLANS FOR UTILITY LAYOUTS INCLUDING
       X           X     X     Utility and other easements
       X           X     X     Sanitary sewers
       X           X     X     Storm sewers
       X           X     X     Other drainage facilities, if any
       X           X     X     Water distribution lines
       X           X     X     Natural gas lines
       X           X     X     Communications lines
       X           X     X     Electric lines
   INFORMATION
       X                       Profiles based upon mean sea level datum for
                               sanitary sewers and storm sewers
                               Illustration of connections to existing systems,
       X           X     X     showing line sizes, the location of fire
                               hydrants, blowoffs, manholes, force mains and
                               gate valves
   SITE CALCULATIONS INCLUDING
       X           X     X     Total acreage of tract to be subdivided
       X           X     X     Total acreage in parks, recreation areas, and
                               other nonresidential uses
       X           X     X     Total number of parcels created
       X                       Size of the smallest lot in the subdivision
 
Sketch Preliminary Final Minor Information
   SITE CALCULATIONS INCLUDING
                               Sufficient engineering data to determine readily
                               and reproduce on the ground every straight or
                               curved line, street line, right-of-way, easement
                               line, and setback line, including dimensions,
                               bearings or deflection angles, radii, central
                   X     X     angles, and tangent distance for the centerline
                               of curved property lines that are not the
                               boundary line of curved streets. All dimensions
                               shall be measured to the nearest one one-
                               hundredth of a foot and all angles to a minimum
                               angular accuracy of the nearest minute.
                   X     X     The accurate locations and descriptions of all
                               monuments, markers, and control points
   ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
                   X     X     A copy of any proposed deed restrictions is
                               mandatory when common areas are established
       X                       Evidence of erosion control plan approval
       X                       Topographic map with contour intervals as
                               determined by the Ordinance Administrator
       X           X     X     Digital copy of plat (i.e., PDF, JPEG)
 
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
APPENDIX A-3: REQUIRED CERTIFICATES
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
The undersigned hereby certifies that the land shown hereon is owned by the
undersigned, and hereby freely dedicates all rights-of-way, easements, streets,
recreation areas, open spaces, common areas, utilities, and other improvements
to public or private common use as noted on this plat, and further assumes full
responsibility for the maintenance and control of said improvements until they
are accepted for maintenance and control by an appropriate public body or by an
incorporated neighborhood or homeowners association or similar legal entity.
________________________            ________________________
Owner                     Date
Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
I, __________, certify that this plat was drawn under my supervision from an
actual survey made under my supervision (deed description recorded in Book
____, page ____, etc.) (other); that the boundaries not surveyed are clearly
indicated as drawn from information found in Book ____, page ____; that the
ratio of precision or positional accuracy as calculated is ____; that this plat
was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended. Witness my original
signature, license number and seal this ____ day of ____, A.D., ____
_________________ (Seal or Stamp)
Professional Land Surveyor
License Number
Certificate of Review Officer
I, _______________________, Review Officer of Carteret County, certify that the
map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory
requirements for recording.
________________________ ________________
Review Officer Date
Certificate of Approval for Recordation
I hereby certify that the minor subdivision shown on this plat is in all
respects in compliance with the provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance
of the Town of Newport. Therefore, this plat has been approved by the Ordinance
Administrator.
______________________________ _________________
Ordinance Administrator Date
Town of Newport
Certificate of Approval for Proposed Town Streets
I hereby certify that these streets as installed, or as designed and
guaranteed, are in accordance with the minimum design criteria presently
required by the Town of Newport for the acceptance of streets onto the Town
system for maintenance.
____________________________________    _________________
Director of Public Works          Date
Town of Newport
Certificate of Approval for Recordation and Acceptance of Dedications
I, _______________________, Town Clerk of the Town of Newport, North Carolina,
do hereby certify that on the _____ day of __________, 20_____, the Newport
Town Council approved this plat for recording and accepted the dedication of
the streets, easements, rights of way, public parks, and other sites for public
purposes as shown hereon, but assumed no responsibility to open or maintain the
same until, in the opinion of the governing body of the Town of Newport, it is
in the public interest to do so.
______________________________ _________________ (Seal)
Town Clerk Date
Town of Newport
Certificate of Approval for Proposed State Streets
I hereby certify that these streets as installed, or as designed and
guaranteed, are in accordance with the minimum design criteria presently
required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of
Highways, for the acceptance of streets onto the State system for maintenance.
____________________________________    _________________
District Engineer             Date
North Carolina Department of Transportation
Certificate of Lots Served by Public Water and/or Sewer Systems
I hereby certify that the construction plans for the water system and/or sewer
system have been approved for (Name of Subdivision). The utilities have been
constructed, or secured via a financial guarantee, to the Town of Newport's
standards.
_________________________________    _________________ Director of Utilities
Date
Town of Newport
Certificate of Approval of On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems
I hereby certify that the lot(s) on this Final Plat have been evaluated under
the current provisions of Title 15A NCAC 18A.1900 et. seq., and found that it/
they has/have acceptable soils for an on-site, subsurface sewage treatment and
disposal system.
___________________________ _________________
Carteret County Health Department Date
Certificate of Exemption
I hereby certify that the division of land shown and described hereon is not
division of land subject to the Town of Newport Subdivision Regulations. No
approval of this plat is required.
________________________________    _________________     Ordinance
Administrator              Date
Town of Newport
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
APPENDIX A-4: JURISDICTION
   The Towns of Newport and Morehead City are authorized, by a local bill of
the General Assembly entitled "S.L. 1997-185, House Bill 604", adopted June 16,
1997 to exercise extraterritorial planning jurisdiction not to exceed two miles
from the corporate limits of the town except where Morehead City overlaps. The
dividing line shall begin where the run of Hull Swamp Creek enters into the
Newport River, then runs with the run of Hull Swamp Creek to the northwest
corner of the property of Merritt-Williams Ford in the southern right-of-way
margin of U.S. Highway 70, then northwestward with the southern margin of U.S.
Highway 70 to the north westernmost corner of the property of Paul Wysocki (Tax
Parcel Number 634608990762), and thence with the Wysocki northwest line in a
southwestern direction to the north property line of Mamie Murdoch (Tax Parcel
Number 634704708233), and thence westward and southward with the north and west
lines of the Murdoch property back to the run of Hull Swamp Creek and shown on
the "Official Zoning Map for the Town of Newport".
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 6-14-2021)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
154.01   Adopted by reference
§ 154.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   This Subdivision Ordinance is a revision of the Subdivision Ordinance
dated April 6, 1972, as amended November 4, 1998 and May 5, 2009. It is based
on the land use plan. It contains the criteria for the subdivision of all land
within the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   (B)   The Subdivision Ordinance is adopted and incorporated by reference as
part of this Chapter 154 as fully as if set out at length herein. Please see
Appendix B of this Chapter 154 for the Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009; Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-13-2019; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-
12-2019)
APPENDIX B: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
Section One: In General
   
1-1   Short title
   
1-2   Jurisdiction
   
1-3   Purpose
   
1-4   Relationship to other ordinance
   
1-5   Severability
   
1-6   Repeal of existing subdivision regulations
Section Two: Proper Inclusions and Exceptions
   
2-1   Subdivision defined
   
2-2   Exceptions
   
2-3   Minor subdivisions
   
2-4   Minor subdivision approval
Section Three: Duty of the Register of Deeds
   
3-1   Duty of Register of Deeds
   
3-1.1   The filing or recording
Section Four: Interpretation and Definitions
   
4-1   Word interpretation
   
4-2   Tense and number
   
4-3   Term definition
Section Five: Procedures for Securing Approval of Subdivision Plats
   
5-1   General
   
5-2   Sketch plan
   
5-3   Preliminary plat
   
5-3.1   Review of the preliminary plat by the Zoning Administrator
   
5-3.2   Review of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board
   
5-3.3   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board
   
5-3.4   Review and approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Council
   
5-3.5   Building permits and certificate of occupancy
   
5-4   Final plat
   
5-4.1   Final plat content
   
5-4.2   Review of the final plat by the Zoning Administrator
   
5-4.3   Approval of the final plat by the Town Council
Section Six: Design Standards
   
6-1   General provisions
   
6-2   Specific requirements
   
6-2.1   Alleys
   
6-2.2   Blocks
   
6-2.3   Buffer strips
   
6-2.4   Building setback lines
   
6-2.5   Cul-de-sac
   
6-2.6   Easements
   
6-2.7   Road grades
   
6-2.8   Horizontal curves
   
6-2.9   Road intersections
   
6-2.10   Lots
   
6-2.11   Pedestrian walkways
   
6-2.12   Rights-of-way and pavement widths
   
6-2.13   Streets
Section Seven: Improvements
   
7-1   General provisions
   
7-2   Guarantees
   
7-2.1   Performance guarantees
   
7-2.2   Inspection of improvements guarantees
   
7-3   Requirements
   
7-3.1   Permanent survey reference markers
   
7-3.2   Permanent concrete monuments
   
7-3.3   Steel or iron markers
   
7-3.4   Electrical and telephone services
   
7-3.5   Open space reservation for parks, playgrounds or recreational
   
7-3.5.1   Private ownership of parks and recreation areas
   
7-3.5.2   Duly recorded instruments
   
7-3.5.3   Area devoted to parks and recreation
   
7-3.5.4   Formula for area set aside
   
7-3.5.5   Criteria for evaluating suitability
   
7-3.5.6   Fees in lieu of land set aside
   
7-3.6   Paving and street improvement
   
7-3.7   Sewage disposal
   
7-3.8   Sidewalks
   
7-3.9   Street lights
   
7-3.10   Street name markers
   
7-3.11   Trees and preservation of natural environment
   
7-3.12   Surface water drainage and sedimentation controls
   
7-3.13   Water supply
   
7-3.14   House numbers
   
7-3.15   Other requirements
Section Eight: Administration
   
8-1   Variances
   
8-2   Exceptions
   
8-3   Procedure for exceptions
   
8-4   No service or permit until final plat approval
   
8-5   Compliance with the land development and thoroughfare plans, school sites
   
8-6   Town costs when oversize facilities are required
   
8-7   Penalty
   
8-7a   Transfer or sell illegal subdivision, Class 2 misdemeanor
   
8-7b   Building permits denied
   
8-7c   Provision to sell plat prior to final plat approval
   
8-7d   Provision to enter into contract to sell approved preliminary plat
   
Appendix B-1: Suggested certificates
   
Appendix B-2: Subdivision sketch plan review check list and application
   
Appendix B-3: Preliminary plat check list
   
Appendix B-4: Final plat check list
SECTION ONE: IN GENERAL
§ 1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known as the “Subdivision Regulations of the Town of
Newport, North Carolina”, and may be cited as the “subdivision regulations”.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 1-2 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall govern each and every subdivision of land within the
corporate limits of the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 1-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to establish procedures and standards
for the regulation and control of the subdivision of land within the
jurisdiction of the town in order to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community. They are designed to promote the orderly
layout and development of land; provide for the coordination and dedication of
land for streets and public utilities; ensure adequate provision for
transportation facilities, sewers, water supply, schools, parks, playgrounds
and other public facilities; promote the proper distribution of population and
traffic to avoid congestion and overcrowding; provide adequate light, air and
open space; provide greater safety from fire, flood and other dangers; and
require proper legal description, identification, monumentation and recording
of subdivision properties.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 1-4 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCE.
   It is not intended that these regulations shall in any way repeal, annul or
interfere with the existing provisions of any other law or ordinance except any
ordinance which these regulations specifically replace. It is not intended that
these regulations contravene any easements, covenants or other agreements
between parties. However, if the provisions of these regulations impose greater
restrictions or higher standards for the use of land, then the provisions of
these regulations shall control.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 1-5 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision or standard of these regulations that now exists
or may exist in the future is found by a court to be invalid for any reason,
the decision of the court shall not affect the validity of any other section,
provision or standard. The other parts of these regulations not affected by the
decision of the court shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 1-6 REPEAL OF EXISTING SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   In part, this ordinance carries forward by reenactment, some of the
provisions of the subdivision regulations of the town (adopted by the Town
Board of Commissioners in April 6, 1972, as amended), and it is not the intent
to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force such existing provisions
so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved
and may be enforced. All provisions of the subdivision regulations which are
not reenacted herein are hereby repealed.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
SECTION TWO: PROPER INCLUSIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 2-1 SUBDIVISION DEFINED.
   A SUBDIVISION shall include all divisions of a tract of land into two or
more lots, building sites or other divisions, when any one or more of those
divisions is created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether
immediate or future), and shall include all divisions of land involving the
dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009; Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 2-2 EXCEPTIONS.
   A SUBDIVISION shall not include:
   a.   The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted
lots, where the total number of lots is not increased, and the resultant lots
are equal to or exceed the standards of the town as shown by the regulations
prescribed by this chapter;
   b.   The division of land into parcels of ten acres or greater, where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved;
   c.   The public acquisition of strips of land for the purpose of widening or
opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors;
   d.   The division of a tract in single ownership into not more than three
lots, where the entire area is no greater than two acres, provided no street
right-of-way dedication is involved, and provided that the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the standards of the town as prescribed in these
regulations;
   e.   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a
probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under G.S. Ch. 29.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009; Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 2-3 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   a.   Minor subdivisions are divisions of a tract of land where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved;
   b.   Where no town public utilities are extended or enlarged to accommodate
the development;
   c.   The tract or parcel to be divided is not exempted under §
2-2 b.;
   d.   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided under
this division in the ten years prior to division;
   e.   The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is greater than
five acres;
   f.   After division, no more than three lots result from the division; and
   g.   After division, all resultant lots comply with all of the following:
      1.   Any lot dimension size requirements of the applicable land use
regulations, if any;
      2.   The use of the lots is in conformity with the applicable zoning
requirements, if any;
      3.   A permanent means of ingress and egress is recorded for each lot.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009; Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-13-2019)
§ 2-4 MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
   Minor subdivisions may be reviewed and approved for recording by the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator will advise the Planning Board of any
approvals at its next regular meeting.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009; Ord. 2019-06, passed 6-13-2019)
SECTION THREE: DUTY OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS
§ 3-1 DUTY OF REGISTER OF DEEDS.
   The Register of Deeds shall not file or record a plat of any subdivision
located within the town jurisdiction without:
   1.   The written approval of the Town Council as required by this chapter;
   2.   Written approval of the Zoning Administrator for minor subdivisions;
and
   3.   Written exemption from these regulations by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 3-1.1 THE FILING OR RECORDING.
   The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval as
required by these regulations shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
SECTION FOUR: INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
§ 4-1 WORD INTERPRETATION.
   For the purposes of this ordinance, certain words shall be interpreted as
follows. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this ordinance shall
have their customary dictionary definitions. The word “building” shall include
the word “structure”. The word “used” shall include “arranged”, “designed”,
“constructed”, “altered”, “converted”, “rented”, “leased”, or “intended to be
used”, and the word “shall” is mandatory. The word “may” is permissive. The
word “lot” includes the word “plot, parcel, site and premises”.
   4-1.1   The words “map”, “Zoning Map” and “Newport Zoning Map” shall mean
the “Official Zoning Map for the Town of Newport, North Carolina”.
   4-1.2   The word “Town” shall mean the “Town of Newport, a municipal
corporation of the State of North Carolina”.
   4-1.3   The words “ordinance” and “regulation” shall mean the “Official
Subdivision Ordinance for the Town of Newport, North Carolina”.
   4-1.4   The words “Planning Board” shall mean the “Town of Newport Planning
Board”.
   4-1.5   The words “Town Council” shall mean the “Town Council of the Town of
Newport, North Carolina”.
   4-1.6   The words “Board of Adjustment” shall mean the “Town of Newport
Zoning Board of Adjustment”.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 4-2 TENSE AND NUMBER.
   4-2.1   The present tense includes the future tense, and the future tense
includes the present tense.
   4-2.2   The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural
number includes the singular number.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 4-3 TERM DEFINITION.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE. A subordinate building or use which is
incidental to that of the principal building or use.
      1.   Designed for the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of
the principal use served; and
      2.   Located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or use
served, with the single exception of accessory parking facilities located
elsewhere.
   ADJOINING LOT. Land immediately adjacent to the lot in question, including
lots located immediately across streets, alleys and watercourses of less than
100 feet in width, drainage easements and other rights-of-way.
   ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING. The person, officer or official, and his or her
authorized representative, whom the Town Council has designated as its agent
for the administration and enforcement of these regulations.
   AGENT OF OWNER. Any person who can show written authority that he or she is
acting on behalf of the property owner.
   ALLEY. A public or private way not less than 20 feet wide which affords
means of access to abutting property and may be dedicated and accepted for
public use and which may be used for public utility purposes.
   APARTMENT. See DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator’s interpretation
of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
   BLOCK. A parcel of land intended for urban purposes which oftentimes
includes one or more lots and which is entirely surrounded by public streets,
highways, railroad rights-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural
land or drainage channels or a combination thereof.
   BUILDING LINE. See SETBACK LINE.
   CURB CUT. A lowered or cut away curb for purposes of ingress or egress to
property abutting a public street.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling or lodging units per gross acre.
   DEVELOPER. An owner, or any person with written authorization from the
owner, who intends to improve or construct improvements upon a given property.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling units,
entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is not on a separate
lot, and which includes apartments, hotel apartments and group housing.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for or used exclusively for
residence purposes by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A building containing two dwelling units,
entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is not on a separate
lot. Mobile homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn
vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not
included within this definition.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner to another of land for specific
purposes.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, upon which the boundaries of the areas
of special flood hazard have been shown as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles as well as the flood
boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood
elevation.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be preserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The ratio of total floor area to a lot area.
   FRONTAGE, BUILDING OR OCCUPANCY. The length of that portion of a building or
ground floor occupancy which abuts a street, publicly used parking area, or
mall appurtenant to said building or occupancy expressed in lineal feet and
fractions thereof.
   FRONTAGE, LOT. The distance along the street between the two side lot lines
expressed in lineal feet and fractions thereof.
   GROUP DEVELOPMENT. A development comprising two or more buildings such as a
group of apartments where the land is not subdivided into the customary streets
and lots.
   LANDOWNER. Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property,
including the heirs, devisors, successors, assigns and personal representative
of such owner. The LANDOWNER may allow a person holding a valid option to
purchase to act as his or her agent or representative for purposes of
submitting a subdivision plan, a proposed specific development plan or a phased
development plan under this section.
   LANDSCAPED OPEN SPACE. Consists of lawns, shrubs, trees and other vegetation
and permanent ground cover capable of absorbing runoff water.
   LANDSCAPING. Any combination of living plants and natural material purposely
maintained for functional and/or aesthetic reasons. LANDSCAPING includes trees,
shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers and grass; natural features, such as rock,
stone, bark chips/shavings and pine straw; and human- made features, including,
but not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor art work and benches.
   LOT. A parcel of land capable of being used under the regulations of this
ordinance, lawfully created as such in accordance with the subdivision
regulations or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation providing such
yards and other open spaces as are herein required. A LOT shall have frontage
of at least 35 feet on an improved public street, and may consist of:
      (a)   A single lot of record;
      (b)   A portion of a lot of record;
      (c)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; or
      (d)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
   LOT, AREA. The computed area contained within the lot lines exclusive of
street rights-of-way but including portions held in fee title in the same
ownership which may have easements for such purposes as utilities or flood
control channels.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection, or
upon two parts of the same street, such parts of the same street forming an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees within the lot lines.
   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the total lot area covered by structures.
   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines.
   LOT, FLAG. A parcel of land which primary land area meets or exceeds the
shape and size required within the zoning regulations. However, the parcel of
land does not front or abut a public street, road or right-of-way for a minimum
width as specified in the district. The lot is required to access the main body
by a narrow strip of land. The lot resembles a flag, which is its main body and
a flag pole constituting the access to a public street.
   LOT, KEY. A lot at the rear of a corner lot, the front of which is
substantially a continuation of the side property line of the corner lot.
   LOT, PARENT. As applies to a flag lot, it is the conforming lot(s) that
remains and fronts or abuts a public street, road or right-of-way after the
parcel of land has been divided to form the flag lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision or plat which has been
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county, or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between side lot lines measured at the front
building setback line.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It
is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD).
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, it is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   PAVING. The terms PAVING, PAVED or PAVEMENT in this ordinance means streets
and parking areas that are prepared for and finished with asphalt or concrete
having a compacted subgrade and granular base material.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, LLC, PA, LLD, limited
partnership, joint venture, association or any other legal entity.
   PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan which has been submitted to the town by a
landowner for phased development which shows the type and intensity of use for
a specific parcel or parcels with a lesser degree of certainty than the plan
determined by the town to be a site specific development plan.
   PLAN, SKETCH. A concept plan that is required prior to the preliminary plat
and is the first plan presented to the Planning Board for review. The plan does
not need detailed engineering drawings or environmental permits for review. The
SKETCH PLAN is used by the applicant to negotiate a commitment from the town
relating to public services, i.e., town water, sewer, annexation and any other
design ideas for the project.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A land area containing interrelated
buildings and open spaces, designed and organized to function as an integrated
unit pursuant to a general development plan approved by the Town Council.
   PLAT. Includes the terms map, plan, plat, replat or replot. A map or plan of
a tract or parcel of land which is to be or which has been subdivided.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing on record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances, and
with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets and alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the
character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES. The utilities and/or services offered and operated by the
town or by others authorized by the town.
   SETBACK LINE. The lines on the front, rear and sides of a lot, set according
to the zoning district regulations, which delineate the area upon which a
structure may be built and maintained.
   SITE SPECIFIC PLAN. Any subdivision plan, preliminary or general development
plan, planned unit development plan, precise plan, special use permit or
conditional use permit, a conditional use or special use district zoning plan,
or any other land use designation as may be utilized by the town. Unless
otherwise expressly provided by the town, such a plan shall include the
approximate boundaries of the site; significant topographical and other natural
features effecting development of the site; the approximate location on the
site, the proposed buildings, structures and other improvements; the
approximate dimensions, including height, of the proposed buildings and other
structures and the approximate location of all existing and proposed
infrastructure on the site, including water, sewer, roads, and pedestrian
walkways. A variance shall not constitute a SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN, and
approval of a SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN with the condition that a variance
be obtained shall not confer a vested right unless and until the necessary
variance is obtained. Neither a sketch plan nor any other document which fails
to describe with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a
specified parcel or parcels of property may constitute a SITE SPECIFIC
DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   SOUND BARRIER. Consists of a wall of brick, concrete, concrete block, glass,
full louvered or solid wooden fencing (manufactured of suitable pressure-
treated lumber) not less than eight feet high and no more than ten feet from a
building where outside noises may be expected to occur (such as animal, human,
machinery, engines under operation or testing and the like) The SOUND BARRIER
shall encircle the noise area on all sides.
   STREET. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic
which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties, and may be:
      a.   A COLLECTOR STREET which is defined as a street which collects
traffic from another street (minor) and serves as the most direct route to a
major street or a community facility;
      b.   A CUL-DE-SAC which is defined as a minor street having one end open
to vehicular traffic and having one end permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
      c.   A MAJOR STREET which is defined as a street or highway used for
moving heavy traffic volumes or high speed traffic, or both, or which has been
designed as a major thoroughfare on the thoroughfare plan;
      d.   A MARGINAL ACCESS STREET which is defined as a minor street located
beside a limited access street or highway or a railroad and which provides
access to abutting properties, provides protection from through traffic, and
controls access; and
      e.   A MINOR STREET which is defined as a street the primary purpose of
which is to provide access to adjacent properties designed in a manner that
will discourage use by through traffic;
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in
the ground or attached to something having more or less a fixed location on or
in the ground. Among other things, STRUCTURES include buildings, mobile homes,
walls, fences, signs and swimming pools. STRUCTURE for floodplain management
purposes means a walled and roofed building, manufactured home, a gas or liquid
storage tank, or other human-made facilities or infrastructures that are
principally above ground.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a
subdivision as herein defined.
   THOROUGHFARE. A main road or public highway. As applied to this ordinance at
the time of its adoption, the term would apply to U.S. Highway 70, Chatham
Street, East Chatham Street, Howard Boulevard and Orange Street (Mill Creek
Road).
   TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES. Speed bumps, humps, ribbons, grooves and the like
that are installed perpendicular to the traffic flow for the purpose of
controlling and/or limiting the maximum speed of vehicular traffic along the
road. This definition is not intended to limit the creation, design and
installation of other TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES such as traffic islands, the
strategic narrowing of the street or diverters.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance. A VARIANCE may
be made where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property not the result of
the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship. VARIANCES are granted by the Board of
Adjustment or the Town Council as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance which
must adhere to certain rules and regulations as set forth in this ordinance.
   VESTED RIGHTS. The right to undertake and complete the development and use
of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific
development plan or an approved phase development plan.
   YARD. A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any principal
building or accessory building, extending from ground to sky, except as
provided herein.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot measured from side
lot line to side lot line and lying between the abutting street right-of-way
and the front setback line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of the lot measured from side
lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear property line and the rear
setback line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along either side of a lot measured from front
setback line to the rear setback line and lying between the side lot line and
the side setback line.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. See ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
SECTION FIVE: PROCEDURES FOR SECURING APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 5-1 GENERAL.
   A subdivider shall follow the procedures set forth in this section for
securing approval of subdivision plats.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-2 SKETCH PLAN.
   Before an application for approval of the preliminary plat is filed, the
subdivider shall submit a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.
   a.   The sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale that lends itself to adequate
detail, and generally not on a scale larger than one inch to 100 feet. The
applicant shall submit at least ten copies of the drawings.
   b.   The sketch plan shall show existing and tentative street right-of-way
layout, easements, lot arrangements, existing structures, watercourses, site
dedication or proposed dedication for parks, schools, churches or other public
and semi-private uses, and all other things as required by §§
5-3 d.1. through
5-3 d.6. and
5-3 d.8 through
5-3 d.15.
   c.   Data shall be given regarding acreage in the total tract, minimum lot
size, average lot size and acreage left in open space or other uses.
   d.   The sketch plan shall incorporate a vicinity map, showing the
relationship between the subdivision and the surrounding area.
   e.   The sketch plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and other
town departments for general compliance with this chapter and other town
regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009; Ord. 2019-08, passed 9-12-2019)
§ 5-3 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   a.   A request for consideration of the preliminary plat by the Planning
Board shall be made by the subdivider in writing along with an application fee
per the town’s Fee Schedule. The request shall be delivered to the Zoning
Administrator at least 15 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which
time it is to be considered. The Planning Board Chairperson shall schedule the
date for consideration and cause the notification to the subdivider of such.
The date of consideration shall be no greater than 70 calendar days from the
date of receipt of the letter of request.
   b.   The subdivider shall submit at least ten copies of the preliminary plat
and any supplemental material to the Zoning Administrator at least 15 days
prior to the scheduled Planning Board meeting at which said plat is to be
considered.
   c.   The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a design professional to a
scale that lends itself to adequate detail and generally no larger scale than
one inch to 100 feet.
   d.   The preliminary plat shall show the information set forth in the
following:
      1.   The location of existing and platted property, buildings, streets,
railroads, bridges, culverts, watercourses, transmission lines, sewers,
drainpipes, water mains, other public utility easements and town and county
boundary lines;
      2.   Boundaries of tracts shown with bearings, distances and closures;
      3.   Marsh, swamp, floodway, floodplain, topography at five-foot
intervals and any other physical conditions affecting the site. In extremely
flat terrain, the Planning Board may require lesser intervals to and including
one foot;
      4.   Existing zoning classification both of the land to be subdivided and
of adjacent land;
      5.   Names of adjacent property owners and subdivisions;
      6.   Proposed streets, street names, rights-of-way, easements, pavement
widths, and approximate grades;
      7.   Locations of proposed utility lines (storm and sanitary sewer,
water, gas, electric and telephone) showing connections to existing supply and
disposal systems or planned supply and disposal systems. These utility drawings
shall be annotated on a separate page of the plan along with a grading plan;
      8.   The location, widths and purposes of other proposed rights-of-way or
easements;
      9.   Proposed areas for parks, school sites and public open spaces;
      10.   Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers and lot dimensions;
      11.   Proposed minimum building setback lines;
      12.   Title, date, magnetic and true north arrows, and graphic scale;
      13.   Name of owner and surveyor or engineer;
      14.   Data shall be given regarding acreage in total tract to be
subdivided or developed, minimum lot size, total number of lots and lineal feet
in streets; and
      15.   A location map showing the relationship between the subdivision and
the entire community shall also be submitted. This map shall be placed as an
inset on the preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-3.1 REVIEW OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT BY THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   a.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the plat with the subdivider and
town officials for compliance with all town ordinances and regulations. It
shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to ensure, when appropriate,
that:
      1.   The District Highway Engineer;
      2.   The County Health Director;
      3.   Town Fire Chief;
      4.   Town Public Works Department;
      5.   The School Superintendent; and
      6.   Other agencies and officials, all have an opportunity to review and
make recommendations concerning the proposed subdivision plat before approval
is given by the Planning Board.
   b.   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to acquire all
necessary permits from the county and/or state agencies such as, but not
limited to:
      1.   Improvements permit for septic tanks;
      2.   Erosion control plan;
      3.   Storm water permit;
      4.   Wetlands permit; and
      5.   Water and sewer extensions.
   c.   The developer shall provide the Zoning Administrator with copies of all
permit applications and permits issued by other agencies for the development
project.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-3.2 REVIEW OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
   The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as set forth in
this section.
   a.   The Zoning Administrator shall advise and report recommendations to the
Planning Board received from other town, county and state agencies and
officials reviewing the plat.
   b.   The Planning Board shall discuss the plat with the subdivider, changes
deemed advisable, if any, and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by
the subdivider.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-3.3 APPROVAL OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
   The Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the
preliminary plat or defer action for a period not to exceed two regular
scheduled meetings.
   a.   If the preliminary plat is approved, approval shall be noted on three
copies of the plat by the Planning Board Chairperson. One of these copies shall
be transmitted to the subdivider, one retained and placed on file by the Zoning
Administrator, and one transmitted to the Town Council.
   b.   In case of conditional approval, the reasons and the conditions to be
met shall be specified in writing. One copy of such reasons and conditions
shall be filed with the copy of the plat retained by the Zoning Administrator,
Town Council and another shall be given to the subdivider. The Planning Board
may require the subdivider to submit a revised preliminary plat with all
recommended changes made before approving the plat.
   c.   When a preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Board shall
specify the reasons for such action in writing. One copy of such reasons shall
be retained and placed on file by the Zoning Administrator and one copy shall
be given to the subdivider. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the
subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a revised preliminary
plat.
   d.   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board, the plat
along with all requirements shall be transmitted to the Town Council for its
review and approval.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-3.4 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT BY THE TOWN COUNCIL.
   a.   The preliminary plat shall be reviewed and approved by the Town
Council. Particular attention shall be paid to public utilities and facilities.
   b.   Where public utilities are to be extended to the town or dedicated to
the town, the town’s consulting engineer shall review, at the developer’s
expense, all proposed public utilities and make recommendations to the Town
Council.
   c.   The Town Council may approve, conditionally approve, disapprove or make
changes to the preliminary plat or the Town Council may refer the preliminary
plat back to the Planning Board with recommendations for reconsideration.
   d.   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Council, the
subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the
installation, construction or arrangements for required improvements in
accordance with the preliminary plat as approved and in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
   e(1).   In case of conditional approval, the reasons and the conditions to
be met shall be specified in writing by the Town Council. One copy of such
reasons and conditions shall be filed with the copy of the plat retained by the
Zoning Administrator, Town Council and another shall be given to the
subdivider. The Town Council may require the subdivider to submit a revised
preliminary plat with all recommended changes made before approving the plat.
   e(2).   Conditional approval is usually given so that the developer can
proceed with the design submittal of storm water, erosion control, wetland
delineation and any other environmental requirements of the town and other
agencies. After all conditions have been satisfied, the developer shall submit
to and request a review of, the approved permits by the Zoning Administrator of
the town. After satisfactory review, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a
letter authorizing construction of the subdivision to the developer. The Zoning
Administrator will transmit a copy of the letter of authorization to the Town
Council.
   f.   When a preliminary plat is disapproved, the Town Council shall specify
the reasons for such action in writing. One copy of such reasons shall be
retained and placed on file by the Town Council, Zoning Administrator and one
copy shall be given to the subdivider. If the preliminary plat is disapproved,
the subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a revised
preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-3.5 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   a.   After Town Council approval of the preliminary plat, the Building
Inspection Department may issue building permits for construction of
structures, houses or buildings within the preliminary approved subdivision.
Permits shall only be written to the subdivision owner.
   b.   After final plat approval and recording, permits may be written to any
qualified builder or contractor.
   c.   Certificates of occupancy of the houses or buildings shall only be
issued after final plat approval by the Town Council and then only after all
other requirements of this ordinance are satisfied.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-4 FINAL PLAT.
   a.   Upon completion of the installation or arrangements for the
improvements shown on the approved preliminary plat for the whole or a portion
of the subdivision, a request for consideration of the final plat by the Town
Council shall be made by the subdivider in writing and submitted to the Zoning
Administrator at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the Council at which it
is to be considered. The Town Clerk shall schedule the date of consideration
and notify the subdivider of such. The date of consideration shall be no
greater than 40 calendar days from the date of receipt of the letter of
request.
   b.   The developer shall submit ten copies of the final plat to include “as-
built” drawings at the time of the request. One of these copies shall be drawn
on good quality reproducible material, such as linen or film Mylar.
   c.   The developer shall submit a digital copy in the form and data
compatible with the town’s geographical information system (GIS) of the final
design. After utilities and infrastructure is completed, the developer and any
subcontractors of the project shall submit digital copies of the “as-built”
drawings.
   d.   The request for consideration and submission of a final plat shall be
made within two years after approval of the preliminary plat by the Council or
as specified in
Appendix A, Zoning, § 1-11, Vested Rights. Otherwise preliminary approval shall
become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by
the Council. No more than two such extensions shall be granted.
   e.   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved by the Council.
   f.   The final plat shall include only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop, provided
that such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter.
   g.   The final plat shall be prepared by a design professional to a scale
that lends itself to adequate detail and generally no larger scale than one
inch to 100 feet. It shall be prepared to meet the requirements for recording
in the County Register of Deeds office.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-4.1 FINAL PLAT CONTENT.
   The final plat shall show the following information:
   a.   The boundary lines and names of all streets and roads;
   b.   Lot lines, lot dimensions and block numbers;
   c.   Minimum building setback lines;
   d.   Reservations, easements, alleys and any roads to be dedicated to public
use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose
and any limitations;
   e.   Sufficient data to determine readily and to be easily reproduced on the
ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line,
boundary line (with error of closure), block line and building line, whether
curved or straight, and including true and magnetic north arrows. This should
include the radius, center angles, point of tangency, tangent distance and arcs
and cords of all curved property lines;
   f.   All dimensions should be to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and angles
to the nearest minute;
   g.   Accurate location and description of all monuments and markers;
   h.   All names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets and the
location and ownership of adjoining subdivided property;
   i.   Title, date, name and location of subdivision and graphic scale;
   j.   Name of subdivider and registered surveyor or registered engineer, as
applicable. No plat shall be accepted without the name of the registered
surveyor or engineer;
   k.   Utility layouts for water, gas, sanitary sewer, storm drainage and
electrical and telephone lines. If not served with municipal sewer, the plat
shall show by number the appropriate Health Department symbols which lot(s) are
not suitable or approved for septic tanks. Such marking shall be of the type
required by the Department of Environmental Health;
   l.   Floodway and/or floodplain, both 100-year and 500-year; and
   m.   The following certificates shall also appear on each copy of the final
plat by the subdivider:
      1.   Certificate of ownership and dedication, signed;
      2.   Certificate of approval of water supply and sewage disposal system,
signed;
      3.   Certificate of accuracy and mapping, signed; and
      4.   Reference to any separate instruments, including restrictive
covenants, filed in the Register of Deeds office with direct affect on the land
being subdivided.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-4.2 REVIEW OF THE FINAL PLAT BY THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator shall review the final plat for compliance with the
provisions of these subdivision regulations, and:
   a.   The Zoning Administrator may request reports from any person or agency
directly affected by the proposed development. Such reports shall show
certified compliance with or note deviations from the approved preliminary plat
and the requirements of these subdivision regulations;
   b.   If the Zoning Administrator finds that a discrepancy exists that needs
review by the Council, he or she shall transmit the plat to the Council which
may appoint an engineer to check the final plat against the subdivision’s
actual layout for correctness; charging the cost to the subdivider if the plat
is found to be seriously in error;
   c.   If the final plat is found to be in compliance, the Zoning
Administrator or the Planning Board Chairperson, as appropriate, shall transmit
the final plat, together with recommendations, to the Town Council for final
action;
   d.   If the final plat is found not to be in compliance or if changes have
been made from the approved preliminary plat, the Zoning Administrator shall
review and transmit the final plat, together with recommendations thereon, to
the Town Council for final action; and
   e.   Where individual sewage treatment facilities, such as septic tanks, are
required, improvement permits from Environmental Health shall be provided and
accompany the final plat for all approved lots within the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 5-4.3 APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT BY THE TOWN COUNCIL.
   a.   Approval of the final plat by the Town Council is authorization for the
plat to be filed with the Register of Deeds.
   b.   If the Town Council should disapprove the final plat, or part thereof,
the reasons for such action shall be noted in the minutes and recommendations
shall be made, on the basis of which, the proposed subdivision could be
approved.
   c.   The actions of the Town Council shall be noted on the original drawing
and three copies of the final plat. One copy shall be returned to the
subdivider. One copy and the original drawing shall be transmitted to the
Register of Deeds of the county for recording if approval is granted and one
copy shall be retained for the permanent files of the Zoning Administrator.
   d.   Upon receiving the final plat, the Register of Deeds shall comply with
G.S. § 160a-373 (Procedure for Filing).
   e.   No final plat shall be approved until all improvements are properly
installed to meet the requirements set forth by these regulations, all required
fees have been paid, and the certificates required by these regulations to
appear on the final plat have been properly filled out and signed.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
SECTION SIX: DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Any land area subject to the provisions of this chapter which lies within
the floodway, and other land deemed by the Planning Board to be unsuitable
shall be prohibited for residential occupancy or for other use that may
jeopardize life, health or property, or which may increase the danger to life
on property from flood hazard.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   The following standards for design shall be minimum requirements. Where
other official engineering and public works, standards, and specifications are
more stringent, such higher standards shall be used.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.1 ALLEYS.
   a.   Alleys may be required where it is found that access requirements of
Article XIII of the Zoning Ordinance are not adequate.
   b.   The width of an alley serving commercial and industrial areas shall not
be less than 20 feet. Deadend alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround
facilities at the deadend as determined by the Planning Board.
   c.   Alleys are not permitted in residential districts except where the
Planning Board determines that special conditions warrant a secondary means of
access.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.2 BLOCKS.
   a.   Blocks shall be laid out with special attention given to the type of
use contemplated.
   b.   Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet or be less than 400 feet.
Blocks shall not be more than 1,000 feet unless there is an approved pedestrian
alley of not less than six feet wide dividing the blocks.
   c.   Blocks shall have a sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of
minimum depth. Blocks may consist of single tier lots where such are required
to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or
nonresidential uses.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.3 BUFFER STRIPS.
   The Council may require in residential districts that a buffer strip of at
least 50 feet in depth, in addition to the normal lot depth required, be
provided adjacent to all railroads, limited access highways and commercial
developments. This strip shall be part of the platted lots but shall have the
following restriction lettered on the face of the plat:
      “This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the owner;
the building of structures thereon is prohibited.”
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.4 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   a.   The minimum building setback or the distance between the street right-
of-way line and the building line shall not be less than that prescribed in the
zoning district of the subdivision.
   b.   Where the lack of vehicle parking is a concern, the town shall require
additional setback requirements so as to accommodate additional vehicle parking
on the lot.
   c.   Double vehicle driveway width may be required, along with the
requirements of paragraph b. above. The driveway may be required to be paved
with a hard surface material so as to be in keeping with the intended character
of the neighborhood.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.5 CUL-DE-SAC.
   A cul-de-sac shall not exceed 800 feet in length measured from the entrance
to the center of the turnaround. A street designed to be permanently closed
shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround. Adequate sewer and water
line right-of-way shall be reserved to eliminate water line deadends and to
provide sewage outfall.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.6 EASEMENTS.
   a.   Easements shall be provided where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream. There shall be provided a storm
easement or drainage right-of-way substantially in conformity with the lines of
such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
   b.   Easements for utilities shall be provided. Easements not less than ten
feet wide, centered on lot lines for both underground and above ground
facilities, for use by both public and private utilities shall be provided
along each lot line.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.7 ROAD GRADES.
   Road grades in accordance with NCDOT Subdivisions Roads Manual.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.8 HORIZONTAL CURVES.
   Horizontal curves in roads in accordance with NCDOT Subdivisions Roads
Manual.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.9 ROAD INTERSECTIONS.
   Road intersections in accordance with NCDOT Subdivisions Roads Manual.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.10 LOTS.
   Lots shall be laid out as follows.
   a.   Minimum lot width at the street, lot sites, shapes and locations shall
be made with due regard to topographic conditions, contemplated use and the
surrounding area. Each lot shall front for a distance of at least 50 feet on a
public street, except that the minimum road frontage shall be 35 feet in the
turning radius of a cul-de-sac.
   b.   Community water and sewer available. Where the town public water and
sewer facilities or public water and sewer facilities licensed as such by the
North Carolina Utilities Commission and meeting the town’s design and
engineering standards are available, every lot shall contain not less than the
area prescribed in the zoning district in which the subdivision exists.
   c.   Community water and sewer not available. Residential lots not served by
the town public water and sewer facilities or public water and sewer facilities
licensed by the North Carolina Utilities Commission and meeting the town’s
design and engineering standards, shall be at least 20,000 square feet in area,
not less than 100 feet wide at the building line nor less than 150 feet deep.
   d.   Community water available. Residential lots served by town public water
facilities or public water facilities licensed by the North Carolina Utilities
Commission and meeting the town’s design and engineering standards, but not
public sewer, shall be at least 15,000 square feet in area, not less than 90
feet wide at the building line nor less than 150 feet deep. Every lot shall
contain not less than the area prescribed in the zoning district for the
appropriate zone or zones in which the subdivision exists.
   e.   Corner residential lots. The lot line with the shortest street frontage
shall be increased by ten feet more than otherwise required in order to provide
adequate space to meet side setback requirements.
   f.   Double frontage lots. Double frontage or reverse frontage lots shall be
avoided except where necessary to separate residential development from through
traffic or nonresidential uses.
   g.   Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
or radial to street lines.
   h.   Commercial or industrial uses. Lots are not required for commercial or
industrial uses but when provided they shall be adequate to provide for off-
street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and
development contemplated.
   i.   Minimum lot size. In no instance shall the area of a residential lot be
less than the size determined to be adequate by the County Health Department
after investigation of soil conditions, proposed individual disposal system and
depth of ground water. All lots shall conform to the zoning districts in which
the subdivision exists.
   j.   Flag lots.
      1.   Flag lots as defined by §
4-3, are allowed only within Zoning Districts R-20, R-20A and R-15.
      2.   The flag pole which is the entrance of the lot shall front a public
street, road or right-of-way by a minimum of 35 feet. The entrance way “pole”
shall maintain the 35 foot minimum width throughout its entire length until it
joins the main “flag” body. The main body is considered to start where its
width is as wide as the required minimum lot width in the district.
      3.   The flag pole and flag portion of the lot shall not be separate
parcels and shall not be used as access to other parcels of land. The flag pole
shall not be included as part of the required minimum lot area in the district.
      4.   The address of the dwelling located on a flag lot shall be clearly
visible from the street which the flag lot accesses.
      5.   Where the neighborhood and lot are provided with public water
service, a fire hydrant may be required and located within 500 feet of the
dwelling at the discretion of the fire official. If the hydrant is required to
be located on the main body of the flag lot or flag pole portion of the lot,
the expense will be born by the property owner.
      6.   The front of the dwelling shall be oriented toward the entrance
“pole”. It is to be assumed that the “pole” extends through the lot. This
should orient the flag lot dwelling side yard towards the rear yard of the
front “parent” lot.
      7.   To allow the street fronting parent lot to be fenced for its entire
back and side yard to the maximum allowed in the district, the maximum height
for front yard setback fence requirement for the parent lot shall be measured
from the street right-of-way at the flag entrance to the front yard setback
distance of the parent lot required in the district, or to the front yard
setback of the adjacent dwelling on the parent lot, whichever is further from
the road.
      8.   Flag lots shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board for
all subdivisions.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.11 PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS.
   Pedestrian easements or walkways shall be provided through the interior of
blocks having a length greater than 1,000 feet. Pedestrian easements shall be
at least six feet wide and shall be laid out along property lines. The walkways
shall be paved.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.12 RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND PAVEMENT WIDTHS.
   The minimum right-of-way and pavement width shall be in accordance with the
North Carolina Division of Highways Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction
Standards Manual.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 6-2.13 STREETS.
   a.   Character. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and
location of all streets shall conform to all of the elements of the official
plans for the community and shall be designed in accordance with the provisions
of NCDOT Manual referred to in §
7-3.6b.
   b.   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so that use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
   c.   Private streets.
      There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision except where
located in a subdivision with a homeowners association which is responsible for
street maintenance, in a commercial development, or in the ETJ where offered
for dedication to the public.
      Where the development roads are to remain private roads, the following
words shall appear on the recorded plat:
      “All roads in this development shall remain private roads to be
maintained by the developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or
maintained by the town.”
   d.   Proposed street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in
alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the assigned name of
the existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate
or be phonetically similar to existing street names. The subdivider shall have
all proposed street names approved by the County E-911 supervisor.
   e.   Street pattern and adjacent property. The street pattern shall be such
as to cause no hardship in the subdividing of adjacent properties. The Planning
Board may require the dedication of a street right-of-way to facilitate the
development of adjacent properties.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
SECTION SEVEN: IMPROVEMENTS
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   a.   Final plats for all subdivisions shall not be approved until all
required improvements listed in this section have been installed or the
subdivider has guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Town Council as provided
in §
7-2 below that such improvements will be installed.
   b.   All improvements shall be made in conformity with the requirements and
standards set forth in this chapter and other specifications and policies at
the developer’s expense.
   c.   All improvements shall be inspected and approved by the Zoning
Administrator, or his or her representative, as conforming to the requirements
of the town.
   d.   All improvement specifications of the town are on file in the office of
the Town Clerk.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-2 GUARANTEES.
§ 7-2.1 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   a.   The developer shall provide one of the following performance guarantees
for an amount adequate to cover the estimated construction costs of a portion
of the required improvements at preliminary plat consideration and approval.
   b.   The developer shall provide the guarantee adequate to cover
construction cost of all grading and land disturbing.
   Note
      This guarantee is intended to pay for any mitigation of damage repair or
improvements that may be born by the town should the development be abandoned,
sold to other parties or otherwise stopped and the construction has or may
adversely affect adjacent properties or other town systems.
   c.   The conditions and the amount of the performance guarantee shall be
determined by the Council with advice of the town’s consulting engineer, Town
Manager and/or Town Attorney. The conditions and form can either be:
      1.   A cashier’s check or official bank check payable to the town, or a
savings account or certificate of deposit all naming the town as owner, for the
establishment of an escrow account, as provided for in § 4. below;
      2.   Performance bond payable to the town issued by a surety company,
approved by the Town Manager and Town Attorney, as provided for in § 5. below;
      3.   An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution
establishing funding for the construction of the development, from which the
town may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by the Town Manager and
Town Attorney, as provided for in § 6. below;
      4.   Escrow account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an
escrow account shall be made by either a cashier’s check or official bank check
made out To the town, the direct deposit into a savings account, or the
purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the developer,
the town shall be named as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the town shall
be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account shall
be returned to the developer unless expended to finish construction as provided
below;
      5.   Performance bond (surety bond). A performance bond shall detail the
conditions of the bond, the method for release of the bond or portions of the
bond to the developer, and the procedures for collection by the town. The bond
documents shall specifically reference the subdivision for which
approval is sought; or
      6.   Letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or
other lending institution shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the
construction of the development and may not be used for any other project or
loan. If construction is not complete within 320 days of the date of the letter
of credit, a new (renewal) letter of credit for not less than 365 days must be
furnished to the town within 20 calendar days, and this must be repeated until
construction is complete. If the renewal letters of credit are not timely
furnished, the town will make demand upon the then current letter of credit for
payment to the town of the estimated costs of completing construction, plus 20%
thereof. Failure of the town to make such demand shall not waive the town’s
rights under the letter of credit.
   d.   Contents of guarantee. The performance guarantee executed by the
developer and approved by the town shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation,
provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the
release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer, and a
date after which the developer will be in default allowing the town access to
the funds to finish construction, as provided below.
   e.   The town, at its discretion, may provide for the developer to enter
into a binding agreement with the town for approval of the final plat on the
condition that some lots may be sold and built upon if:
      1.   It is certified by the Town Manager, after advice from the
consulting engineer and for such other persons as he or she may deem
appropriate, that adequate improvements have been installed in accordance with
this ordinance and the regulations of the appropriate utilities; and
      2.   A performance guarantee of the type specified in c.1. through c.6.
above, as selected by the developer, and acceptable to the town, is submitted
in an amount necessary to cover the completion of the required improvements at
an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portions of the required
improvements already installed plus 20% of this figure. Notice of the agreement
and any conditions shall be on the final plat which is recorded at the Register
of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures for release of
the performance guarantees contained in §
7-2.1g.
   f.   Phasing of development. The Council may approve plans to develop a
major subdivision in separate and distinct phases. This may be accomplished by
limiting final approval to those lots or buildings abutting that section of the
proposed development’s road or roads covered by a performance guarantee. When
development is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing public
way. All deadend roads shall be provided with a permanent or temporary cul-de-
sac. Final approval of lots in subsequent phases shall be given only upon
satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
   g.   Release of guarantee. Prior to the release of any part of the
performance guarantee, the Council shall determine to its satisfaction, in part
upon the report of the town’s consulting engineer and whatever other agencies
and departments may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed
the design and construction requirements for that portion of the improvements
for which the release is requested.
   h.   Default. If, upon inspection, the town’s consulting engineer finds that
any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with
the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, he or she shall
so report in writing to the Building Inspector, the Town Manager, the Council,
and the subdivider or developer. The Town Manager shall take any steps
necessary to preserve the town’s rights.
   i.   Failure to construct in accordance with approved plans and
specifications shall be a violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-2.2 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEES.
   a.   Inspection of improvements. If the Town Manager finds that any of the
improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the applicable
construction standards and specifications, the owner shall be responsible for
completing the improvements to the required standards. Whenever the cost of
improvements is covered by a performance bond, the owner and the bonding
company shall be liable severally and jointly for said improvements to be made
according to specifications and requirements of law and ordinances.
   b.   Release or reduction of performance bond. The Town Manager shall not
release nor reduce a performance bond until all departments or agencies provide
written confirmation that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed and all associated and/or surplus construction materials are removed
from the site. There shall be no reduction or release of a bond if any
outstanding administrative penalties or violations related to the bonded site
exist.
   c.   Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond may be reduced upon
demonstration of satisfactory completion of public improvements, including
installation of asphalt surface binder course, and then only to the ratio that
the installed improvement bears to the total public improvements for the
subdivision. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below 10% or
$5,000, whichever is greater, of the original principal amount. The bond shall
remain in effect for a minimum of two years after final plat approval.
   d.   Extension of performance bond. The Town Manager, upon finding
extenuating circumstances may extend the completion date set forth in such bond
and may require an extension and/or an increase in the bonded amount to cover
increases in costs.
   e.   Refer to Town Council. The Town Manager may refer decisions to release,
reduce or extend a bond to the Town Council.
   f.   Maintenance of improvements. The owner shall be required to maintain
all improvements including all lot improvements until acceptance of such
improvements by the town.
   g.   Expiration of bond. Should the bond lapse or expire for any reason
prior to completion of all required improvements, no additional building
permits shall be issued and the Town Manager shall take any and all appropriate
legal action necessary to assure completion of improvements. The developer may
be declared in default and the bond proceeds shall be held by the town. Only
after completion of all improvements or posting of a new bond shall building
permits again be issued.
   h.   Disposition of liquidated securities. Funds derived from liquidation of
securities, as a result of performance agreement default, shall be used by the
town to complete the required work, based upon the stage of development when
work ceased. Project administrative fees may be charged by the town against
liquidated funds to offset actual personnel or equipment costs utilized in the
accomplishment of required work. Any surplus funds shall be returned to the
security provider after all charges and expenses are paid and required work is
accepted.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3 REQUIREMENTS.
§ 7-3.1 PERMANENT SURVEY REFERENCE MARKERS.
   Permanent survey reference markers shall be installed in all subdivisions in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 39, Art. 5A and the following requirements.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.2 PERMANENT CONCRETE MONUMENTS.
   Permanent concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, three feet
long, shall be placed at not less than two corners of the subdivision, provided
that additional monuments shall be placed where necessary so that no point
within the subdivision lies more than 500 feet from a monument. Two or more of
the required monuments shall be designated as control corners. The top of each
monument shall have an indented cross metal pin or metal plate to identify the
location of the point. All monuments will be shown on the final plat.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.3 STEEL OR IRON MARKERS.
   Steel or iron markers shall be set at all lot corners and at all other
survey points not marked by monuments. Such markers shall be set at points of
curvature, points of tangency, reference points, and points of intersection.
Survey markers shall be at least three-fourths inches in diameter and shall be
sunk vertically into the ground until the top is approximately four inches
above the finished grade, except in sidewalks, streets and other similar
surfaces where the markers shall be flush with such surface. In the interest of
safety, steel or iron markers may be installed flush with the ground surface
provided the point is also marked with a wooden survey stake until all lots
adjoining the point are sold.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.4 ELECTRICAL AND TELEPHONE SERVICES.
   All electrical, telephone, cable TV and other such utilities shall be
underground.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5 OPEN SPACE RESERVATION FOR PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS OR RECREATIONAL.
   Every person or corporation that subdivides land for residential purposes
under the requirements of this ordinance shall also be required to dedicate a
portion of such land, to provide cash in lieu of land payment, or to provide a
combination of land, cash and facility development acceptable to the town for
the purpose of developing park, recreation and open space sites to serve the
residents of the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located or in the
immediate area of the subdivision.
   a.   The Planning Board shall consider and make recommendations to the Town
Council whether to accept a dedication of land or to require a fee in lieu of
dedication.
   b.   Land set aside for parks and recreational purposes will be dedicated to
the town by proper conveyance of title. Said conveyance shall be indicated on
the final plat for recording and any deeds shall accompany the final plat for
consideration by the Town Council. The developer shall improve the land set
aside with landscaping. The developer may be required to provide recreation
equipment and facilities as the town deems appropriate for the use of the
recreation land. If a fee in lieu of land is proposed, the fee shall accompany
the final plat submitted to the Council.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5.1 PRIVATE OWNERSHIP OF PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
   Private ownership of parks and recreation areas for subdivisions or multi-
family developments are authorized under these regulations subject to the
following stipulations.
   a.   A duly organized ownership association is created to provide for
management and maintenance, or in the case of multi-family developments,
management and maintenance is the obligation of the developer or property
owner.
   b.   In the event of dissolution or financial incapability of a private
ownership organization to properly manage and/or maintain its private
facilities, those areas will be dedicated and conveyed to the town. Language
providing for this conditional conveyance shall be included in the
organizational instruments of the private ownership association and a deed
shall be executed to the town conveying the land and the facilities located
thereon to the town, conditioned, however, that the private ownership
organization or the developer or owner, as the case may be, of the land and
facilities shall have the full right to occupy, possess, maintain and control
such land and facilities so long as the organization, developer or owner is in
existence and is exercising the responsibility for maintenance and control of
the land and facilities.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5.2 DULY RECORDED INSTRUMENTS.
   Park and recreational use of the land set aside is protected by duly
recorded instruments. Restrictions and covenants running with the land can not
be voiced or amended by the owner or ownership association without the prior
written consent of the town and a deed shall be executed to the town conveying
the land and the facilities located thereon to the town, conditioned, however
that the private ownership organization or the developer or owner, as the case
may be, of the land and facilities shall have the full right to occupy,
possess, maintain and control such land and facilities so long as the
organization, developer or owner is in existence and is exercising the
responsibility for maintenance and control of the land and facilities.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5.3 AREA DEVOTED TO PARKS AND RECREATION.
   The area devoted to parks and recreational purposes is equal to or exceeds
the area required under these regulations.
   Exemptions:
   a.   The division of a parcel of land into one new lot is exempt from this
part; and
   b.   Industrial and commercial subdivisions, without any residential, are
exempt from this part.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5.4 FORMULA FOR AREA SET ASIDE.
   The following formula which addresses number, type and density of dwelling
units will be used to determine the amount of area to be set aside for park and
recreational purposes:
 
(NDU) x (2.4 3 AFS) x (.008) x (VDF) = Acres Set Aside
 
   Example 1. For a 33 lot, 12-acre subdivision.
 
33 x 2.43 x 0.008 x 1.2 = 0.76 acres (33,105 sq. ft.)
 
   NDU = Number of dwelling units.
   AFS =   Average family size (latest census).
   VDF = Variable density factor.
Variable Density Factor Table
Acreage Average per Dwelling Unit VDF
Variable Density Factor Table
Acreage Average per Dwelling Unit VDF
0.0—0.1                         1.8
0.1—0.2                         1.6
0.2—0.3                         1.4
0.3—0.4                         1.2
0.4—0.5                         1.0
0.5—0.6                         0.9
0.6—0.7                         0.8
0.7—0.8                         0.7
0.8—0.9                         0.6
0.9 over                          0.5
 
      1.   The average acre per dwelling unit is computed by dividing the
combined total acreage of all dwelling units or lots by the number of dwelling
units or lots. For computation purposes, land dedicated or reserved for
purposes such as streets, alleys and purposes other than residential shall not
be used in determining average acreage. In no case shall a developer be
required to dedicate more than 30% of the acreage of a development.
 
Example 1. For a 33 lot 12 acre subdivision.
12 acres ÷ 33 = 0.36 acre average. Reference to the chart shows a 1.2 VDF
 
      2.   Variable density factor is designed to provide an adjustment to
subdivision plats which contain average lot sizes of 0.5 acres and above. This
adjustment is used since subdivisions with larger lots contain more open space
and thus fewer lots and greater park acreage. Conversely, those subdivision
plats that create lots or units which average less than 0.4 acres are adjusted
due to the density of development and the inherent increased demand for more
public recreation and park land. The adjustments for large lots or for small
lots are based on a sliding scale reflecting degree of density.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5.5 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING SUITABILITY.
   Criteria for evaluating suitability of proposed recreation, parks and open
space areas shall include, but not be limited to, the following as determined
by the Council.
   a.   Unity. The dedicated land shall be a single parcel except where it is
determined that two or more parcels would be in the public interest. The
Planning Board may request that the parcels be connected and may also require
at least a 30-foot path width in addition to the land requirements.
   b.   Location. The dedicated land shall be located so as to serve the
recreation needs of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision. General
public access shall not be restricted from the recreation area.
   c.   Shape. Topography and soils of the dedicated land shall be such as to
be suitable for parking and active recreation. Lakes and marsh may not be
included in computing dedicated land area unless acceptable to the Planning
Board. Land area less than two and one-half contiguous acres shall not be
considered as suitable for land set aside.
   d.   Accessibility. Public access to the dedicated land shall be provided
either by an abutting street or public easement. Such public easement shall be
at least 30 feet in width. The proposed land set aside shall be located as
remote from a building lot as possible. Consideration shall be given to the
location, screening, or buffering so as not to cause a nuisance to the
residential area. If adequate protection to the residential area can not be
provided, then the offer for land set aside shall be denied and a fee in lieu
of land set aside shall be required.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.5.6 FEES IN LIEU OF LAND SET ASIDE.
   In the event that it is determined by the town that the area, topography,
geology, access or location of the area to be set aside does not conform to the
park and recreational objectives of the town or appropriately meet the
immediate and future needs of the residents due to the availability of adjacent
facilities, the town may elect to waive the set aside of land for dedication by
accepting a fee in lieu of the dedication of land subject to the following:
   a.   Determination of fee. The amount of the fee to be accepted in lieu of
land dedication shall be determined by multiplying the required acreage times
the tax value of the land to be subdivided.
 
Example 1. Tax value at the time of submittal of preliminary plat to the
Planning Board:
$6,000 per acre x 0.76 acres = $4,560
 
   b.   Payment of required fees shall be by cash or certified check, payable
to the town. Payment must be made before final plat approval is granted by the
town.
   c.   Funds collected in lieu of land set aside shall be maintained in a
separate interest bearing account by the town in a recreation reserve fund for
use only to acquire additional land or expand or improve existing recreational
facilities.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.6 PAVING AND STREET IMPROVEMENT.
   a.   The subdivider of any subdivision shall clear and grade all streets to
their full right-of-way width so as to provide adequate shoulders and
pedestrian walkways.
   b.   All streets shall be designed, constructed and paved in accordance with
the Division of Highways, North Carolina Department of Transportation,
Subdivision Roads, Minimum Construction Standards Manual, current edition.
   c.   Streets within the corporate limits shall be provided with curb and
gutter except where, at the option of the Town Council, engineering design
philosophy recommends against curb and gutter because environmental and storm
water controls would be best managed with other types of street design. The
town may require streets within the extraterritorial jurisdiction to have curb
and gutter.
   d.   The subdivider may be required to provide street/road(s) connection to
the property line to serve an adjacent tract of land for future development and
may be required to interconnect with an adjacent development’s road system.
   e.   The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost and installation of
the road foundation, paving and/or any other road improvements.
   f.   If a street has a potential for being a collector street, or minor
street, the Council may require the installation of traffic calming devices.
The devices shall be approved by the Council upon recommendation by planning
staff and the Police Chief.
   g.   All collector roads, service roads and local residential subdivision
roads shall be provided with double stripe paint markings so as to delineate
travel lanes.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.7 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   a.   Municipal or community system. For subdivisions within the corporate
limits of the town, the subdivider shall connect to the sewer system of the
town in order to provide sewer service to every lot within the subdivision.
Sewer systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Public
Utilities Handbook Technical Specifications Water/Sewer Improvements for the
Town of Newport, state and federal environmental rules and other such
specifications as may be required by the town.
   b.   Where it is necessary to construct sewage lift stations, the developer
shall also provide the necessary land. The station shall be floodproofed,
fenced and landscaped to the satisfaction of the town. The design of the
station not limited solely to the size of pumps, alarm system and the like,
shall be to the satisfaction of the town. All sewage lift stations shall be
provided with an auto-start, standby power generator of sufficient capacity to
operate the lift station during power outages. The fuel type and capacity will
be determined by the town. Should the developer desire to utilize an existing
lift station, the developer shall pay for any engineering and/or increased
capacity costs to the lift station, to include any new alarm system and an
auto-start standby power generator.
   c.   Individual disposal systems. Where the subdivision is not serviced by
the town or a community system, the individual disposal system shall be
approved by the County Environmental Health Department or appropriate state
agency. All proposed lots shall be evaluated for approval and a letter shall
indicate by lot number its potential for approval and where improvements will
be required for final approval.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.8 SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks shall be required along any street where considerable pedestrian
traffic is expected, as determined by the Town Planning Board or Town Council,
especially in the vicinity of schools, parks and commercial activity. Sidewalks
shall be constructed on street right-of-way and installed in accordance with
town policy.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.9 STREET LIGHTS.
   Before final approval of a subdivision plat, the subdivider shall present a
street lighting plan, developed in accordance with town policy, to the Planning
Board for its approval. Street lights shall be installed at each intersection,
the dead end of cul-de-sacs and within 500 feet of each other. Public street
lighting fixture installation fees, if any, shall be paid by the developer.
Rental fees on the fixtures inside the town limits shall be paid by the town.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.10 STREET NAME MARKERS.
   a.   The developer shall provide street name markers at all subdivision
street intersections and at any other point within the subdivision deemed
necessary by the town. Approved regulation street name signage consists of
metal pipe poles with street names on metal plates. Material specifications,
attachment devices and coloration shall be those officially adopted for use by
the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
   b.   Use of non-regulation street signs.
      1.   The Town Council may approve non-regulation street signs where the
developer desires to use distinctive street signage as a tenant of initial
marketing and aesthetics design under the following conditions. The developer
will provide for the funding and eventual erection of regulation street name
signs.
      2.   Compliance options.
         a.   Prior to final approval, the developer may:
            1.   Deposit with the town the amount of money required to purchase
the regulation street signs necessary for the subdivision or phase for which
plat approval is required. The amount of money to be deposited with the town
shall be based on the estimated cost of materials as determined by the Town
Manager; or
            2.   Deliver to the Town Manager the poles, mounting apparatus and
street name plates required for the subdivision or phase for which plat
approval is required.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.11 TREES AND PRESERVATION OF NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   It is required that trees be planted in all subdivisions where there is a
lack of natural trees along the streets. The plan for tree planting shall be
submitted to the Planning Board at the time of presentation of the preliminary
plan. Trees planted should be located inside the property lines where they are
less subject to injury, decrease the chance of motor accidents and enjoy more
favorable conditions for growth. At least one tree planted every 30 lineal feet
along the front property line generally will be accepted. The size and type of
trees are specified in
Appendix A Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.12 SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROLS.
   a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
   b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   d.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivisions that
are located within a Flood Zone A as depicted on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, federal insurance rate map (FIRM) and the design shall be
consistent with the town’s Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   e.   In all subdivisions where land disturbing activity is one acre or more,
the subdivider shall submit for and receive a sedimentation and storm water
control permit from the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and
Community Development. In addition, the developer shall comply with other
conditions that may be more stringent as specified in this ordinance.
   f.   Surface water drainage shall not empty into a sanitary sewer. Where in
the opinion of the Planning Board a public storm water sewer is reasonably
accessible (within 100 feet of an existing storm water sewer and feasible from
an elevation viewpoint upon the recommendation of a registered engineer), and
before a subdivision is approved and accepted, the subdivider shall connect
with the public storm sewer system. He or she shall provide all grading and all
structures necessary to carry the water to the storm drainage system.
   g.   Where a storm drainage system is not accessible, the subdivider shall
do all grading and provide all drainage structures necessary to properly carry
the water to locations which are acceptable to the town.
   h.   When consistent with the minimum requirements of the Division of
Environmental Management for storm water controls, all drainage ditches shall
be paved, approved conduit construction and/or otherwise enclosed. Exceptions
that may be considered by the Town Council are:
      1.   Where good engineering data suggests and recommendations are made
not to enclose or pave;
      2.   Where an open ditch is to have side slopes of three to one or
greater, prove that vegetation can be maintained on the ditch slopes and it
will not become a high maintenance item;
      3.   Where an open ditch will not be an attractive nuisance; and
      4.   Where the open ditch will not adversely detract from the appearance
of the subdivision, such as the possibility of noxious weeds, snakes, vermin or
other nuisances.
   i.   Where the possibility exists for the subdivision drainage water to
adversely affect other drainage ditches down stream, such as to load the
ditches beyond their design capacity which may cause flooding or erosion, the
developer shall provide sufficient engineering study to determine the impact.
Where an adverse impact is determined to exist, as substantiated by the Town
Engineer and the Public Works Department, the subdivider shall mitigate, at his
or her expense, the drainage problem to the satisfaction of the town.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.13 WATER SUPPLY.
   a.   Every lot in every subdivision shall be provided with a water supply
system which is ample for the needs of the type of development proposed. Every
lot in every subdivision within the corporate limits shall be supplied with
water from the town. For subdivisions outside of the corporate limits, water
may be made available in accordance with current policy and ordinances of the
town. The water system shall be designed and installed in accordance with
Public Utilities Handbook Technical Specifications Water/Sewer Improvements for
the Town of Newport, state and federal environmental rules and other such
specifications as may be required by the town.
   b.   Every lot in every subdivision served by a community water system shall
be served by a fire hydrant that is located no more than 500 feet from the lot
measured along the centerline of the street(s).
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.14 HOUSE NUMBERS.
   House numbers are required for each lot within the subdivision. The
identification numbers shall be as follows.
   a.   Six-inch minimum block letters shall be painted or otherwise indelibly
mounted on the street curb, vertical face, or where no curb and gutter exist,
shall be located on the edge of the street paving, centrally located on the
front of the lot. Where paint is used, it shall be of the reflective traffic
type.
   b.   Each dwelling unit shall be provided a three-inch minimum size house
number installed in a prominent location in the vicinity of the main entrance
visible to the main street.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 7-3.15 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   The developer shall refer to the Zoning Ordinance for subdivision signs,
landscaping and other Development standards.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
SECTION EIGHT: ADMINISTRATION
§ 8-1 VARIANCES.
   a.   Where topography or other existing physical conditions are such that
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance would cause unusual and
unnecessary hardship on the subdivider above and beyond what other subdividers
would meet, the minimum requirements as set forth in these regulations may be
varied by the Planning Board, provided that such variations will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations.
   b.   The Town Council may approve subdivision plats which vary from the
requirements of design, but not from the requirements of procedure or
improvements, contained in this chapter upon the recommendation of the Planning
Board.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-2 EXCEPTIONS.
   The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
Planning Board and the Town Council in cases of a plan and program for a group,
cluster or planned unit development. Exceptions may be considered where in the
judgment of the Planning Board, adequate public spaces and improvements for the
circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated, are provided and such covenants or other legal
provisions as will assure conformity to any achievement of the land use plan
are imposed.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-3 PROCEDURE FOR EXCEPTIONS.
   a.   The subdivider must submit a written request stating the reasons for
each modification. Refer to Article XVI of the Zoning Ordinance for any planned
unit developments.
   b.   The Planning Board may require such conditions that will, in its
judgment, preserve the spirit and intent of these regulations. These conditions
may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Surety, performance or maintenance bonds; and
      2.   Affidavits, covenants or other legal instruments as will assure
conformity to and achievement of the plan.
   c.   Any modifications thus authorized, along with the basis on which the
exception was justified, are required to be entered in writing in the minutes
of the Planning Board and the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-4 NO SERVICE OR PERMIT UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town, nor shall any street
lighting, water or sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of
land, nor shall any permit be issued by any administrative agency or department
of the town for the construction of any building or other improvements
requiring a permit, unless and until the requirements set forth in this
ordinance have been complied with and the same approved by the town.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-5 COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAND DEVELOPMENT AND THOROUGHFARE PLANS, SCHOOL
SITES.
   a.   When a tract of land to be subdivided embraces any part of a proposed
major or minor thoroughfare as depicted in the thoroughfare plan, the proposed
street way shall be platted and dedicated by the subdivider in the location and
at the width specified in the plan.
   b.   If the Town Council has approved a comprehensive land use plan, which
has located sites for public schools, and a developer has submitted a
subdivision plan which includes one of these sites, the subdivider can be
required to reserve the land for such schools, provided that the school board
has indicated that it is interested in buying the land. The school board then
has 18 months to decide whether to buy the land at the fair market value, after
which, if it hasn’t bought the land, the subdivider may treat the land as if
freed from the reservation.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-6 TOWN COSTS WHEN OVERSIZE FACILITIES ARE REQUIRED.
   Whenever the Town Council requires that the developer install improvements
or facilities that are either larger, more costly or not normally required by
these regulations, the municipality shall pay 100% of the extra cost. The
subdivider shall be required to pay only the portion of the cost of
construction that would equal the cost of an improvement required to serve only
the subdivision, as determined by the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-7 PENALTY.
   The following penalties as provided in G.S. § 160A-375 shall be applicable.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-7a TRANSFER OR SELL ILLEGAL SUBDIVISION, CLASS 2 MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within the planning jurisdiction granted to the municipality who transfers or
sells such land by reference to a plat showing a subdivision of such land
before such plat has been approved by said Town Council and recorded in the
office of the Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and
the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
transaction from such penalties. The town, through its own Town Attorney or
other
official designated by its Town Council, may enjoin such transfer or sale by
action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance or sale
of land, and the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction
and order requiring the offending party to comply with the subdivision
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-7b BUILDING PERMITS DENIED.
   Building permits required pursuant to G.S. § 160A-417 may be denied for lots
that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies the town may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent unlawful subdivision
of land, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal
act or conduct.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-7c PROVISION TO SELL PLAT PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent
from entering into contracts to sell or lease by reference to an approved
preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet been properly approved
under the subdivision ordinance or recorded with the Register of Deeds,
provided that the contract does all of the following:
      1.   Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary plat
referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the buyer a
copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance;
      2.   Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer or lessee
that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at the time of
the contract, that the town nor any other government body will incur any
obligation to the prospective buyer or lessee with respect to the approval of
the final subdivision plat, that changes between the preliminary and final
plats are possible and that the contract or lease may be terminated without
breach by the buyer or lessee if the final recorded plat differs in any
material respect from the preliminary plat;
      3.   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat does not
differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the contract, the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any
earlier than five days after delivery of a copy of the final recorded plat; and
      4.   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat differs in any
material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the contract, the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any
earlier than 15 days after the delivery of the final plat, during which 15-day
period the buyer or lessor may terminate the contract without breach or any
further obligation and may receive a refund of all earnest money or prepaid
purchase price.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
§ 8-7d PROVISION TO ENTER INTO CONTRACT TO SELL APPROVED PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or its agent
from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to an approved
preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
APPENDIX B-1: SUGGESTED CERTIFICATES
   (A)   Certificate of ownership and dedication.
 
Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner (s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we)
hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building lines, and
dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and private use as noted.
__________________________, 20______
Date
                                          _______________________________
                                          Owner
                                          _______________________________
                                          Owner
 
   (B)   Certificate of accuracy and mapping.
Certificate of Accuracy and Mapping
I, _______________________, certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn
under my supervision) from (an actual survey made under my supervision) deed
(other); that the error of closure as calculated by latitude and departures is
1:_____________; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines
plotted from information found in Book ____________, page _________; that this
map was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30 as amended.
Witness my hand and seal this _________ day of _________, A.D., 20________.
                                    ______________________________________
                                    Surveyor or Engineer
                                    ______________________________________
                                    Registration #
 
   (C)   Notary certificate of accuracy and mapping.
Notary Certificate of Accuracy and Mapping
North Carolina
____________________ County
I, __________________, a Notary Public of said county and State, do hereby
certify that ____________ personally came before me this day and, being duly
sworn, stated that the annexed map was prepared by him or her (or was prepared
under his or her supervision) from an actual survey made by him or her (or made
under his or her supervision) on the _____________ day of ___________,20_____.
(Official Seal)
                                       ___________________________________
                                       Notary Public
My Commission expires ________________________, 20_________.
 
   (D)   Certificate of Clerk of Court.
Certificate of Clerk of Court
State of North Carolina
__________________________ County
The Forgoing Certificate of ____________ Notary Public of _____________ County,
is certified to be correct.
This the ____________ day of ____________, 20 __________.
                                          _______________________________
                                          Clerk of Court
 
   (E)   Certificate of registration by Register of Deeds.
 
Certificate of Registration by Register of Deeds
North Carolina
__________________ County
Filed for registration on the __________ day of ____________, 20_______ at
_______(a.m./p.m.) and duly recorded in Map Book _________, at page
___________.
                                          ________________________________
                                          Register of Deeds
 
   (F)   Performance bond.
Performance Bond
I certify: (1) that streets, utilities, and other improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and according to town specifications in the
subdivision entitled __________________ or, (2) that a performance guarantee in
the amount of $ _____________ or cash in the amount of $ __________ has been
posted with the Town of Newport, North Carolina to assure completion of all
required improvements in case of default.
______________, 20____________
Date
                                          ________________________________
                                          (1) Mayor
                                          ________________________________
                                          (2) Town Clerk
 
   (G)   Certificate of approval by the Town Council.
Certificate of Approval by the Town Council
I, ___________________, Town Clerk of the Town of Newport, North Carolina, do
certify that on the ________________ day of ________________________,20_____,
the Town Council approved this plat for recording and accepted the dedication
of the streets, easements, rights-of-way, public parks and other sites for
public purposes as shown hereon, but assumed no responsibility to open or
maintain such until, in the opinion of the governing body of the Town of
Newport, it is in the public interest to do so.
______________,20_____________.
Date
(Seal)
                                          _______________________________
                                          Town Clerk
 
   (H)   Certificate of approval of water supply and sewage disposal systems.
 
Certificate of Approval of Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems
I hereby certify that the water supply and sewer disposal systems installed, or
proposed for installation in ________________________ Subdivision, fully meet
the requirements of the North Carolina Health Department and are hereby
approved as shown.
Date _______________,20________
                                       ___________________________________
                                       County Health Officer
 
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
APPENDIX B-2: SUBDIVISION SKETCH PLAN REVIEW CHECK LIST AND APPLICATION
Town of Newport
Sketch Plan Review Check List and Application
Town of Newport
Sketch Plan Review Check List and Application
Subdivision Record:                     Date of Submittal:
_____________________________________
Location of proposed Subdivision:
___________________________________________________________________
Owner(s) and Developers:
_________________________________________________________________________
Address: ____________________________________       Phone:
____________________________________
Surveyor or Design Engineer:
_____________________________________________________________________
Sketch plan is for review and discussion of a concept. The sketch plan must be
approved by the Planning Board and Town Council prior to submitting the
preliminary plat. The developer will be able to negotiate water and/or sewer
and annexation options. After approval of the sketch plan by Town Council, the
developer may proceed with preliminary plat design and seek permits from any
and all environmental agencies.
Refer to subdivision regulations § 5-2 for content requirements of sketch plan
review and approval process.
The following items are the minimum required for submittal by the subdivision
regulations:
_______ At least ten copies of the sketch plan
_______ Map drawn to proper scale, not larger than 1 inch to 100 feet
_______ Vicinity map, north arrow
_______ Map shall show existing streets, railroad, bridges, watercourses,
transmission lines and other public utilities
that may be pertinent to, and proposed streets in the development
_______ Easements
_______ Lot arrangements, setback lines, lot and block numbers and dimensions
_______ Topography at 5 ft. intervals and any other physical conditions
affecting the site
_______ Existing structures
_______ Watercourses
_______ Zoning classification of proposed and surrounding property
_______ Names of adjacent property owners and subdivisions
_______ Proposed street and road cuts
_______ Locations, widths and purposes of other rights-of-way and easements
 
Town of Newport
Sketch Plan Review Check List and Application
Town of Newport
Sketch Plan Review Check List and Application
_______ Traffic calming technique and placement
_______ Proposed dedication for
recreation______________________________________________
_______ Proposed dedication for schools, churches or other uses where required.
_______ Acreage in the total tract _______ Minimum lot sizes _______ Average lot
size _______ Lineal feet of streets _______
_______ Acreage left in open space for others
Staff Comments:
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
______________
_________________________________________________________________________________
______________
Planning Board Comments
Recommend Approval:
___________________________________________________________________________
Recommend Disapproval:
________________________________________________________________________
Town Council Comments
Approved:
_________________________________________________________________________________
___
Disapproved:
_________________________________________________________________________________
_
 
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
APPENDIX B-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECK LIST
Preliminary Plat Check List
Preliminary Plat Check List
SUBDIVISION RECORD
Date submitted:______________________ Date of Planning Board Review:_____________
(At least 15 days after submitted)
Fee: $_________________ Paid: _________________________
Date of Consideration by the Planning Board:_________________________________ (No
more than 40 days from date submitted)
Name of subdivision:
_______________________________________________________________________ _________
Location:
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________
Owner: _________________________________________________________ Phone:
___________________________
Owner address:
_________________________________________________________________________________
___
Designer: ___________________________ Address: ____________________ Phone:
___________________________
Recommendations of the Planning Board:
________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________________
Check Lists:
________ Sketch vicinity map embracing subdivision and surrounding area
________ Ten copies of preliminary plat at proper scale
________ Name of subdivision and owner
________ North point, graphic scale (1 in. to 100 ft.), date
________ Boundaries of tract with bearings and distances
________ Name of adjacent property owners
________ The location of existing sewer, water and gas mains and other utilities
________ The location of existing streets, roads, bridges, culverts, railroads,
watercourses and the like
________ Names, location and approximate dimensions of proposed streets,
easements, parks and reservations, lot
lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, culverts, electric and gas
lines, and other surface and
sub-surface structures and pipe lines
________ Proposed lot lines, building lines and approximate dimension
________ Lot and block numbers
 
Preliminary Plat Check List
Preliminary Plat Check List
________ Zoning classification on land to be subdivided and on adjoining land
________ Conforms to general requirements and minimum design standards
________ Areas to be used for purposes other than residential
________ Total acreage in the tract
ENVIRONMENTAL PERMITS
________ Erosion Control Plan
________ Storm Water Permit
________ Wetlands Permit
________ Improvements Permit for Septic Tanks
________ Water and Sewer Extensions Permit
________ Plat depicts Floodway and Flood Boundary
TOWN DEPARTMENT HEAD REVIEW
________ Fire Chief
________ Police Chief
________ Public Utilities
________ Town Manager
________ Town Engineer
________ Emergency Management, for street names and the like
________ Public Works
_____________________________________________________________________________
Approved __________________ To proceed to final plat subject to the following
modifications: __________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
________________
Disapproved _________________ For the following reasons:
______________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________
________________
 
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
APPENDIX B-4: FINAL PLAT CHECK LIST
Final Plat Check List
Subdivision Record                  Date Submitted:
_____________________________________________
Preliminary Consideration by the Planning Board Date:
____________________________________________________
Name of Subdivision:
________________________________________________________________________________
Location:
_________________________________________________________________________________
_________
Owner:
_________________________________________________________________________________
__________
Owner Address:___________________________________________ Phone:
__________________________________
Check List:
_______ Submitted within 24 months of preliminary approval
_______ Ten copies of final plat
_______ Proper scale of map
_______ Conforms substantially to preliminary plat
_______ Names and rights-of-way of streets and roads
_______ Lot lines and building lines
_______ Reservations, easements, public areas or sites for other residential use
with explanation or purpose
_______ Legal description of boundary lines, street lines, lot lines, building
lines and the like
_______ Contour map
_______ North point, graphic scale, date
_______ Location and description of monuments
_______ Names and location of adjoining subdivisions and streets and the location
and ownership of adjoining property
_______ Conforms to general requirements and minimum design standards
_______ Required improvements have been made or $_______ bond posted
_______ Required certificates
_______ Flood boundary shown on plat
Recommendations of Town Staff:
_______________________________________________________
 
(Ord. passed 5-5-2009)
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        6-1-1993    Annexing White Sands, Section V.
-        12-16-1996  Annexing a portion of the Croatan National Forest.
-        8-5-2009    Annexing 593 Chatham Street.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1991 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Cites Code Section
G.S. Cites               Code Section
1-593                    10.05
Ch. 7A                   150.054
                         10.99,
                         71.11,
14-4                     91.009,
                         110.99,
                         151.030,
                         151.999
14-151.1                 51.015
18B-101(9)               110.15
18B-101(15)              110.15
18B-300(c)               110.15
18B-1001                 110.03
20-1 et seq.             Ch. 73 Sch. I
20-4.01(12b)             72.02
20-114(c)                91.079
20-158                   70.99
20-219.11(c)             91.078
20-219.11(d)             91.078
20-219.11(e)             91.078
20-219.11(f)             91.078
20-279.21                72.04
20-280                   113.16
Ch. 130A, Art. 9         150.015
130A-290(a)(6)           150.015
130A-290(a)(35)          150.015
130A-290(a)(36)          150.015
Ch. 132                  113.45
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6 150.001
Ch.143                   54.02
143-128.2                54.02
143-129                  54.02
143-143.15               150.066
143-215.58               150.053,
                         150.999
Ch. 153A, Art. 6         150.001
Ch. 160, Art. 3          Charter § 3
Ch. 160A, Art. 7, Part 2 Charter § 49
Ch. 160A, Art. 8         150.001
Ch. 160A, Art. 10        51.018,
                         151.029
160A-148                 Charter § 49
160A-175                 10.99,
                         111.99
160A-188                 90.50
160A-193                 91.008
160A-303(b)              Ch. 74 Sch. I
160A-303(d)(2)(e)        91.079
160A-304                 113.45
160A-361 et seq.         30.01
160A-362                 30.02
160A-499                 54.01,
                         54.02
Ch. 160D, Art. 7         150.001
Ch. 160D, Art. 9         150.001
160D-907                 153.01
Ch. 160D, Art. 11        150.001
160D-1201                151.002
160D-1202                151.002
160D-1203 et seq.        151.002
160D-1203(2)             151.021,
                         151.022
160D-1203(3)             151.023
160D-1203(4)             151.024
160D-1203(6)             151.024
160D-1203(7)             151.029
160D-1205                151.002
160D-1208(a)             151.025
160D-1208(d)             151.026
164-7                    10.14
                         
 
 
REFERENCES TO 1991 CODE
1991 Code Section 2017 Code Section
1991 Code Section 2017 Code Section
-                 39.01
1-1               10.01
1-2               10.05
1-3               10.19
1-4               10.20
1-5               10.21
1-6               10.18
1-7               10.13
1-8               10.14
1-9               10.16
1-10              10.17
1-11              10.22
2-1               11.01
2-41              30.01
2-42              30.02
2-43              30.03
2-44              30.04
2-45              30.05
2-47              30.06
2-48              30.07
2-49              30.08
2-50              30.09
3-1               110.01
3-2               110.02
8-21              151.001
8-22              151.002
8-23              151.999
8-24              151.003
8-25              151.004
8-26              151.005
8-27              151.006
8-46              151.020
8-47              151.021
8-48              151.022
8-49              151.023
8-50              151.024
8-51              151.025
8-52              151.026
8-53              151.027
8-55              151.029
8-56              151.030
8-57              151.031
8-58              151.032
8-76              151.045
8-77              151.046
8-78              151.047
8-96              151.060
8-97              151.061
8-98              151.062
8-99              151.063
8-100             151.064
8-101             151.065
8-102             151.066
8-103             151.067
8-121             151.080
8-122             151.081
8-123             151.082
8-124             151.083
8-125             151.084
8-126             151.085
8-127             151.086
8-128             151.087
8-129             151.088
8-146             151.100
8-147             151.101
8-148             151.102
8-149             151.103
8-150             151.104
9-21              112.01
9-22              112.02
9-23              112.03,
                  112.99
9-24              112.04
10-2              130.01
10-3              130.02
10-4              130.03
11-1              93.01
11-21             91.001
11-22             91.002
11-23             91.003
11-24             91.004
11-25             91.005
11-26             91.006
11-27             91.007
11-28             91.008
11-29             91.009
11-46             91.025
11-47             91.026
11-66             91.040
11-67             91.041
11-86             91.055
11-87             91.056
11-88             91.057
11-89             91.058
11-90             91.059
11-91             91.060
11-92             91.061
11-111            91.075
11-112            91.076
11-113            91.077
11-114            91.078
11-115            91.079
11-136            91.090
11-137            91.091
11-138            91.092
12-21             92.01
12-22             92.02
12-23             92.03
12-24             92.04
12-26             92.05
12-27             92.06
12-28             92.07
12-46             92.20
12-47             92.21
12-48             92.22
12-49             92.23
12-50             92.24
12-51             92.25
12-52             92.26
13-1              50.01
13-2              50.02
13-3              50.03
13-4              50.04
13-5              50.05
13-6              50.06
14-1              94.01
14-2              94.02
14-3              94.03
16-1              70.01
16-2              70.02
16-3              72.99,
                  Ch. 73 Sch. IV
16-4              Ch. 73 Sch. I
16-51             Ch. 73 Sch. II
16-71             Ch. 74 Sch. I
16-72             Ch. 74 Sch. II
16-91             71.01
16-92             71.02
16-93             71.03
16-95             71.04
16-96             71.05
16-97             71.06
16-98             71.07
16-101            71.08
16-102            71.09
18-26             113.01
18-46             113.15
18-47             113.16
18-48             113.17
18-49             113.18
18-50             113.19
18-51             113.20
18-52             113.21
18-53             113.22
18-54             113.23
18-55             113.24
18-56             113.25
19-1              95.01
19-3              95.02
19-24             95.06
19-28             95.99
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        12-3-1974   11.01
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        5-7-1947    130.02
-        5-1-1951    130.01
-        4-7-1964    Ch. 73 Sch. II
-        7-5-1966    30.01—
                     30.09
-        8-6-1968    91.001
-        4-7-1970    70.02
-        4-7-1970    110.02
-        8-6-1974    130.03
                     113.01,
-        8-5-1975    113.15—
                     113.25
-        11-15-1975  91.001—
                     91.009
-        5-26-1978   Ch. 74 Sch. I
-        3-4-1980    92.01—
                     92.07
-        1-20-1981   Ch. 74 Sch. II
-        2-17-1981   Ch. 74 Sch. I
-        9-15-1981   Ch. 73 Sch. II
-        11-17-1981  50.01—
                     50.06
-        2-23-1982   92.20—
                     92.26
-        4-6-1982    110.01
-        6-1-1982    91.025,
                     91.026
                     151.001—
                     151.006,
                     151.020—
                     151.027,
                     151.029—
                     151.032,
                     151.045—
-        8-3-1982    151.047,
                     151.060—
                     151.067,
                     151.080—
                     151.088,
                     151.100—
                     151.104,
                     151.999
-        9-7-1982    Ch. 73 Sch. I
-        9-7-1982    Ch. 74 Sch. I
                     112.01—
-        4-24-1984   112.04,
                     112.99
-        12-3-1985   Ch. 73 Sch. IV
                     91.040,
                     91.041,
                     91.055—
-        8-19-1986   91.061,
                     91.075—
                     91.079,
                     91.090—
                     91.092
-        9-18-1986   71.01—
                     71.09
-        7-11-1989   94.03
-        4-3-1990    110.01
                     111.01—
-        2-16-1993   111.04,
                     111.99
-        6-1-1993    TSO I
                     110.15—
-        11-21-1995  110.18,
                     110.99
-        11-21-1995  130.20—
                     130.22
-        12-16-1996  TSO I
-        4-21-1998   11.01
-        9-1-1998    32.01
                     90.01,
                     90.15—
                     90.23,
-        11-3-1998   90.35—
                     90.38,
                     90.50—
                     90.52,
                     90.99
                     95.01,
-        2-2-1999    95.02,
                     95.06,
                     95.99
-        12-7-1999   Ch. 73 Sch. II
-        2-1-2000    Ch. 73 Sch. II
-        - -2002     51.014
-        7-2-2002    Ch. 73 Sch. IV
                     53.01,
-        9-3-2002    53.04—
                     53.07
-        2-4-2003    31.01—
                     31.05
                     150.001—
                     150.004,
                     150.015,
                     150.030—
                     150.036,
                     150.050—
-        7-15-2003   150.054,
                     150.065,
                     150.066,
                     150.068—
                     150.071,
                     150.080,
                     150.081,
                     150.999
                     93.02—
-        12-2-2003   93.09,
                     93.20—
                     93.22
-        2-3-2004    10.99
-        8-2-2005    Ch. 73 Sch. III
-        1-3-2006    Ch. 74 Sch. I
                     91.001,
-        5-2-2006    91.010,
                     91.026
                     70.15—
-        7-5-2006    70.21,
                     70.99
-        10-2-2007   Ch. 73 Sch. II
-        10-2-2007   91.001
-        7-1-2008    32.15—
                     32.18
                     92.02—
                     92.07,
-        11-4-2008   92.20,
                     92.22,
                     92.24,
                     92.25
-        5-5-2009    154.01
-        8-5-2009    TSO I
-        10-6-2009   33.15—
                     33.22
                     113.15,
                     113.16,
                     113.19,
                     113.24,
                     113.26—
-        12-1-2009   113.30,
                     113.45—
                     113.52,
                     113.65—
                     113.68,
                     113.99
-        2-2-2010    32.30—
                     32.32
-        2-2-2010    71.10
                     96.01—
-        3-2-2010    96.05,
                     96.99
                     53.01—
-        6-24-2010   53.11,
                     53.99
                     51.001—
                     51.018,
-        5-3-2011    51.030—
                     51.039,
                     51.050—
                     51.066
                     72.01—
-        11-8-2012   72.05,
                     72.99
Z2013-01 9-12-2013   153.01
Z2013-02 11-14-2013  153.01
Z2014-01 2-17-2014   153.01
                     51.001—
                     51.018,
-        9-11-2014   51.030—
                     51.039,
                     51.050—
                     51.066
-        9-10-2015   130.01
2017-01  7-13-2017   130.01
2017-02  9-14-2017   110.03
O2018-02 10-9-2018   71.11,
                     92.22
2019-01  6-13-2019   153.01
2019-02  6-13-2019   153.01
2019-03  6-13-2019   153.01
2019-04  6-13-2019   153.01
2019-06  6-13-2019   154.01
2019-07  9-12-2019   153.01
2019-08  9-12-2019   154.01
                     150.001—
                     150.004,
                     150.015,
                     150.030—
                     150.036,
                     150.050—
2019-09  9-12-2019   150.054,
                     150.065,
                     150.066,
                     150.068—
                     150.072,
                     150.080,
                     150.081,
                     150.999
2020-01  6-11-2020   153.01
                     150.001—
                     150.004,
                     150.015,
                     150.030—
                     150.036,
                     150.050—
2020-02  6-11-2020   150.054,
                     150.065,
                     150.066,
                     150.068—
                     150.072,
                     150.080,
                     150.081,
                     150.999
2020-03  8-13-2020   153.01
                     151.001—
                     151.006,
2021-01  6-14-2021   151.020—
                     151.027,
                     151.029
2021-02  6-14-2021   153.01
2023-02  6-8-2023    153.01
2023-03  7-13-2023   51.008
2023-06  10-12-2023  153.01
2025-06  10-9-2025   54.01 —
                     54.03
                    
 
