CITY OF OXFORD, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 22-11-15, passed 11-15-22; and
State legislation current through North Carolina
Legislative Service, 2025 Acts, Pamphlet No. 2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Article
   
I.   Incorporation and Corporate Powers
   
II.   Election and Duties of City Officials
   
III.   Officers and Employees
   
IV.   Taxation
   
V.   Bonds and Notes
   
VI.   Eminent Domain
   
VII.   General Powers
   
VIII.   Police Jurisdiction
   
IX.   Laws Repealed or Validated
   
X.   Granville County Recorder's Court
   
XI.   Joint Airport
   
XII.   Subdivisions
   
XIII.   Street Assessments and Improvements
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS
SEC. 1. INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS.
   The inhabitants of the City of Oxford, North Carolina, within the boundaries
and limits of said city as established in section 2 of this charter or as
hereinafter established in the manner provided by law shall be and continue to
be a body politic and corporate by the name “City of Oxford,” and under that
name shall have perpetual succession and is hereby invested with all the
property and rights of property which now belong to said corporation under any
corporate name or names heretofore used; may use a corporate seal; may sue and
be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may plead and be impleded; may
acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purposes,
in fee simple or lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or
condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage, and contract such property as
its interests may require; and except as provided by the Constitution of North
Carolina, or
restricted by this charter, the City of Oxford shall have and may exercise all
municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name
and nature whatsoever.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. I, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Incorporation and general powers, see G.S. § 160A-11
SEC. 2. CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The corporate limits of said city shall be as follows:
   Beginning at an iron stake one foot south of the southeast corner of South
Side Sewage Treatment Plant fence; going thence N. 65° 30' W. 4,580 feet to a
point in the center of Oxford to Durham Highway (U.S. Highway #15); going
thence N. 42° 15' W. 820 feet to a point 40 feet from the western margin of the
Southern Railroad right-of-way; going thence S. 26° 15' W. across Whitfield
Drive 81 feet to a point on the southern side thereof; going thence S. 35° 45'
W. 321.5 feet to a point 40 feet from the western margin of the Southern
Railroad right-of-way; thence S. 46° 30' W. 391 feet to a point 40 feet from
the western margin of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence S. 50° W.
across East Dale Avenue 225 feet more or less to an iron pin 40 feet from the
western margin of the Southern Railroad right-of-way; going thence in a line
parallel with the southern margin of East Dale Avenue as follows N. 55° 18' W.
190 feet to an iron pin; N. 51° 5' W. 410 feet past an iron pin to the western
margin of Pine Tree Road; thence along the western margin of the said Pine Tree
Road as follows: N. 38° 55' E. across East Dale Avenue 497.8 feet to a point;
N. 36° 13' West 322.2 feet to a point; N. 31° 30' E. 198.5 feet to a point; N.
29° E. 135 feet to a point; going thence away from Pine Tree Road N. 24° 15' W.
290 feet to a point; N. 86° W. 275 feet to a point; N. 1° W. 292 feet to a
point; N. 24° 15' W. 370 feet to a point in the center of the Hillsboro Street
Extension Road; going thence N. 3° 30' E. 6,891 feet north of the Hicks Mill
Road; going thence N. 69° 30' E. 4,335 feet to
a pont in the western margin of Rayland Street; going thence S. 46° 15' E.
across the Oxford to Clarksville Highway (U.S. Highway #15 North) past a large
cedar on the east side thereof 7,686 feet to a point, said point being 300 feet
from the center of the Oxford to Henderson Highway (U.S. Highway #158 East);
going thence S. 14° 20' 10" W. 351.25 feet to a point in the southern right-of-
way line); going thence along said southern right-of-way line S. 61° 25' E.
424.55 feet to a point; thence leaving said southern right-of-way S. 1° 46' E.
781.13 feet to a point; thence S. 80° 33' 30" W. 477.14 feet to a point; thence
S. 82° 20' W. 156.22 feet to a point; going thence S. 14° 45' W. 4,562.20 feet
to a point 300 feet from the center of the Raleigh Road; going thence S. 63°
15' W. 2,780 feet to an iron stake one foot south of the southeast corner of
the South Side Sewer Treatment Plant fence, said iron stake being the point and
place of beginning.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. I, § 2)
Statutory reference:
   Corporate limits, see G.S. §§ 160A-21 and 160A-22
ARTICLE II. ELECTION AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS
SEC. 3. ELECTIONS.
   The next city election after the adoption of this Charter shall be held in
May, 1965, and biennially thereafter and said election shall be conducted as
set forth in Chapter 160 of the North Carolina General Statutes and all future
amendments thereto.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. II, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Elections, see G.S. §§ 160A-1 et seq.
SEC. 4. MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS.
   The municipal officers of the City of Oxford shall consist of a Mayor and a
Board of [seven] Commissioners.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor and city commissioners, see G.S. § 160A-66
SEC. 5. PRIOR OFFICIALS TO HOLD OVER.
   That the Mayor and the Board of Commissioners previously elected and in
office prior to the enactment of this Charter shall serve in the office for
which they were elected until their successors have been elected and qualified
as herein set forth and shall have all powers and duties as herein given to
their successors.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 2)
SEC. 6. ELECTION OF MAYOR.
   At the election to be held in the City of Oxford, as herein specified in
May, 1965, and each two years thereafter, there shall be elected a Mayor, who
shall serve for a term of two years and until his successor is elected and
qualified. Said term of office shall begin upon his taking oath of office and
qualifying, which shall be done at the regular May meeting of the Board of
Commissioners of the City of Oxford.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 3)
SEC. 7. MAYOR; DUTIES.
   The mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the City of Oxford and
shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Commissioners. He is hereby
empowered to execute such documents and perform such other acts, relating to
the City of Oxford which are necessary and incidental to the proper maintenance
of good government, upon proper authority of the Board of Commissioners. He
shall not have a vote upon any matters coming before the Board of Commissioners
except in case of a tie. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor
pro tem shall perform his duties.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 4)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor and duties, see G.S. §§ 160A-67, 160A-69 and
   160A-70
SEC. 8. SAME-COMPENSATION.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 5)
Editor's note:
   The above section is deleted as it has been repealed by
   G.S. § 160A-64.
SEC. 9. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS: ELECTION; TERMS.
   The Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford shall consist of seven
members who shall be elected at the time and in the manner as herein set forth.
At the election to be held in the City of Oxford as herein specified in May,
1965, and each four years thereafter, there shall be elected four Commissioners
who shall serve for a term of four years and until their successors are elected
and qualified. Said term of office shall begin upon their taking oath of office
and qualifying which shall be done at the next regular meeting of the Board of
Commissioners of the City of Oxford or within thirty days thereafter. At the
election to be held in the City of Oxford as herein specified in May, 1967, and
each four years thereafter, there shall be elected three Commissioners to serve
for a term of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
Said term of office shall begin upon their taking oath of office and qualifying
which shall be done at the next regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
of the City of Oxford or within thirty days thereafter.
   The four Commissioners to be elected in the May election in the year 1965,
shall fill the office of the four Commissioners who are elected in the
municipal elections for the City of Oxford, in the year 1961, and the three
Commissioners to be elected in the year 1967, shall fill the office of the
three Commissioners who were elected in the year 1963.
(Session Laws, 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 6)
SEC. 10. SAME-DUTIES.
   That the Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford shall be the governing
body of said city and shall have the power to make ordinances, rules, and
regulations for the better government of the city as authorized herein and
under Chapter 160 [now 160A] of the North Carolina General Statutes and
amendments thereto, and may enforce such rules, regulations and ordinances, by
imposing penalties on such as violate them; and may compel the performance of
the duties imposed upon others, by suitable penalties, and shall also make and
provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules, and regulations for the
better government of the City of Oxford as they may deem necessary; provided,
however, that such ordinances, rules,
and regulations shall not be inconsistent with this Charter and the law of the
land.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 7)
Statutory reference:
   Duties, see G.S. §§ 160A-1 et seq.
SEC. 11. SAME-COMPENSATION.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 9)
Editor's note:
   The above section has been deleted as it has been
   repealed by G.S. § 160A-64.
SEC. 12. MEETINGS OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall meet for the transaction of business on the
second Tuesday of each month. The procedure for calling special meetings shall
be determined by ordinance.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 9)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings and procedures, see G.S. § 160A-71
SEC. 13. MAYOR PRO TEM.
   The Board of Commissioners shall elect a Mayor Pro Tempore, who shall
exercise the duties of the said office, during the absence of the Mayor, or
when the Mayor cannot perform the duties of said office.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 10)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor pro tem, see G.S. § 160A-70
SEC. 14. OATH OF OFFICE.
   Upon taking office and prior to the performance of the duties thereof the
Mayor and the Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford shall take the oath
required and directed for said municipal officials under North Carolina General
Statute 160-7 [160A-61], and amendments thereto.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 11)
Statutory reference:
   Oath of office, see G.S. §§ 160A-61 and 160A-68
SEC. 15. VESTED WITH GENERAL STATE LAW POWERS AND DUTIES.
   That except as herein set forth the Mayor and Board of Commissioners of the
City of Oxford are hereby made subject to and empowered with all duties and
powers set forth in Chapter 160 [160A] of the North Carolina General Statutes
and amendments thereto, and any other North Carolina General Statute and
amendments thereto, granting or limiting duties and powers of Mayor and City
Commissioners generally.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. III, § 12)
Statutory reference:
   Vesting of general powers, see G.S. §§ 160A-1 et seq.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SEC. 16. CITY MANAGER.
   The Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford shall appoint a city
manager who shall be the administrative head of the city government and shall
be responsible for the administration of all departments. He shall be appointed
with regard to merit only and he need not be a resident of the City when
appointed. He shall hold office during the pleasure of the Board of
Commissioners and shall receive such compensation as said Board shall fix by
ordinance. The City Manager so appointed shall have all the powers or duties as
are now or may hereafter be prescribed for City Managers under the Plan D form
of city government as set out in the General Statutes of North Carolina, and
amendments thereto.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. IV, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   City manager, see G.S. § 160A-147
Editor's note:
   The successor to Plan D is G.S. §§ 160A-147 et seq.
SEC. 17. CLERK, TREASURER, TAX COLLECTOR, CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Board of Commissioners shall elect a Clerk to the Board and the City
Manager shall appoint a Treasurer, a Tax Collector, a Chief of Police, and such
other policemen as it may deem needful for the efficient administration of the
ordinances of the city. [The Clerk] shall at all times be subject to removal by
the Board. The Board of Commissioners may, if it shall deem it expedient,
combine the offices of Clerk, Treasurer, and Tax Collector, and these offices
may be held by the same individual. The [City Manager] may also, if it appears
expedient, require the Chief of Police to act as tax collector.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. IV, § 2) (Ord. No. 77-2-1, 2-8-77)
Statutory reference:
   City clerk, treasurer, tax collector, and chief of police,
   see G.S. §§ 160A-102, 160A-148 and 160A-171
Editor's note:
   The editor has altered the above section to reflect Ord. No. 72-2-1, which
provides that “all employees, except the city attorney and city clerk, would
come under the jurisdiction of the city manager.” The ordinance listed the
above section as being altered by such ordinance. See also G.S. §§ 160A-102 and
160A-148.
SEC. 18. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS, OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
   That in exercising the powers of the City of Oxford, the Board of
Commissioners shall have all powers under Article 19 of the Municipal
Corporation Act of 1917, and amendments thereto, and in addition thereto shall
have the power and authority by ordinance or resolution, to establish such
departments and heads of departments and assistants, thereto, and employees
thereof, as they deem advisable and in their discretion are necessary for the
proper administration of municipal affairs and the execution and enforcement of
ordinances, rules, regulations, and resolutions, passed by the Board of
Commissioners.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. IV, § 3)
Statutory reference:
   Administration, see G.S. § 160A-155
ARTICLE IV. TAXATION
SEC. 19. ANNUAL TAX LEVY.
   That in order to raise funds for the expenses incident to the government of
the City of Oxford for the payment of principal and interest on all bonds,
notes and any other obligations, owing by said City of Oxford, and for all
necessary purposes of said city government, the Board of Commissioners of the
City of Oxford may annually levy and collect taxes in the manner and as
specified in Chapter 160 [160A] and Chapter 105 of the North Carolina General
Statutes and amendments thereto, and any other North Carolina General Statute
and amendments thereto relating to the levy and collection of taxes.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. V, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Levy of taxes by municipalities, see G.S. §§ 105-1
   et seq. and 160A-206 et seq.
   State Constitution, see Art. V, § 2
ARTICLE V. BONDS AND NOTES
SEC. 20. ISSUANCE.
   The Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford may issue bonds and notes
for the purposes and in the manner prescribed by the General Laws of North
Carolina and amendments thereto, for the issuance of bonds and notes by
municipalities.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VI, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Bonds and notes, see G.S. §§ 159-43 et seq.
ARTICLE VI. EMINENT DOMAIN
SEC. 21. PURPOSES; RESOLUTION; PETITION; NOTICE; APPRAISAL; APPEAL.
   That among the powers hereby conferred upon the City of Oxford is the right
to eminent domain, and when any land or right-of-way shall be required by said
city for the purpose of widening or straightening streets, opening new streets,
laying and constructing water, gas, or sewer pipe lines, erecting buildings,
laying out additional or new cemeteries, or for any other purposes allowed by
its charter or the North Carolina General Statutes and amendments thereto,
applying to municipalities, and for want of agreement as to the value thereof,
or any other cause, the same cannot be purchased from the owner or owners, and
it shall become necessary to condemn the same, the necessity for such
condemnation shall be conclusively evidenced by a resolution duly passed by the
Board of Commissioners of said city at any regular or special meetings. The
said Board of Commissioners shall file its petition before the Clerk of the
Superior Court of Granville County, stating the purpose for which said land or
right-of-way is desired, with description of the same, the names of the owner
or owners, and of all persons having an interest in said lands, and praying the
appointment of appraisers. The clerk of said court, after at least ten-days'
notice to the owner or owners and all persons having an interest in said lands,
shall thereupon appoint three disinterested freeholders of the City of Oxford
to value said land or right-of-way, and the said three free-holders, after
being duly sworn, shall go upon the premises and value the same, taking into
consideration the loss or damage to the owner in consequence of the land or
right-of-way being surrendered, also any benefit or advantage such owner may
receive from the opening of such street or other improvement, and shall state
the amount of each, and the excess of loss or damage over and above the
advantages, shall form the measure of valuation of said land or right-of-way;
and said freeholders or a majority of them shall file their report in the
office of the clerk of said court within ten days from the date of their
appointment; provided, that in case service of notice of process cannot be had
upon any person or persons interested in said lands, then service upon such
persons may be had by publication in the same way as is now provided by law for
service of process by publication in special proceedings or other actions. If,
however, the owner of said land or right-of-way, or the said Board of
Commissioners, be dissatisfied with the valuation thus made, then either party
may have an appeal to the next term of Granville County Superior Court; but if
the valuation so made be paid to the owner, or lodged in the hands of the Clerk
of the Superior Court, the land so valued shall vest in the city so long as it
may be used for the purpose of the same, and the appeal shall not hinder or
delay said Board of Commissioners in opening such street or erecting such
improvement; provided, that in case of the discontinuance of the use of the
land and its reversion to the owner, the city shall have the right to remove
any improvement under its authority erected.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VII, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal powers of eminent domain, proceedings, see
   G.S. § 160A-240.1
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL POWERS
SEC. 22. IMPROVEMENTS, ASSESSMENTS, AND LIENS.
   The Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford is hereby authorized and
empowered to make such improvements, assessments and declare liens therefor in
the
manner and as is authorized in North Carolina General Statutes and amendments
thereto relating to municipalities.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VIII, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Improvements, assessments, and liens, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq.
SEC. 23. DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY BY ORDINANCE OR STATUTES.
   Where the duties and powers of the City officials, officers, and employees,
are not herein specifically set forth, the Board of Commissioners of the City
of Oxford shall have the power to specify, delegate and regulate same by
ordinance and if same are not specified, delegated, or regulated, by ordinance,
said City officials, officers, and employees, shall have those duties and
powers granted by the North Carolina General Statutes, and amendments thereto.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VIII, § 2)
SEC. 24. EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   All existing ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Board of
Commissioners of the City of Oxford and officials appointed thereunder and all
existing ordinances, rules and regulations of departments, or agencies of the
Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this act, shall continue in full force and effect until repealed,
modified, or amended, by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford,
North Carolina.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VIII, § 3)
SEC. 25. ENUMERATED POWERS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The enumeration of particular powers as herein enumerated shall not be held
or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended
that the Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford shall have and may
exercise all powers granted to municipalities generally under the North
Carolina General Statutes and amendments thereto, and the Constitution of North
Carolina as if same were herein specifically enumerated. All powers of the
Board of Commissioners of the City of Oxford whether expressed or implied shall
be exercised in the manner herein prescribed or if not specifically herein
prescribed, then in the manner set forth in North Carolina General Statutes and
amendments thereto, and if not therein set forth, then in the manner provided
by ordinances, rules, or resolutions of the Board of Commissioners of the City
of Oxford.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VIII, § 4)
ARTICLE VIII. POLICE JURISDICTION
SEC. 26. EXTRA POLICE JURISDICTION.
   When any crime is committed in the City of Oxford, Granville County, and the
person or persons charged therewith flees or flee the city, any police officer
of the municipality, either with or without process, is hereby given full
authority to pursue the person or persons so charged, whether in sight or not,
beyond the corporate limits of the city to any point within Granville County
and to apprehend and arrest such person or persons anywhere within said county,
provided the offense is committed in the presence of the pursuing officer or
officers.
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. VIII, § 5)
Statutory reference:
   Extra police jurisdiction, see G.S. § 160A-286
Editor's note:
   Section 6 of Art. VIII of Ch. 971 of the 1963 Session
   Laws, authorizing the issuance of warrants by police
   officers was omitted inasmuch as a similar section
   was declared unconstitutional by the State Supreme
   Court.
ARTICLE IX. LAWS REPEALED OR VALIDATED
SEC. 27. ENUMERATION OF REPEALED ACTS.
   The following acts having served the purposes for which enacted or having
been consolidated into this act [charter] are hereby repealed:
   (1)   N.C. Private Laws, 1913, Chapter 302 (Recodification)
   (2)   N.C. Private Laws, 1915, Chapter 306 (Mayor's Court)
   (3)   N.C. Private Laws, 1915, Chapter 342 (Bond Issue)
   (4)   N.C. Private Laws, 1919, Chapter 25 Bond Issue)
   (5)   N.C. Private Laws, 1920, Extra Session, Chapter 69 (Official's Salary)
   (6)   N.C. Private Laws, 1927, Chapter 219 (Taxes)
   (7)   N.C. Private Laws, 1929, Chapter 8 (Taxes)
   (8)   N.C. Private Laws, 1929, Chapter 101 (Mayor's Court)
   (9)   N.C. Private Laws, 1933, Chapter 19 (Mayor's Court)
   (10)   N.C. Public-Local Laws, 1937, Chapter 74 (Mayor's Court)
   (11)   N.C. Public-Local Laws, 1937, Chapter 478 (Elections)
   (12)   N.C. Public-Local Laws, 1937, Chapter 638 (Corporate Limits)
   (13)   N.C. Public-Local Laws, 1939, Chapter 346 (Corporate Limits)
   (14)   N.C. Session Laws, 1943, Chapter 394 (Mayor's Court)
   (15)   N.C. Session Laws, 1947, Chapter 204 (Corporate Limits)
   (16)   N.C. Session Laws, 1947, Chapter 957 (Corporate Limits)
   (17)   N.C. Session Laws, 1949, Chapter 221 (Adopting Plan D)
   (18)   N.C. Session Laws, 1949, Chapter 449 (Terms of Office)
   (19)   N.C. Session Laws, 1949, Chapter 1150 (Taxes)
   (20)   N.C. Session Laws, 1951, Chapter 140 (Jurisdiction)
   (21)   N.C. Session Laws, 1951, Chapter 253 (Mayor's Court)
   (22)   N.C. Session Laws, 1953, Chapter 158 (Sale of Property)
   (23)   N.C. Session Laws, 1953, Chapter 159 (Mayor's Court)
   (24)   N.C. Session Laws, 1953, Chapter 323 (Jurisdiction)
   (25)   N.C. Session Laws, 1955, Chapter 274 (Election and terms of office of
city officials)
   (26)   N.C. Session Laws, 1957, Chapter 937 (Salaries of Officials)
   (27)   N.C. Session Laws, 1961, Chapter 624 (Elections)
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. IX, § 1)
SEC. 28. SAME-SAVED FROM REPEAL.
   This act shall not be deemed to repeal, modify nor in any manner to affect
any of the following acts:
   (1)   N.C. Private Laws, 1929, Chapter 187 [Bonds of Halifax County School
Board]
   (2)   N.C. Session Laws, Chapter 451 (Joint Airport)
   (3)   N.C. Session Laws, 1961, Chapter 539 (Subdivision of land)
   (4)   N.C. Session Laws, 1961, Chapter 775 (Reorganization of Board of
Education)
   (5)   N.C. Session Laws, 1961, Chapter 1089 [Specific property conveyance
authorized jointly with county of ten acres known as the W. H. Hunt property]
(Session Laws 1963, Ch. 971, Art. IX, § 2)
ARTICLE X. GRANVILLE COUNTY RECORDER'S COURT
SECS. 29 - 32. RESERVED.
Editor's note:
   Article X which consisted of sections 29-32 (which are
   derived from Session Laws 1963, Ch. 897) are
   deleted as the county recorder's courts have been
   abolished. The district court now has criminal
   jurisdiction over violations of municipal ordinances.
   See G.S. § 7A-272.
ARTICLE XI. JOINT AIRPORT
SEC. 33. DEFINITIONS.
   Airport or landing field for the purposes of this and the sections following
is defined as any plot of land or water formally set aside, and designated, as
a place where aircraft may land or take off.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 1)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see G.S. § 63-1
SEC. 34. AUTHORITY TO JOINTLY ACQUIRE AND REGULATE.
   The governing bodies of the City of Henderson, City of Oxford, County of
Granville, and County of Vance are hereby authorized to jointly acquire,
establish, construct, own, control, lease, equip, improve, maintain, operate
and regulate, airports or landing fields for the use of airplanes and other
aircraft without the limits of said cities and within the limits of both of
said counties, or either of them, and may use for such purpose or purposes any
properties suitable therefor that are now or at any time hereafter may be
jointly owned or controlled by said cities and counties.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 2)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to jointly acquire, see G.S. §§ 63-4
SEC. 35. RIGHT TO ACQUIRE AND OWN PROPERTY.
   Any lands acquired, owned, controlled, or occupied by said cities, and
counties, for the purposes enumerated in section two [34] hereof, or which may
be later acquired for said purposes, shall and are hereby declared to be
acquired, owned, controlled and occupied for a public purpose, and said cities
and counties shall have the right to acquire property for such purposes under
the power of eminent domain as and for a public purpose.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 3)
Statutory reference:
   Right to own/acquire property, see G.S. §§ 63-5
   and 63-6
SEC. 36. SAME-AUTHORITY TO FINANCE.
   Private property needed by said cities and counties for an airport or
landing field may be acquired by gift or devise, or shall be acquired by
purchase if said cities and counties are able to agree with the owners on the
terms thereof, otherwise by condemnation, in the manner provided by law under
which cities and counties are authorized to acquire real property for public
purposes, other than street purposes, or if there be no law, in the manner
provided for and subject to the provisions of the condemnation law. The
purchase price, or award, for property acquired for an airport or landing field
may be paid for by an appropriation of moneys available therefor, or by the
application of any funds derived by either of said counties, or either of said
cities from the sale of any lands now or heretofore owned for airport or
landing field purposes or other purposes, or wholly or partly from the proceeds
of the sale of bonds of either of said cities or either of said counties as the
governing bodies of such cities and counties may determine.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 4)
Statutory reference:
   Financing, see G.S. §§ 63-6 and 63-8
SEC. 37. LANDS SUBJECT TO CONDEMNATION; BURIAL SITES.
   The power to acquire lands by condemnation herein granted to said cities and
counties for the purpose of such airport or landing field shall embrace the
power to acquire by condemnation any dwelling, yard, orchard, garden, kitchen,
church, burial ground, graveyard, or cemetery located on or situate upon the
lands found necessary to be acquired for such purpose; and in event there are
graves located on such lands which be necessary to be acquired for such
purposes by condemnation, it shall be lawful for said cities and counties,
after thirty-days' notice to the husband or wife, or next of kin of the
deceased buried therein, or the person in control of such graves, if any are
known, and if not known, then after publishing a notice once a week for four
consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in Vance County and for a like
period in a newspaper published in Granville County, to open such graves, and
to take therefrom any dead body, or part thereof buried therein, and anything
interred therewith, and to remove and reinter the same in some other cemetery
or suitable place in the same county to be selected by the next of kin, or
welfare officer of the county or by the clerk of the superior court of said
county, in the order named. Due care shall be taken to do this work in a proper
and decent manner, and, if necessary, to furnish suitable coffins or boxes for
reinterring said remains. Due care shall also be taken to remove all tombstones
and other markers from said graves, and to protect and replace all such
tombstones or other markers so as to leave the new grave in as good condition
as the former one. All of said work shall be done under the direction and
supervision of the welfare officer of the county, if one, or her
representatives, but if there is no welfare officer, then under the direction
and supervision of the clerk of the superior court of said county, or his
representatives. All expenses connected with said work, including the actual
expenses of one of "next of kin" in attending to the same, if one does attend,
shall be borne by said cities and counties doing or causing the same to be
done.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 5)
Statutory reference:
   Condemnation, see G.S. §§ 63-5 and 63-49
SEC. 38. APPROPRIATIONS BY JOINT AUTHORITIES.
   The governing bodies of said cities and counties and each of them are hereby
authorized to appropriate and use from the net proceeds derived from the
operation, by either of said cities or either of said counties, of any public
utility, or from funds derived from any source other than ad valorem taxes,
sums sufficient to carry out the provisions of this Act as to planning, laying
out, establishing and maintaining of any airport in such proportion and upon
such equal proportion as may be determined by the governing boards of said
cities and counties. Provided nothing herein
shall be construed to permit the governing bodies of said cities or counties to
issue bonds under the provisions of this Act without a vote of the people.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 6)
Statutory reference:
   Appropriations, see G.S. § 63-8
SEC. 39. ORGANIZATION OF JOINT BOARD.
   The joint board to be appointed by the governing bodies of the said cities
and counties shall be appointed as follows:
   Each municipality shall be entitled to one representative on said board and
that representative shall be appointed biennially by a majority of the
governing body of said municipality, at the first regular meeting in July. Said
representative shall hold office from his appointment until the first regular
meeting of the governing body in the second July thereafter, when his successor
shall be appointed. Only a city or cities contributing an equal amount to the
establishment of an airport shall have a representative on the board, unless
the city and county in which it is located shall agree among themselves as to a
different formula for raising the fifty per cent (50%) of the total cost which
each county and the city located therein must bear in the total cost, in which
event said municipality shall be entitled to one representative on said joint
board. Each county shall be entitled to have one representative on said board,
and that representative shall be appointed biennially by a majority of the
board of county commissioners of said county, at the first regular meeting in
July. Said representative shall hold office from his appointment until the
first regular meeting of the board of county commissioners in the second July
thereafter, when his successor shall be appointed. Only a county which
contributes an equal amount to the establishment of such an airport shall be
entitled to have representation on said board, unless the county and the city
located therein shall agree on a different formula for raising its fifty per
cent (50%) in which event said county shall be entitled to be represented on
said board. It being the intention of this section to provide representation on
said board for the city and the county in which it is located on said board in
event the city and county in which it is located shall pay fifty per cent (50%)
of the total cost of establishing such airport. The said board so appointed by
the governing bodies of the cities and counties, shall be known as the
“Aeronautics Authority of the City of Henderson, City of Oxford, County of
Granville and County of Vance.” Upon the occurrence of any vacancy on said
authority, said vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days after notice
thereof at a regular, or special meeting called for that purpose, meeting of
the governing body of the governmental unit which has the vacancy within its
representation. Within thirty (30) days after the ratification of this Act the
governing bodies of each of said cities and counties may appoint its
representatives on said board to hold office until his successor shall be
appointed in the manner hereinbefore set out; provided however, that the
representative first so appointed by each municipality shall hold office from
his appointment until the following July, at which time his successor shall be
appointed as hereinbefore set out, and provided further that each of the
representatives first so appointed by each of said counties shall hold office
from his appointment until the second July thereafter, at which time his
successor shall be appointed in the manner hereinbefore set forth.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 7)
SEC. 40. POWERS AND DUTIES OF JOINT BOARD; COMPENSATION.
   The board so appointed by the governing bodies of said cities and counties
shall act in an administrative capacity and shall be vested with the authority
to establish, construct, control, lease, maintain, improve, repair, operate and
regulate the joint airport or landing field. It shall have complete authority
over any airport or landing field jointly acquired by the several governmental
bodies represented on said board. Provided that the said board or the
individual members thereof shall have no authority to pledge the credit of any
of said governmental units. The said board shall have authority to deal with
the Civil Aeronautics Authority of the United States Government and any other
representative of the Federal Government relative to the grading, constructing,
equipping, improving, repairing, maintaining and operating of airports or
landing fields established under the authority of this Act. A majority of the
board shall control its decisions. At the first meeting of the board, and
annually thereafter it shall select a chairman from among its members. Each
member of said board, including the chairman, shall have one vote. The said
authority shall meet at such time and such place as the chairman of the
authority shall designate. Or upon failure of said chairman to select a time or
place at such time and place as shall be requested in writing by two or more
members of the authority. The members of said board, who are fulltime employees
of either of said governing boards shall serve without compensation other than
actual expenses. Members of said board who are not fulltime employees of any of
the governing bodies may be allowed compensation, not to exceed ten dollars
($10.00) per day for days actually spent in the performance of their duties as
members of the authority. The members of the authority shall be empowered to
employ a secretary for said board at such salary as may be agreed upon by the
various governing bodies. The members of said authority shall take the oath of
office to be administered by the clerk of the superior court in the county in
which the member of the authority resides. Members of said authority shall not
be personally liable in any manner for their acts as members of the authority,
except for misfeasance or malfeasance. Said authority shall have the right and
is empowered to expend such funds as are appropriated from time to time to the
said governmental units jointly or severally for joint airport purposes and is
empowered to enter into contracts and pledge the credit of the authority to the
extent of moneys appropriated by said governmental units for joint airport
purposes.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 8)
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of joint board, see G.S. §§ 63-53 and 63-56
SEC. 41. LIMITATION.
   This Act shall apply only to the City of Henderson, the City of Oxford, the
County of Granville, and the County of Vance.
(Session Laws 1945, Ch. 451, § 9)
ARTICLE XII. SUBDIVISIONS
SEC. 42. RESERVED.
Editor's note:
   Art. XII consisted of section 42. Such section was
   derived from Session Laws 1961, Ch. 539, § 1. It is
   deleted as it amended G.S. § 160-277.1 which is now
   repealed.
ARTICLE XIII. STREET ASSESSMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Editor's note:
   The provisions of this division have been deleted from the printing of G.S.
Ch. 160A. § 44.
SEC. 43. AUTHORIZED WITHOUT PETITION.
Editor's note:
   Article XIII consisted of Section 43. Such section was derived from G.S. §
160-293.1, which no longer exists. G.S. § 160A-217, which addresses petitions
for street improvements, contains a Local Modification for the City of Oxford:
Session Laws 1993, c. 240 wherein the Board of Commissioners may order sidewalk
improvements, and may assess adjoining land owners in keeping with applicable
assessment statutes according to one or more of the assessment bases as set
forth in Article 10 Chapter 160A without the necessity of a petition upon
finding by the Board as a fact that the sidewalk improvement project as
proposed is necessary for public safety.
SEC. 44. TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY.
   This act applies only to incorporated cities and towns within Dare County
and to the City of Oxford.
(Session Laws 1981, Ch. 320, § 2; Session Laws 1984, Ch. 982, § 2)
CHAPTER 1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
1-1.   Title of code
   
1-2.   Interpretation
   
1-3.   Application to future ordinances
   
1-4.   Captions
   
1-5.   Definitions
   
1-6.   Rules of interpretation
   
1-7.   Severability
   
1-8.   Reference to other sections
   
1-9.   Reference to offices
   
1-10.   Errors and omissions
   
1-11.   Official time
   
1-12.   Reasonable time; computing time
   
1-13.   Ordinances repealed
   
1-14.   Ordinances unaffected
   
1-15.   Effective date of ordinances
   
1-16.   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
1-17.   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
1-18.   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
1-99.   General penalty
§ 1-1 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Oxford shall be
designated as the “Code of Oxford, North Carolina,” and may be so cited.
§ 1-2 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 1-3 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Chapter 1 compatible with future legislation shall apply
to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-4 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the chapter, article and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 1-5 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of the City of Oxford, North
Carolina.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Oxford, North Carolina.
      CITY. The City of Oxford, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new chapters, articles or
sections.
      COUNTY. Granville County, North Carolina.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
the persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON.
         (a)   Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.
         (b)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the city and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
§ 1-6 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 1-7 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code, as now or later amended, or its application
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 1-8 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 1-9 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 1-10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted, as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 1-11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 1-12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided,
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
      (2)   If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 1-13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 1-14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 1-15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 1-16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
§ 1-17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein.
      (2)   When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division,
or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and
printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the
city.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section
               of the Code of Ordinances, City of Oxford, North Carolina, is
hereby amended as follows...” The new provisions shall then be set out in full
as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, City of
Oxford, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
              , which section shall read as follows...” The new section shall
then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the
case may be.
§ 1-18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 3-1 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 139-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1986 and subsequently amended, the 1986
code section number shall be indicated in the history. Example: (`86 Code, § 3-
1)
§ 1-99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of the
provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)    A person may not be found responsible or guilty of a violation
punishable pursuant to division (A) of this section if, when tried for that
violation, the person produces proof of compliance with the provisions of this
code of ordinances through any of the following:
      (1)   No new alleged violations of the provision within 12 months from
the date of the initial alleged violation.
      (2)   The person provides documented proof of a good-faith effort to seek
assistance to address any underlying factors related to unemployment,
homelessness, mental health, or substance abuse that might relate to the
person's ability to comply with the provisions of this code of ordinances.
(G.S. § 14-4(a), (c))
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
2-1.   Loan or lease of city equipment
Article II: Legislative Procedures
   
2-21.   Public notice of official meetings
   
2-22.   Rules governing conduct of meetings
   
2-23.   Conduct of spectators at meetings; procedure
   
2-24.   Special meetings
   
2-25.   Quorum
   
2-26.   Order of business
   
2-27.   Reserved
   
2-28.   Mayor to preserve order
   
2-29.   Previous question
   
2-30.   Motion to adjourn
   
2-31.   Committees appointed by Mayor
   
2-32.   Resignation of members
   
2-33.   Every member to vote
   
2-34.   Effective date of ordinances
Article III: Officers and Employees
Division 1: Generally
   
2-51.   Oath of office
   
2-52.   Interest of contracts or purchases
   
2-53.   Residence requirement
Division 2: Personnel Records
   
2-76.   Generally
   
2-77.   Notice to employees or procedure
   
2-78.   Location
   
2-79.   Form; contents generally
   
2-80.   Responsibility for records; release and notice
   
2-81.   Access to records; release to public
   
2-82.   Access by employee; appeals as to content
   
2-83.   Access by supervisor
   
2-84.   Other requests for personal information
Division 3: Mayor
   
2-101.   Duties
Division 4: City Clerk
   
2-116.   Election
   
2-117.   Duties
Division 5: Finance Director
   
2-136.   Office created
   
2-137.   General duties
   
2-138.   Bond
Division 6: City Treasurer
   
2-151.   Duties
   
2-152.   Bond
Division 7: City Attorney
   
2-171.   Election
   
2-172.   Duties under retainer
Division 8: City Manager
   
2-181.   Purchases
   
2-182.   Disposal of city-owned surplus personal property valued at less than
$5,000
Article IV: Financial Affairs
   
2-226.   Processing fee for returned checks
Article V: Boards and Commissions
Division 1: Community Appearance Commission
   
2-426.   Creation
   
2-427.   Members
   
2-428.   Officers and meetings
   
2-429.   General powers and duties
   
2-430.   Annual report
   
2-431.   Advisory council or committees
   
2-432.   Staff and technical services
   
2-433.   Receipt and expenditure of funds
Division 2: Planning Board
   
2-446.   Creation
   
2-447.   Membership and vacancies; attendance
   
2-448.   Organization, rules and meetings
   
2-449.   Jurisdiction and voting
   
2-450.   General powers and duties
   
2-451.   Basic studies
   
2-452.   Comprehensive plans
   
2-453.   Zoning amendments
   
2-454.   Subdivision regulations
   
2-455.   Public facilities
   
2-456.   Miscellaneous powers and duties
Division 3: Board of Commissioners
   
2-461.   Code of Ethics
Division 4: Downtown Oxford Economic Development Corporation
   
2-463.   Downtown Oxford Economic Development Corporation
Article VI: City Policies
Division 1: Smoking Policy
   
2-466.   Definition
   
2-467.   Regulation in municipal buildings and vehicles
   
2-468.   Violation and penalty
Division 2: Infection Control Policy
   
2-476.   Infection Control Policy
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2-1 LOAN OR LEASE OF CITY EQUIPMENT.
   No officer or employee of the city shall loan or lease any machinery, tools
or other equipment belonging to the city to any person without the consent of
the Board, except as authorized by the Mayor or City Manager for a short period
of time.
(`86 Code, § 2-1)
ARTICLE II: LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 2-21 PUBLIC NOTICE OF OFFICIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   If the Board has established, by ordinance, resolution or otherwise, a
schedule of regular meetings, it shall cause a current copy of that schedule,
showing the time and place of regular meetings, to be kept on file with the
City Clerk. If the Board changes its schedule of regular meetings, it shall
cause the revised schedule to be filed with the City Clerk at least seven
calendar days before the day of the first meeting held pursuant to the revised
schedule.
   (B)   If the Board holds an official meeting at any time or place other than
a time or place shown on the schedule filed pursuant to division (A) above, it
shall give public notice of time and place of that meeting, as provided below.
      (1)   If a meeting is an adjourned or recessed session of a regular
meeting or of some other meeting, notice of which has been given pursuant to
this section, and the time and place of the adjourned or recessed session has
been set during the regular or other meeting, no further notice is necessary.
      (2)   For any other meeting, except an emergency meeting, the Board shall
cause written notice of the meeting stating its purpose.
         (a)   To be posted on the principal bulletin board of the Board, or,
if the Board has no bulletin board, at the door of its usual meeting room; and
         (b)   To be mailed or delivered to each newspaper, wire service, radio
station and television station, which has filed a written request for notice
with the City Clerk or with some other person designated by the Board. The
Board shall also cause notice to be mailed or delivered to any person, in
addition to the representatives of the media listed above, who has filed a
written request with the Clerk, Secretary or other person designated by the
Board. This notice shall be posted and mailed or delivered at least 48 hours
before the time of the meeting. The Board may require each newspaper, wire
service, radio station and television station submitting a written request for
notice to renew the request annually. The Board shall charge a fee to persons
other than the media, who request notice, of $10 per calendar year, and may
require them to renew their requests quarterly.
      (3)   For an emergency meeting, the Board shall cause notice of the
meeting to be given to each local newspaper, local wire service, local radio
station and local television station that has filed a written request, which
includes the newspaper's, wire service's or station's telephone number, for
emergency notice with the City Clerk or with some other person designated by
the Board. This notice shall be given either by telephone or by the same method
used to notify the members of the Board and shall be given immediately after
notice has been given to those members. This notice shall be given at the
expense of the party notified. An “emergency meeting” is one called because of
generally unexpected circumstances that require immediate consideration by the
Board. Only business connected with the emergency may be considered at a
meeting to which notice is given pursuant to this division.
(`86 Code, § 2-21)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 143-318.12
§ 2-22 RULES GOVERNING CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   The Board adopts the following rules governing its meetings in all matters
of parliamentary procedure. “Robert’s Rules of Order” shall govern and apply.
   (A)   The Board’s rules and order of business shall be observed in all cases
unless suspended temporarily for a special purpose of an emergency nature by a
unanimous vote of all members present. Any member may move at any time for the
suspension of any rule to entitle it to consideration.
   (B)   (1)   If any member, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the rules
of the Board, the presiding officer shall, or any member can, call him or her
to order, in which case the member so called to order shall immediately cease
discussion unless permitted by the presiding officer to explain.
      (2)   The Board, if appealed to, shall decide the question without
debate. If the decision be in favor of the member so called to order, he or she
shall be at liberty to proceed. If otherwise, he or she shall not proceed
without leave of the Board to proceed in order.
   (C)   (1)   A member about to speak shall respectfully address the chair and
shall not commence to speak until recognized by the presiding officer.
      (2)   When two or more members request to speak at the same time, the
presiding officer shall determine which one is recognized.
   (D)   Every member, while speaking, shall confine himself or herself to the
subject under debate, shall refrain from personalities and shall not refer to
any other member of the Board of Commissioners, except in a respectful manner.
   (E)   Unless a member who has the floor yields for that purpose, no member
shall interrupt another while speaking, except to propound a parliamentary
inquiry or to make a point of order.
(`86 Code, § 2-22) (Am. Ord. 06-11-01, passed 6-14-11)
§ 2-23 CONDUCT OF SPECTATORS AT MEETINGS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his or her duly
designated representative to be present and on official duty at all special and
regular meetings of the Board.
      (2)   Except during the periods of time at the meetings as the Board
shall set aside for public discussion, it shall be unlawful for any person
present as a spectator to interrupt or disturb the proceedings in any manner by
voice, actions or otherwise.
      (3)   During periods set aside for public discussion of any nature, any
person desiring to speak shall secure the permission of the presiding officer
by first silently raising his or her hand and being recognized. The use of
profanity, obscene language, threats or any violent or abusive conduct by any
person shall be a misdemeanor.
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, upon the order of the
presiding officer at any meeting, to forcibly, if necessary, evict any person
violating the provisions of this section from the Board’s meeting hall.
(`86 Code, § 2-23)
   (B)   (1)   Any person desiring to appear before the Board of Commissioners
may submit a request in person, or in writing, stating his or her name, address
and purpose for appearing before the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Requests shall be submitted to the City Clerk, 300 Williamsboro
Street, P.O. Box 1307, Oxford, NC 27565.
      (3)   The request shall be received no later than the first Tuesday of
each month.
      (4)   The agenda is set by the Board of Commissioners in the agenda
session held on Monday, one week prior to the second Tuesday of each month at
5:30 p.m. in the Board meeting room, Third Floor, City Hall, 300 Williamsboro
Street. The regular Board meeting is held on the second Tuesday of each month
at 7:00 p.m. in the Board meeting room, Third Floor, City Hall, 300
Williamsboro Street.
(Am. Ord. 00-4-2, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 02-03-01, passed 3-12-02; Am. Ord.
05-12-02, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 07-12-03, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 06-11-
02, passed 6-14-11)
§ 2-24 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor, or in the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro
Tempore, may call a special meeting of the Board at the time as he or she deems
advisable.
   (B)   (1)   Each member of the Board shall be given notice of the time,
place and purpose of the special meeting.
      (2)   The notice will be given at the member's normal place of business
or at his or her home.
   (C)   All members of the Board will be given notice of the meetings as far
in advance of the special meeting as is reasonably possible.
(`86 Code, § 2-24)
§ 2-25 QUORUM.
   Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and if a quorum fails
to attend, the meeting shall stand adjourned to a day agreed on by a majority
of the members present.
(`86 Code, § 2-25)
§ 2-26 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   The order of business at a regular meeting of the Board shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Call to order to include consider adjustments to and approval of
the agenda;
      (2)   Delegations;
      (3)   Public hearings;
      (4)   Public comment on agenda and non-agenda items;
      (5)   Old business;
      (6)   New business;
      (7)   Reports;
      (8)   Consent agenda.
   (B)   If the Board directs any matter to be the special business of a future
meeting, the same shall have precedence over all other business at the meeting.
(`86 Code, § 2-26) (Am. Ord. 06-11-03, passed 06-14-11; Am. Ord. 01-12-01,
passed 1-10-12)
§ 2-27 RESERVED.
§ 2-28 MAYOR TO PRESERVE ORDER.
   The Mayor shall preserve order and decide all questions of order, but any
member of the Board may appeal to the Board from the decision of the Mayor upon
any question of order.
(`86 Code, § 2-28)
§ 2-29 PREVIOUS QUESTION.
   (A)   The previous question at a meeting of the Board may be called for at
any time by a majority of the members present.
   (B)   The ayes and noes may be called for at any time by any member.
(`86 Code, § 2-29)
§ 2-30 MOTION TO ADJOURN.
   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without
debate.
(`86 Code, § 2-30)
§ 2-31 COMMITTEES APPOINTED BY MAYOR.
   All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor unless otherwise ordered by
the Board.
(`86 Code, § 2-31)
§ 2-32 RESIGNATION OF MEMBERS.
   Resignation of members of the Board shall be in writing.
(`86 Code, § 2-32)
§ 2-33 EVERY MEMBER TO VOTE.
   Every member shall vote when a question is stated from the chair unless
excused by the Board and unless a member of the Board requests action by the
Board, his or her refraining shall be considered to be an excuse by the Board.
(`86 Code, § 2-33)
§ 2-34 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   Every ordinance shall be in force from its passage unless otherwise
specified in the ordinance.
(`86 Code, § 2-34)
ARTICLE III: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 2-51 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every person elected by the people or appointed to any city office shall,
before entering upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe the oath of
office prescribed in Article VI, Section 7, of the North Carolina Constitution.
Oaths of office shall be administered by some person authorized by law to
administer oaths, and shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(`86 Code, § 2-51)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-61
§ 2-52 INTEREST OF CONTRACTS OR PURCHASES.
   It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city directly or
indirectly to become a contractor for work done for the city, or to become
directly personally interested in or receive profit from any purchase of
supplies for any department of the city. Any person shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and removed from office.
(`86 Code, § 2-52)
§ 2-53 RESIDENCE REQUIREMENT.
   Except for the City Manager, no person shall hold any public office unless
he or she is a qualified voter of the city.
(`86 Code, § 2-53)
DIVISION 2: PERSONNEL RECORDS
§ 2-76 GENERALLY.
   The information in a city employee's personnel records that can be made
public shall be as specified in G.S. § 160A-168. The information in a city
employee's personnel records that is confidential shall be as specified in G.S.
§ 160A-168. The penalties for authorized access or examination of personnel
files shall be as specified in G.S. § 160A-168.
(`86 Code, § 2-76)
§ 2-77 NOTICE TO EMPLOYEES OF PROCEDURE.
   All employees shall be informed of G.S. § 160A-168 and of this division.
(`86 Code, § 2-77)
Statutory reference:
   Personnel records, confidentiality and disclosure, see
   G.S. § 160A-168
§ 2-78 LOCATION.
   Official personnel records shall be in the city personnel office.
(`86 Code, § 2-78)
§ 2-79 FORM; CONTENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Official personnel records for each individual city employee shall be
contained in a separate file folder marked and filed alphabetically by the
employee's name. Each individual's personnel file folder shall contain the
documents as the employment application and resume, employee record cards,
employee performance appraisals, personnel action forms, certificates of
achievement, test results, letters of recommendation and commendation, letters
of reprimand, records of disciplinary action and other personnel-related
documents.
(`86 Code, § 2-79)
   (B)   Retirement forms are kept in the payroll office.
§ 2-80 RESPONSIBILITY FOR RECORDS; RELEASE AND NOTICE.
   (A)   Under the direction of the City Manager, the Director of Personnel is
responsible for the control, maintenance and safekeeping of official personnel
records. Every city employee having or receiving employee personnel information
is responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of the information.
   (B)   Official personnel records or personnel file folders shall not be
removed from the personnel office by any person unless specifically authorized
by the Director of Personnel or by the City Manager.
   (C)   An individual employee shall be notified by the personnel office when
his or her personnel information is requested and released to a person or
organization outside of city employment, to whom it was released and for what
reason. The notice shall be made by furnishing the employee with a copy of the
form that is provided to the individual who requests and receives the
information.
(`86 Code, § 2-80)
§ 2-81 ACCESS TO RECORDS; RELEASE TO PUBLIC.
   (A)   Any person who seeks access to any city employee personnel information
shall be referred to the personnel office for the information. Upon request,
the personnel office staff will make the public record portion of an employee's
personnel file available for inspection, examination and copying during regular
working hours.
   (B)   To facilitate the city's response to a request, the personnel office
shall make available public information on an individual employee basis through
the issuance of the form “Request for Information from Employee Personnel
Records.” If public record personnel information is requested on all city
employees or a group of employees, a charge shall be made by the city to cover
the cost of staff time and computer time that may be required to assemble the
requested information.
   (C)   With regard to telephone requests for employment verification for
credit consideration, an employee's place of work, position classification,
salary and date of entry on the job shall be released only by the personnel
office staff who are familiar with the caller. Disclosure of personnel
information which is not a matter of public record is prohibited, except as
authorized by G.S. § 160A-168.
(`86 Code, § 2-81)
§ 2-82 ACCESS BY EMPLOYEE; APPEALS AS TO CONTENT.
   (A)   A request by a city employee or by his or her authorized agent or
licensed physician to review all or part of that employee's official personnel
file shall be processed as follows:
      (1)   The request shall be made to any staff member of the personnel
office.
      (2)   The personnel office staff shall set an appointed time during
regular business hours for the employee or his or her authorized agent or
licensed physician to inspect, examine and copy any information from the
employee's official personnel record that is not designated by the statute to
be withheld from the employee or from his or her authorized agent or licensed
physician. The review shall take place in the personnel office.
      (3)   Before the contents of a personnel file are released for
inspection, examination or copying by an employee or his or her authorized
agent, the personnel office staff shall temporarily remove letters of reference
solicited prior to employment and/or information that a prudent physician would
not divulge to his or her patient. The documents shall be replaced in the file
after the inspection is completed.
   (B)   An employee who objects to material in his or her file on grounds that
it is inaccurate or misleading may place in the file a statement relating to
the material or the employee may seek to have the material removed from the
file by following the city's grievance procedure, including appeal to the City
Manager.
(`86 Code, § 2-82)
§ 2-83 ACCESS BY SUPERVISOR.
   A request by a city supervisor to review his or her subordinate's personnel
record shall be made to a member of the personnel office staff. The personnel
staff shall make available, for review in the personnel office, the contents of
a personnel file to the supervisor.
(`86 Code, § 2-83)
§ 2-84 OTHER REQUESTS FOR PERSONNEL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Requests for city employee personnel information not otherwise
provided for in this division shall be made in writing to the Director of
Personnel.
   (B)   If the Director of Personnel determines that the person requesting the
information is authorized by statute to receive it and that information is not
deemed confidential under law, then the request shall be granted.
(`86 Code, § 2-84)
DIVISION 3: MAYOR
§ 2-101 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to:
   (A)   Preside over all meetings of the Board;
   (B)   Keep himself or herself informed as to the city's business;
   (C)   See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; and
   (D)   See that the conditions of all franchises and contracts granted by the
city are faithfully complied with and executed.
(`86 Code, § 2-101)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor, see G.S. §§ 160A-69 et seq.
DIVISION 4: CITY CLERK
§ 2-116 ELECTION.
   At the first regular meeting following the election and qualification, the
Board shall elect the City Clerk.
(`86 Code, § 2-116) (Ord. 80-12-1, passed 12-9-80)
§ 2-117 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to:
   (A)   Attend all meetings of the Board;
   (B)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all the proceedings of the
Board and file them in a well-bound book;
   (C)   Keep the original of all ordinances in a book especially provided for
that purpose by the Board;
   (D)   Keep the seal of the city; and
   (E)   Sign with the Mayor all contracts, ordinances, official city
documents, deeds, proclamations or other documents necessary for the orderly
and proper functioning of the city government under the ordinances, laws and
rules and regulations of the city, the state and the United States.
(`86 Code, § 2-117) (Ord. 80-12-1, passed 12-9-80)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of city clerk, see G.S. § 160A-171
DIVISION 5: FINANCE DIRECTOR
§ 2-136 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the Office of Finance Director.
(`86 Code, § 2-136) (Ord. 80-12-1, passed 12-9-80)
§ 2-137 GENERAL DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to:
      (1)   Make financial reports and statements as may be required of him or
her;
      (2)   Keep the books of accounts of the city which shall show:
         (a)   Accurate and detailed statement of all moneys collected for the
city;
         (b)   All property owned by the city and the income derived therefrom;
         (c)   Separate accounts of every appropriation made by the Board, the
date thereof and the purpose for which made;
         (d)   Each payment of public money, its purpose and to whom paid;
         (e)   A separate account for each department of the city government;
and
         (f)   Other accounts as may be necessary for a complete financial
statement of the city.
      (3)   Require, from time to time, all persons receiving money or having
disposition or management of any property, of which an account is kept in his
or her office, to render a statement thereof to him or her;
      (4)   Submit to the Board at least once a year a report of the financial
transactions of the city during the fiscal year;
      (5)   Keep all financial records of the Police and Fire Departments;
      (6)   Enforce collection of all accounts due the city and its
enterprises;
      (7)   Supervise all employees of the city's general office and recommend
to the City Manager the personnel actions within that office deemed expedient
and appropriate to the city's interest;
      (8)   Work with and assist the City Manager in the preparation of the
annual budget; and
      (9)   Perform other related duties as needed or as may be assigned by the
City Manager.
   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-266(c), the Finance Director
shall sell personal property of the city after same is declared surplus by the
City Manager pursuant to applicable provisions of § 2-182.
(`86 Code, § 2-137) (Ord. 83-10-1, passed 10-11-83)
Statutory reference:
   Finance director's duties, see G.S. § 159-25
§ 2-138 BOND.
   Before entering upon his or her duties, the Finance Director shall execute a
bond in the sum as approved by the Mayor and the Board, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties and that he or she shall properly
account for all moneys that may come into his or her possession by virtue of
office.
(`86 Code, § 2-138) (Ord. 80-12-1, passed 12-9-80)
DIVISION 6: CITY TREASURER
§ 2-151 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to:
   (A)   Receive and securely keep all moneys which he or she shall receive on
behalf of the city;
   (B)   Keep an accurate account of all moneys which he or she shall receive
on behalf of the city;
   (C)   Give a receipt for all moneys received by him or her;
   (D)   Render a monthly statement of his or her receipts and disbursements to
the Board at their regular monthly meeting and at other times as the Board may
require;
   (E)   Do and perform other acts as the City Manager may require;
   (F)   Act as accountant by virtue of his or her office;
   (G)   Make annually a full and complete transcript of receipts and
disbursements on account of the city and cause same to be printed in some
newspaper published in the city, at the end of each fiscal year; and
   (H)   Pay all warrants approved by the Board.
(`86 Code, § 2-151)
§ 2-152 BOND.
   Before entering upon his or her duties, the Treasurer shall execute a bond
in a sum as approved by the Mayor and Board, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his or her duties, and he or she shall properly account for all
moneys that may come into his or her possession by virtue of his or her office.
(`86 Code, § 2-152)
DIVISION 7: CITY ATTORNEY
§ 2-171 ELECTION.
   At the first regular meeting following its election and qualification, the
Board shall elect the City Attorney.
(`86 Code, § 2-171)
§ 2-172 DUTIES UNDER RETAINER.
   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, under his or her retainer, to:
   (A)   Attend all meetings of the Board; and
   (B)   Advise the Manager and the Board during meetings of the Board, in
regard to matters connected with the city's business.
(`86 Code, § 2-172)
DIVISION 8: CITY MANAGER
§ 2-181 PURCHASES.
   (A)   Authority. Subject to the restrictions and conditions hereinafter
provided, when purchasing apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment for use
by the city, in addition to such authority as may be provided by law and/or
otherwise delegated by the Board of Commissioners, the City Manager shall have
the authority to:
      (1)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and/or specifications
setting forth a complete description of the items(s) to be purchased and the
characteristics, features, and/or requirements therefor;
      (2)   Include, where appropriate, in specifications for the item(s) to be
purchased an opportunity for bidders to purchase as trade-in specified personal
property owned by the city;
      (3)   Advertise, or otherwise secure bids, for such item(s), if required
under applicable law;
      (4)   Award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and , where
applicable, award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and the sale of
trade-in property;
      (5)   Reject bids;
      (6)   Readvertise to receive bids;
      (7)   Waive bid bond or deposit requirements;
      (8)   Waive performance and payment bond requirements; and
      (9)   Execute and deliver the purchase contract(s).
   (B)   Report. At the first meeting of the Board of Commissioners following
the award of any contract(s) pursuant to this section, the City Manager shall
submit a report to the Board of Commissioners summarizing the bids received and
contract(s) awarded. The report shall be included in the minutes of the meeting
at which it is received.
   (C)   Extent of authority. Except in cases of sole source purchases pursuant
to G.S. § 143-129(f) and cases of purchases from established contracts pursuant
to G.S. § 143-129(g), unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of this
section shall apply to the purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or
equipment requiring the estimated expenditure of municipal funds as set forth
in G.S. § 143-129(a) for any one item or group of similar items.
   (D)   Appropriation required. No purchase shall be made by the City Manger
under authority of this section unless an appropriation for such purpose has
been authorized in the annual budget, or by supplemental appropriation
amendment duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
   (E)   Application of general statutes. In acting pursuant to the authority
delegated by this section, the City Manager shall comply with the requirements
of Article 8, Chapter 143 of the North Carolina General Statutes, as from time
to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised, or superseded, to the same
extent as would have otherwise applied to the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 98-2-1, passed 2-10-98)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. §143-129(a)
§ 2-182 DISPOSAL OF CITY-OWNED SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY VALUED AT LESS THAN
$5,000.
   (A)   Authority. The City Manager is hereby authorized to dispose of any
surplus personal property owned by the city, whenever he or she determines, in
his or her discretion, that:
      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less that
$5,000;
      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and
      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interests of the city would be served by disposing of the
property.
   (B)   Means of disposal. The City Manager may dispose of any such surplus
personal property by any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to
yield the highest attainable sale price in money or other consideration,
including but not limited to, the methods of
sale provided in Article 12 of N.C. Gen. Stat. Chapter 160A. Such sale may be
public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting period.
   (C)   Sale and disposal. The surplus property shall be sold to the party who
tenders the highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to
the city if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the City Manager
is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If
no offers are received within a reasonable time, the City Manager may retain
the property, obtain any reasonably available salvage value, or cause it to be
disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   Record. The City Manager shall keep a record of all property sold
under authority of this section and that record shall generally describe the
property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and
the amount of money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange,
and that such sale will be reported to the Board of commissioners at their next
regular meeting.
(Ord. 98-2-2, passed 2-10-98)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S.§160A-266(c)
ARTICLE IV: FINANCIAL AFFAIRS
§ 2-226 PROCESSING FEE FOR RETURNED CHECKS.
   A processing fee in the amount established by resolution shall be charged
and collected for checks made to the city on which payment has been refused by
the payor bank because of insufficient funds or because the drawer did not have
an account at that bank.
(`86 Code, § 2-226)
Cross-reference:
   Licenses, taxation and business regulations, see
Ch. 13
Statutory reference:
   Processing fee authorized, see G.S. § 25-3-506
ARTICLE V: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1: COMMUNITY APPEARANCE COMMISSION
§ 2-426 CREATION.
   There is hereby created the Oxford Community Appearance Commission.
(`86 Code, § 2-426) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to create community appearance
   commission, see G.S. § 160A-451
§ 2-427 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Community Appearance Commission shall be composed of nine members
plus one alternate appointed by the Board. All members shall be residents of
the city's planning and zoning jurisdiction.
   (B)   Where possible, appointments shall be made in a manner as to maintain
on the Commission at all times a majority of members who have had special
training or experience in a design field, such as architecture, landscape
architecture, horticulture, city planning or a closely related field and, at
all times, at least two of its members shall have demonstrated special
interest, experience or education in history or architecture.
   (C)   The terms of office of the members shall be staggered initially and
three year terms thereafter.
   (D)   Members of the Commission shall serve without pay, but may be
reimbursed for actual expenses incidental to the performance of their duties
within the limits of funds available to the Commission.
(`86 Code, § 2-427) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83; Am. Ord. 94-10-1, passed 10-
11-94)
Statutory reference:
   Members of community appearance commission, see
   G.S. § 160-451
§ 2-428 OFFICERS AND MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Community Appearance Commission shall meet and elect the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Treasurer and Secretary. The Secretary need not
be a
member of the Commission. The Commission shall also adopt bylaws to govern the
conduct of its business.
   (B)   The Commission shall maintain a record of its members' attendance, its
actions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be open to the
public.
   (C)   A quorum of four members shall be necessary to take any official
action authorized or required by this division.
   (D)   The Commission shall hold at least 11 meetings per year. All of its
meetings shall be open to the public.
   (E)   All members whether residing within the city or within the
extraterritorial area shall be eligible to hold office and shall have voting
power on all matters of business.
(`86 Code, § 2-428) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83)
Statutory reference:
   Community appearance commissions, see G.S.
   §§ 160A-451 et seq.
§ 2-429 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Community Appearance Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   To initiate, promote and assist in the implementation of programs of
general community beautification in the city;
   (B)   To seek to coordinate the activities of individuals, agencies and
organizations, public and private, whose plans, activities and programs bear
upon the appearance of the city;
   (C)   To provide leadership and guidance in matters of area or community
design and appearance to individuals, and to public and private organizations
and agencies;
   (D)   To make studies of the visual characteristics and problems of the
city, including surveys and inventories of an appropriate nature, and to
recommend standards and policies of design for the entire area, any portion of
neighborhood thereof, or any project to be undertaken;
   (E)   To make recommendations on certain special use permit applications in
accordance with the procedures established in the zoning ordinance;
   (F)   To prepare both general and specific plans for the improved appearance
of the city; (These plans may include the entire area or any part thereof and
may include private as well as public property. The plans shall set forth
desirable standards and goals for the aesthetic enhancement of the city or any
part thereof within its area of planning and zoning jurisdiction, including
public ways and areas, open spaces and public and private buildings and
projects.)
   (G)   To request, from the proper officials of any public agency or body,
including agencies of the state and its political subdivisions, its plans for
public buildings, facilities or projects to be located within the planning and
zoning jurisdiction of the city;
   (H)   To review these plans and to make recommendations regarding their
aesthetic suitability to the appropriate agency or to the planning or governing
board; (All plans shall be reviewed by the Commission in a prompt and
expeditious manner and all recommendations of the Commission with regard to any
public project shall be made in writing. Copies of the recommendation shall be
transmitted promptly to the Planning Board and/or the Board of Commissioners
and/or Board of Adjustment, as appropriate and to the appropriate agency.)
   (I)   To formulate and recommend to the Board of Commissioners the adoption
of amendments of ordinances, including the zoning ordinance, subdivision
regulations and other local ordinances regulating the use of property, that
will, in the opinion of the Commission, serve to enhance the appearance of the
city and its surrounding areas;
   (J)   To direct the attention of city officials to needed enforcement of any
ordinance that may in any way affect the appearance of the city;
   (K)   To seek voluntary adherence to the standards and policies of its
plans;
   (L)   To enter, in the performance of its official duties and at reasonable
times, upon private lands and make examinations or surveys;
   (M)   To promote public interest in and an understanding of its
recommendations, studies and plans, and, to that end, to prepare, publish and
distribute to the public studies and reports as will, in the opinion of the
commission, advance the cause of improved municipal appearance;
   (N)   To conduct public meetings and hearings, giving reasonable notice to
the public thereof; and
   (O)   To study, investigate, counsel and develop and /or update annually,
and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets
and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the City
Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official
comprehensive city tree plan for the city.
(`86 Code, § 2-429) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83; Am. Ord. 16-05-01, passed 5-
10-16)
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of community appearance
   commission, see G.S. § 160A-452
§ 2-430 ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   The Community Appearance Commission shall, no later than April 15 of
each year, submit to the Board of Commissioners a written report of its
activities, a statement of its expenditures to date for the current fiscal year
and its requested budget for the next fiscal year.
   (B)   All accounts and funds of the Commission shall be administered
substantially in accordance with the requirements of the Municipal Fiscal
Control Act.
(`86 Code, § 2-430) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83)
§ 2-431 ADVISORY COUNCIL OR COMMITTEES.
   (A)   The Community Appearance Commission may establish an advisory council
when, in the judgement of the Commission, such a council will be an aid to the
performance of its duties.
   (B)   (1)   However, the Commission shall not delegate to the advisory
council any of its official powers or duties.
      (2)   In addition, the Commission may, from its own membership, establish
any temporary or permanent committees needed to assist it in the study of
specific questions and problems.
         (a)   The Commission hereby establishes, from within its own
membership, a City Tree Committee to oversee the city's street trees and park
trees. The City Tree Committee’s responsibilities are spelled out in the city’s
tree ordinance that was approved and incorporated into the city’s zoning
ordinance on May 10, 2016.
(`86 Code, § 2-431) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83; Am. Ord. 16-05-01, passed 5-
10-16)
Statutory reference:
   Advisory councils, see G.S. § 160A-453
§ 2-432 STAFF AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   The Community Appearance Commission may recommend to the Board of
Commissioners suitable arrangements for the procurement or provision of staff
or technical services for the Commission.
(`86 Code, § 2-432) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-453
§ 2-433 RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Community Appearance Commission may receive contributions from
private agencies, foundations, organizations, individuals and the state or
federal government or any other source in addition to any sums appropriated for
its use by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   It may accept and disburse these funds for any purpose within the
scope of its authority and as herein specified.
(`86 Code, § 2-433) (Ord. 83-1-1, passed 1-11-83)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-455
DIVISION 2: PLANNING BOARD
§ 2-446 CREATION.
   Pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-361 and 160A-362, there is hereby created the
Planning Board of the city to perform the functions and duties herein
prescribed.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-447 MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES; ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall consist of 12 members. Six members shall be
citizens and residents of the city and shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Board of Commissioners, six members shall be citizens of the county who reside
outside the city, but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as
specified by an extraterritorial boundary ordinance adopted pursuant to G.S. §
160A-360(b), and shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the
county. The members of the Planning Board shall serve for terms of six years
and the terms shall be staggered.
   (B)   Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of term shall be
filled as they occur for the unexpired remainder of the term. Faithful
attendance at meetings of the Board is to be considered a prerequisite to
continued membership and the Mayor and Board of Commissioners may remove and
replace any member continually delinquent in his or her duty to attend.
   (C)   Members of the Board shall receive a $25 per diem for attending an
official Planning Board meeting. Aquorum as described in § 2-448 must be
present to hold an official meeting. The maximum number of members eligible for
per diem is 12. Elected city officials serving on the Planning Board are not
eligible to receive per diem. Members shall also be reimbursed for all
reasonable expenses incurred as a necessary part of carrying out their duties.
Payment shall be issued by report of attendance from the Planning Director or
their designee, to the Finance Department and payment shall occur on the
regular billing cycle as set by the Finance Director.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86; Am. Ord. 03-06-02, passed 06-10-03)
§ 2-448 ORGANIZATION, RULES AND MEETINGS.
   The Planning Board shall elect the Chairperson and create and fill other
offices as it may determine. The Chairperson and other officers shall serve at
the pleasure of the Planning Board for a period not exceeding their term of
appointment to the Board. Upon expiration of any such officer’s term or removal
by the Board from said office, the Board shall elect a replacement to fill the
vacancy created thereby. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of its
business and shall keep a record of its members’ attendance and of its
resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a
public record. If necessary, the Board shall hold at least one meeting monthly,
and all of its meetings shall be open to the public. There shall be a quorum of
seven members for the purpose of taking any official action.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86; Am. Ord. 94-10-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 12-02-02, passed 2-
14-12)
§ 2-449 JURISDICTION AND VOTING.
   The six members appointed to the Planning Board by the Board of County
Commissioners, as representatives of the extraterritorial zoning area outside
the city, shall have equal rights, privileges and duties with the other members
of the Board in all matters pertaining to the regulations of both the
extraterritorial area and the area within the corporate limits. Seven members
of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the taking of any action on any
matter.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-450 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Planning Board, in general:
   (A)   To make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and surrounding
areas;
   (B)   To determine objectives to be sought in the development of the study
area;
   (C)   To prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;
   (D)   To develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures and other means for carrying out plans that the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners may direct;
   (E)   To advise the Mayor and Board of Commissioners concerning the use and
amendment of means for carrying out plans;
   (F)   To exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the Mayor and Board of Commissioners
may direct; and
   (G)   To perform any other related duties that the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners may direct.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-451 BASIC STUDIES.
   (A)   As background for its comprehensive plans and any ordinances it may
prepare, the Planning Board may gather maps and aerial photographs of manmade
and natural physical features of the area, statistics on past values, the
economic base of the community, land use and other information as is important
or likely to be important in determining the amount, direction and kind of
development to be expected in the area and its various parts.
   (B)   In addition, the Planning Board may make, cause to be made or obtain
special studies on the location, condition and adequacy of special facilities,
which may include, but are not limited to studies of housing commercial and
industrial facilities, parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities, public
and private utilities and traffic, transportation and parking facilities.
   (C)   (1)   All officials of the city shall, upon request, furnish to the
Planning Board available records or information as it may require in its work.
      (2)   The Board or its agents may, in the performance of its official
duties, enter upon lands and make examination or surveys and maintain necessary
monuments thereon.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-452 COMPREHENSIVE PLANS.
   (A)   The comprehensive plans, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive matter, shall be and show the Planning Board's recommendations to
the Mayor and Board of Commissioners for the development of the area,
including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of
streets, bridges, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation
fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces; the general location and
extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned
or operated, for water, power, gas, sanitation, transportation, communication
and other purposes; and the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating,
abandonment, change of use or extension of any foregoing ways, buildings,
grounds, open spaces, properties, utilities or terminals.
   (B)   The comprehensive plans and any ordinances or other measures to
effectuate the plans shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city
and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, beat
promote health, safety, moral and the general welfare, as well as efficiency
and economy in the process of development, including among other things,
adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of good civic design and
arrangement, the wise and efficient expenditure of public funds and the
adequate provision of public utilities, services and other public requirements.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-453 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The Planning Board may initiate, from time to time, proposals for
amendment of the zoning ordinance and map, based upon its studies and plans.
   (B)   In addition, it shall review and make recommendations to the Mayor and
Board of Commissioners concerning all proposed amendments to the zoning
ordinance and map.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-454 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall review, from time to time, the existing
regulations for the control of land subdivision in the area and submit to the
Mayor and Board of Commissioners its recommendations, if any, for the revision
of the regulations.
   (B)   The Planning Board shall review and make recommendations to the Mayor
and Board of Commissioners concerning all proposed plats of land subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
Cross-reference:
   Subdivision regulation ordinance, see §
5-140
§ 2-455 PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   The Planning Board shall review with the City Manager and other city
officials and report its recommendations to the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners upon the extent, location and design of all public structures and
facilities, on the acquisition and disposal of public properties, on the
establishment of building lines, mapped street lines and proposals to change
existing street lines. However, whether or not there is a recommendation from
the Planning Board, the Mayor and Board of Commissioners may, if it deems wise,
take final action on any matter at any time.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
§ 2-456 MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Board may conduct public hearings as may be required to
gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and maintenance of
the plans. Before recommending any plans to the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners, the Planning Board may hold a public hearing thereon.
   (B)   The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest in and
an understanding of its recommendations, and, to that end, it may publish and
distribute copies of its recommendations and may employ other means of
publicity and education, as it may determine.
(Ord. passed 7-8-86)
DIVISION 3: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 2-461 CODE OF ETHICS.
   (A)   General principles underlying the Code of Ethics.
      (1)   The stability and proper operation of democratic representative
government depends upon public confidence in the integrity of the government
and upon responsible exercise of the trust conferred by the people upon their
elected officials.
      (2)   Governmental decisions and policy must be made and implemented
through proper channels and processes of the governmental structure.
      (3)   Elected officials must be able to act in a manner that maintains
their integrity and independence, yet is responsive to the interests and needs
of those they represent.
      (4)   Elected officials must always remain aware that at various times
they play different roles:
         (a)   As advocates, who strive to advance the legitimate needs of
their citizens;
         (b)   As legislators, who balance the public interest and private
rights in considering and enacting ordinances, orders, and resolutions; and
         (c)   As fair and impartial decision makers, when making quasi-
judicial and administrative determinations.
         (d)   Elected officials must know how to distinguish among these
roles, to determine when each role is appropriate, and to act accordingly.
      (5)   Elected officials must be aware of their obligation to conform
their behavior to standards of ethical conduct that warrant the trust of their
constituents. Each official must find within his or her own conscience the
touchstone by which to determine what conduct is appropriate.
   (B)   Code of Ethics.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this code of ethics is to establish
guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for board members and to provide
guidance in determining what conduct is appropriate in particular cases. It
should not be considered a substitute for the law or for a board member’s best
judgment.
      (2)   (a)   Board members should take care to obey all laws that apply to
their official actions as board members. Board members should be guided by the
spirit as well as the letter of the law in whatever they do.
         (b)   At the same time, board members should feel free to assert
policy positions and opinions without fear of reprisal from fellow board
members or citizens. To assert that a board member is behaving unethically
based upon a disagreement with that board member based on a question of policy
(and not on the board member’s ethical behavior) is unfair, dishonest,
irresponsible, and itself unethical.
         (c)   The Board shall endeavor to keep itself up-to-date, through its
attorney or other sources, of new or on-going legal or ethical quandaries or
difficulties that they may face in their official positions.
      (3)   (a)   Board members should act with integrity and with independence
from improper influence as they exercise the functions of their offices.
         (b)   Board members should use their best independent judgment to
pursue the common good as they see it, presenting their opinions to all in a
reasonable, forthright, consistent manner. They should be incorruptible, self-
governing and not subject to improper influence, while at the same time being
able to consider the opinions and ideas of others.
         (c)   At the same time, however, board members should recognize that
they are part of a larger group and should act accordingly. They should respect
their office and not behave in ways that reflect badly on it. They should treat
other board members and the public with respect, and should honor the opinions
of others even when they disagree. They should recognize that they are not
generally authorized to act on behalf of the Board, since the Board must take
official action as a body.
      (4)   (a)   Board members should avoid impropriety in the exercise of
their official duties. Their official actions should be above reproach. A board
member is considered to be acting with impropriety if a reasonable person who
was made aware of the relevant facts surrounding the board member’s action
would conclude that the action was inappropriate.
         (b)   If a board member concludes that his or her actions, while legal
and ethical, may be misunderstood, he or she may seek the advice of the Board’s
attorney. He or she may also state on the record the facts of the situation and
the steps taken to resolve it.
      (5)   (a)   Board members should be faithful in the performance of the
duties of their offices. They should act as the especially responsible citizens
whom others can trust and respect. Board members should not engage in
communications outside the meeting in quasi-judicial matters.
         (b)   Board members should be faithful in their attendance at meetings
and in their preparation for those meetings. They should carefully analyze all
credible information that is provided to them.
         (c)   As a group of citizens to whom much has been entrusted, the
Board should demand full accountability from those over whom it has authority.
The Board should set a good example for others in the community, keeping in
mind that trust and respect must continually be earned.
         (d)   Board members should be willing to bear their fair share of the
Board’s workload. To the extent appropriate, they should be willing to put the
Board’s interests ahead of their own.
      (6)   (a)   Board members of local governing boards should conduct the
affairs of their boards in an open and public manner. They should comply with
all applicable laws governing open meetings and public records, recognizing
that doing so is an important way to be worthy of the public’s trust. This
recognition includes sensitivity to those matters recognized by law. The Board
should remember when meeting that they are conducting the public’s business.
They should also remember that the records of their local government belong to
the public and not to them or their employees. They should make clear that a
climate of openness is to be maintained at all times in their governmental
units.
         (b)   In order to insure strict compliance with the laws governing
openness, governing board members should strive to be transparent and act with
candor. They should prohibit unjustified delay in fulfilling public records
requests. They should take deliberate steps before they go into closed session
for any reason, to insure that the closed session will be lawful and that the
closed session does not stray from the purpose for which it was called.
   (C)   Censure procedures.
      (1)   If the elected Board has reason to believe that one of its board
members has violated a provision of this code of ethics, it may open an
investigation into the matter. All information compiled, including the grounds
for the finding of probable cause, shall be shared with the board member when
it is received. All information pertaining to the case shall be open to public
inspection and copying pursuant to the North Carolina public records statutes.
      (2)   Should the Board determine, by a two-thirds majority, that it
wishes to proceed further with censure proceedings, it shall call for a quasi-
judicial hearing at a regular meeting or at a special meeting convened for that
purpose. Notice of the hearing stating its time, place, and purpose shall be
published twice in two separate calendar weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation or shall be advertised for the same amount of time on the
jurisdiction’s website. The notice shall state that a detailed list of the
allegations against the board member is available for public inspection and
copying in the office of the city clerk.
      (3)   The hearing shall be convened at the time and place specified. Any
and all votes during the hearing and any deliberations that follow shall be
taken by the ayes and noes and recorded in the Board’s minutes. The hearing and
any deliberations shall be conducted in open session in accordance with the
requirements of the North Carolina open meetings statutes. The rules governing
the hearing shall be those that apply to a standard quasi-judicial hearing. For
purposes of illustration but not limitation, the accused board member shall
have the right to have counsel present to present and cross-examine expert and
other witnesses, and to offer evidence, including evidence of the bias of any
board member or presiding officer. An audio or video and audio tape of the
proceedings shall be prepared.
      (4)   (a)   The accused board member shall have the right to challenge
the participation of any other board member or the presiding officer based on
bias or self-interest. If such a challenge is made, the Board shall immediately
hear evidence and vote on the challenge. Neither the accused board member nor
the board member whose participation is challenged may vote, although both may
offer evidence. The challenge shall be decided by a majority vote of those
present and voting, a quorum being present.
         (b)   Under both the city and the county voting statutes, persons may
be excused from voting on matters involving their own financial interest or
official conduct when there is a legal basis for being, or requirement to be,
excused from voting. See G.S. §§ 160A-75 and 153A-43, respectively. Persons
should identify and disclose these matters in advance so the Board can
determine whether there is a conflict allowing a person to be excused by the
Board from voting. A censure proceeding is a matter involving a member’s
official conduct, and the member accused in the proceeding should not take part
in any votes that take place. Since a censure proceeding is a quasi-judicial
matter, board members should also be excused from voting if they are
impermissibly biased in the matter under consideration. This is the basis for
excusing members other than the person who is being directly accused.
      (5)   Once the hearing is concluded, it shall be closed by vote of the
Board. The presiding officer shall next entertain a motion to adopt a non-
binding resolution censuring the board member based on specified violations of
the code of ethics. Any motion made must be an affirmative one in favor of
adopting a non-binding resolution of censure. If the motion or resolution does
not state particular grounds for censure under the code of ethics, the
presiding officer shall rule it out of order.
      (6)   If a motion to adopt a non-binding resolution of censure stating
particular grounds under the code of ethics has been made, the Board shall
debate the motion. The accused board member and any other board members who
have been removed from participation because of bias or self-interest may
remain present, but shall not be allowed to participate in the debate. At the
conclusion of the debate, the board members shall vote, except for the accused
board member and any other board members who have been removed from
participation. If the motion is approved by a two-thirds vote of those present
and voting, a quorum being present, the motion is approved and the non-binding
resolution of censure is adopted.
      (7)   The non-binding resolution of censure shall be made a part of the
minutes of the Board. Any recording of the Board’s quasi-judicial proceedings
shall be approved by the Board as a permanent part of the Board’s minutes. The
proceedings shall then be considered concluded, the Board having done all that
it legally can with respect to the matter in question.
   (D)   Legal enforcement.
      (1)   Local governing boards have no legal power to bring criminal or
other charges against each other, or otherwise to control each other’s behavior
directly. At the same time, the Board expects that individual board members
will probably wish to behave in a manner that is both legal and ethical. For
example, board members will want to take care to be familiar with some of the
more common ethics-related criminal violations with which they might be charged
by the district attorney, and they should take care to avoid common pitfalls.
      (2)   The UNC School of Government offers the following legal rules that
also relate to ethical principles to help meet this need. Local governing board
members should consider legal restrictions in terms of behavior that they
should avoid. While requirements found in the law should be viewed as a minimum
standard, board members should always consider whether there are ethical
problems with other behavior, even if it does not violate crirninal or other
statutes dealing with conflicts of interest or other subjects.
         (a)   Avoid deriving a direct benefit from contracts in which you are
involved in making or administering on behalf of the public agency. (G.S. § 14-
234(a)(1); criminal penalty; note defined terms in the statute: direct benefit,
involved in making or administering a contract).
         (b)   Avoid attempting to influence others who are involved in making
or administering a contract on behalf of the public agency, even if you aren’t
involved, if you will derive a direct benefit from the contract. (G.S. § 14-234
(a)(2); criminal penalty; note defined terms in the statute: direct benefit,
involved in making or administering a contract).
         (c)   Avoid soliciting or receiving any gift or reward in exchange for
recommending, influencing, or attempting to influence the award of a contract
by the public agency you serve. (G.S. § 14-234 (a)(3); criminal penalty).
         (d)   Consider the ethical and practical consequences of deriving a
direct benefit from a contract that is authorized under any exception to the
statute, and weigh these considerations against the potential advantage to the
public agency and to yourself. Follow reporting requirements to ensure
transparency. (G.S. § 14-234 (b); (d)(l)).
         (e)   Avoid participating in deliberations about or voting on a
contract in which you have a direct benefit, when the contract is undertaken as
allowed under any exception to the statute. (G.S. § 14-234 (b)(l); criminal
penalty).
         (f)   Avoid using your knowledge of contemplated action by you or your
unit, or information known to you in your official capacity and not made
public, to acquire a financial interest in any property, transaction, or
enterprise, or to gain a financial benefit that may be affected by the
information or contemplated action. Avoid intentionally aiding another to do
any of these things. (G.S. § 14-234.1; criminal penalty.)
         (g)   Avoid receiving any gift or favor from a current, past, or
potential contractor. (G.S. § 133-32(a); criminal penalty.)
         (h)   Consider the ethical and practical consequences of accepting a
gift or favor under any exception to the statutory prohibition, and follow
reporting requirements to ensure transparency. (G.S. § 133-32(d)).
         (i)   Avoid voting on matters involving your own financial interest or
official conduct. (G.S. §§ 160A-75; 153A-44.) Disclose the existence of the
direct financial interest in advance, and, when in doubt, obtain an opinion
from your local attorney about whether you must vote or may be excused.
         (j)   Avoid voting on any zoning map or text amendment where the
outcome of the vote is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and
readily identifiable financial impact on you.
         (k)   Do not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter,
including matters that come before the Board when acting in a quasi-judicial
capacity under G.S. §§ 160A-388 or 153A-345, if participation would violate
affected persons’ constitutional right to an impartial decision-maker.
Impermissible conflicts under this standard include having a fixed opinion
prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex
parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of
the matter. (G.S. §§ 160A-381(d), 160A-388(e1), 153A-340(g), 153A-345(e)(1);
violation of constitutional standard by one board member invalidates the entire
vote).
(Ord. 11-02-01, passed 2-8-11)
DIVISION 4: DOWNTOWN OXFORD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
§ 2-463 DOWNTOWN OXFORD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.
   The Board of Commissioners accepted the By-laws and Articles of
Incorporation for the Downtown Oxford Economic Development Commission. The By-
laws and Articles of Incorporation are on file at the City Clerk's office.
(Ord. 96-5-1, passed 5-14-96)
ARTICLE VI: CITY POLICIES
DIVISION 1: SMOKING POLICY
§ 2-466 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this division, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar,
cigarette or other combustible tobacco product.
(Ord. 08-02-02, passed 2-12-08)
§ 2-467 REGULATION IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building, facility,
vehicle, heavy equipment or portion of a building or facility owned, operated,
occupied, managed or controlled by the city. The Board of Commissioners shall
have the authority to designate smoking areas outside each city building or
facility. Smoking areas outside each city building or facility shall be as
follows:
   (A)   City Hall, 300 Williamsboro Street, outside second floor executive
entrance;
   (B)   Public Works, 127 Penn Avenue, outside to the left side of facility
under the overhang;
   (C)   Police Department, 204 East McClanahan Street, outside to the left
side of building facing Lanier Street;
   (D)   Fire Department, 112 East McClanahan Street, outside back door in
courtyard area; and
   (E)   Wastewater Treatment Plant, 1649 New Commerce Drive, outside at
covered shed.
(Ord. 08-02-02, passed 2-12-08)
§ 2-468 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person failing to comply with this article shall be subject to
punishment for a violation set forth in §
1-99.
(Ord. 08-02-02, passed 2-12-08)
DIVISION 2: INFECTION CONTROL POLICY
§ 2-476 INFECTION CONTROL POLICY.
   The Police Department, Fire Department, Recreation Department, and Water and
Sewer Department have been determined to be at risk in the official Infection
Control Policy and shall be familiar with the ICP prior to placement in the
work environment and shall practice the guidelines of the ICP at all times
while performing the duties of their position.
(Ord. 92-6-6, passed 6-9-92)
Cross-reference:
   Department of recreation, see
Ch. 15
   Fire department, see
Ch. 8
   Police department, see
Ch. 17
   Water department, see
Ch. 21
CHAPTER 3: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
3-1.   Possession on city property
   
3-2.   Sale of alcoholic beverages before noon
   
3-3.   Social district.
§ 3-1 POSSESSION ON CITY PROPERTY.
   No person shall consume, serve or drink any malt beverage or unfortified
wine on property owned or occupied by the city, except as permitted under G.S.
Ch. 18B.
(`86 Code, § 3-1) (Ord. 88-3-4, passed 3-8-88)
Penalty, see § 1-99
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see G.S. § 18B-301(c)
   Establishment of rules different than state prohibited, see G.S. § 18B-100
   Unauthorized possession of fortified wine and spiritous liquor on public
roads, streets and sidewalks, see G.S. §§ 18B-102(a), 18B-301(f)(1)c
§ 3-2 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BEFORE NOON.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87, any establishment located
in the City of Oxford and holding an ABC permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 188-
1001 is permitted to sell alcoholic beverages allowed by its permit beginning
at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. 17-11-10, passed 11-14-17)
§ 3-3 SOCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §§ 160A-205.4 et seq, one or
more social districts may be created within the city, and the city hereby
creates and designates the following social district: Downtown Oxford Social
District, which is designated as shown on a map dated 04/28/2022; the map is
available in the Office of the City Clerk, and signage and/or markings shall be
posted clearly delineating the boundaries of the Social District.
      (2)   The Downtown Oxford Social District shall be created, designated,
and managed in accordance with the requirements contained in G.S. § 160A-205.4
and G.S. Ch. 18B.
      (3)   Any person who violates this article, and any person who aids,
abets, encourages, assists in, or contributes to such violation, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Definitions.
      PERMITTEE. A person holding any of the following ABC permits issued by
the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission established under G.S.
§ 18B-200:
         (a)   An on-premises malt beverage permit issued pursuant to G.S. §
18B-1001(1).
         (b)   An on-premises unfortified wine permit issued pursuant to G.S. §
18B-1001(3).
         (c)   An on-premises fortified wine permit issued pursuant to G.S. §
18B-1001(5).
         (d)   A mixed beverages permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001(10).
         (e)   A distillery permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1100(5).
      PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
limited liability company, other organization or group, or other combination of
individuals acting as a unit.
      PREMISES. A fixed permanent establishment, including all areas inside or
outside the permitted establishment, where the permittee has control through a
lease, deed, or other legal process.
      SOCIAL DISTRICT. A defined outdoor area in which a citizen may consume
alcoholic beverages sold by a permittee. This term does not include the
permittee's licensed premises or an extended area allowed under G.S. § 18B-904
(h).
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   The provisions and terms contained in this article shall be
applicable between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.Wednesday through
Sunday. At all other times, the provisions and terms contained in this article
are not in effect, and all provisions of State and local laws concerning the
possession and consumption of alcohol shall be in full force and effect.
      (2)   Any alcoholic beverage purchased for consumption in the Downtown
Oxford Social District shall: (i) only be consumed in the Downtown Oxford
Social District; and (ii) be disposed of before the person in possession of the
alcoholic beverage exits the Downtown Oxford Social District unless the person
is reentering the licensed premises where the alcoholic beverage was purchased.
A violation of this Section is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   (D)   Requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages. A permittee located in
or contiguous to the Downtown Oxford Social District may sell alcoholic
beverages for consumption within the Downtown Oxford Social District it is
located in or contiguous to in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   The permittee shall only sell and serve alcoholic beverages on its
licensed premises.
      (2)   The permittee shall only sell alcoholic beverages for consumption
in the Downtown Oxford Social District in a container that meets all of the
following requirements and has been approved in advance by the Downtown Oxford
Economic Development Corporation (DOEDC):
         (a)   The container clearly identifies the permittee from which the
alcoholic beverage was purchased.
         (b)   The container clearly displays the Downtown Oxford Social
District logo.
         (c)   The container is not comprised of glass.
         (d)   The container displays, in no less than 12-point font, the
statement, "Drink Responsibly - Be 21."
         (e)   The container shall not hold more than 16 fluid ounces.
      (3)   The permittee shall not allow a person to enter or reenter its
licensed premises with an alcoholic beverage not sold by the permittee.
   (E)   Requirements for possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages.
The possession and consumption of an alcoholic beverage in the Downtown Oxford
Social District is subject to all of the following requirements:
      (1)   Only alcoholic beverages purchased from a permittee located in or
contiguous to the Downtown Oxford Social District may be possessed and
consumed.
      (2)   Alcoholic beverages shall only be in containers meeting the
requirements set forth in this section.
      (3)   Alcoholic beverages shall only be possessed and consumed during the
days and hours set forth in this section.
      (4)   Nothing in this division shall be construed as authorizing the sale
and delivery of alcoholic beverage drinks in excess of the limitation set forth
in G.S. § 18B-1010.
      (5)   A person shall dispose of any alcoholic beverage in the person's
possession prior to exiting the Downtown Oxford Social District unless the
person is reentering the licensed premises where the alcoholic beverage was
purchased.
      (6)   A violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   (F)   Exceptions. When a special event is held pursuant to the issuance of a
special event permit the terms of the special event permit supersede the
provisions of this article within the boundaries of the special event. Any
alcohol purchased within the boundaries of the special event may not be taken
outside of the special event, even if the alcohol is to be taken from the
boundary of the special event into the boundary of the Social District. A
violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed - -22)
CHAPTER 4: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
   
4-1.   Statement of purpose
   
4-2.   Definitions
   
4-3.   Bird sanctuary
   
4-4.   Duties and responsibilities of animal control officers
   
4-5.   Authority of Granville County animal control officers
   
4-6.   Records
   
4-7.   Unlawful to interfere with animal control officers or veterinarians
   
4-8.   Rabies control
   
4-9.   Failure to surrender animal
   
4-10.   Improper rabies tag; unauthorized removal
   
4-11.   Dogs at large; defecation on streets and private property
   
4-12.   Female dogs in heat
   
4-13.   Public nuisance and vicious animals
   
4-14.   Impoundment
   
4-15.   Methods of impoundment of animals
   
4-16.   Redemption of impounded animals
   
4-17.   Deceased animals
   
4-18.   Wild animals
   
4-19.   Commercial breeding; limitation on number within city
   
4-20.   Domestic fowl running at large
   
4-21.   Unlawful to keep livestock
   
4-22.   Beehives
   
4-23.   Permit to keep livestock near residence
   
4-24.   Penalties
Cross-reference:
   Health and Sanitation, see
Ch. 10
   Interments of animals, see §
6-14
   Vicious animals, see §
18-36
§ 4-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The presence of animals at large, stray animals, nuisance animals, abused
animals and diseased animals within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. The animals are a threat to the health of the
community and the safety of persons and property alike. In order to abate and
control this nuisance and to protect the people of the city from diseases
transmitted by unconfined, uncontrolled or non-immunized dogs and cats and to
ensure that animals are treated in a humane manner, there is hereby created,
with the Police Department, the position of animal control officer who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Chief of Police and City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 4-1) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any live vertebrate creature, wild or domestic, other than a human
being, endowed with the power of voluntary motion, specifically including, but
not limited to dogs, cats, farm animals, birds, fish and reptiles.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person employed by the city to carry out the
duties set forth in this chapter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER. Any holding or other facility designated by the city
for the detention of animals.
   ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT. Any animal confined within a vehicle, confined in a
secure enclosure within the real property limits of its owner or secured by
leash, lead, chain or other physical device of sufficient strength to maintain
the physical control of any animal or under the strict voice control of its
owner.
   AT LARGE ANIMAL. Any animal not physically located on the property of its
owner and not under sufficient physical restraint such as a leash, cage, bridle
or similarly effective device to allow the animal to be controlled.
   CAT.  Any domestic feline of either sex.
   DOG. Any domestic canine of either sex.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, possessing or acting as
custodian of any animal.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL. Any animal or group of animals which:
      (1)   Is repeatedly found at large;
      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
      (3)   Is vicious;
      (4)   Causes fouling of the air by odors;
      (5)   Causes unsanitary condition of enclosures or other surroundings,
including turning over garbage receptacles;
      (6)   By virtue of the number or type, is offensive or dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare;
      (7)   Excessively makes disturbing noises, including barking, whining or
howling;
      (8)   Is diseased and dangerous to the public health;
      (9)   Chases or molests pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicles or their
passengers, livestock or other domestic animals; or
      (10)   Is a stray animal.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. An enclosure or other device from which an animal cannot
escape unless freed by the owner.
   STRAY ANIMAL. Any domestic animal that roams at large without any apparent
owner.
   VACCINATION or INOCULATION. The administration of the anti-rabies vaccine
approved by the U.S. Bureau of Animal Industry, the State Department of
Agriculture and the State Board of Health.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human
beings or other animals by virtue  of biting, chasing, attacking, molesting as
to cause or have potential to cause physical injury or property damage.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any warm- or cold-blooded animal not normally domesticated,
including poisonous, crushing and giant reptiles regulated by the state or
country, including, but not limited to lions, tigers, wild cats, wolves, bears,
raccoons, monkeys and apes.
(`86 Code, § 4-2) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-3 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   (A)   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the city and all land
owned or leased by the city outside the corporate limits is hereby designated
as a bird sanctuary.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot or otherwise
kill, within the sanctuary hereby established, any native wild bird. It shall
be lawful to trap starlings, pigeons or similar birds or fowl when the birds or
fowl are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that
they constitute a nuisance or a menace to the public health or property.
(`86 Code, § 4-3) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-4 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   (A)   The animal control officer shall have the responsibility to enforce
all state laws and city ordinances pertaining to the ownership, control, care
and custody of dogs, cats and other animals covered hereunder, and shall
cooperate with the Health Director and other law enforcement officers within
the city, county and adjoining areas in fulfilling this duty and any other duty
enumerated herein. In addition thereto, the animal control officer shall have
the authority to:
      (1)   Investigate all complaints with regard to animals covered by this
chapter, including, but not limited to cruelty or animal abuse with regard to
dogs, cats and other animals;
      (2)   Act as rabies control officer and enforce and carry out all state
laws and all city ordinances pertaining to rabies control which shall include
making canvasses of the city as deemed necessary and practical, for the purpose
of ascertaining that all dogs are properly licensed and that all dogs are
vaccinated against rabies;
      (3)   Be responsible for the investigation of all reported animal bites
and for the quarantine of any dog or cat involved and suspected of having
rabies, for a period of not less than ten days; and
      (4)   Be responsible for the seizure and impoundment, whenever deemed
necessary, of any dog, cat or other animal in the city involved in a violation
of this chapter or any other city ordinance or state law.
   (B)   (1)   In the performance of his or her duties, the animal control
officer shall have the power and authority to issue a citation and/or summons
and shall have the immunity of a peace officer, as described in the state
statutes, but only in regard to enforcing the provisions of this chapter and
the laws of the state which relate to the care, treatment and impoundment of
animals.
      (2)   In that the animal control officer's authority is limited, as
described herein, the officer shall not be considered to be a law enforcement
officer for purposes of retirement benefits or any special allowance or benefit
available to law enforcement officers.
   (C)   (1)   The animal control officer is not authorized to carry on his or
her person any firearm of any kind unless specifically authorized by the Chief
of Police and the City Manager.
      (2)   The animal control officer may use any authorized firearms when
necessary to enforce sections of this chapter or other applicable law for the
control of wild, vicious, diseased or potentially dangerous animals when the
officer deems necessary.
   (D)   The animal control officer, while performing his or her duties, shall
wear a badge of a size and design to be determined by the Chief of Police.
(`86 Code, § 4-4) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-5 AUTHORITY OF GRANVILLE COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS.
   The county animal control officers are hereby authorized to enforce this
chapter or any other law or regulation law adopted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 4-5) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-6 RECORDS.
   The animal control officer shall keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and
detailed records of any impoundment, complaint, violation or investigation and
any other records deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 4-6) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-7 UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS OR VETERINARIANS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest an
animal control officer, law enforcement officer or agent or veterinarian,
authorized by law or ordinance, while in the performance of their duties or to
seek to release any animal in the officer's or veterinarian's custody in an
unauthorized manner.
(`86 Code, § 4-7) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-8 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Immunization.
      (1)   It shall be required that any dog or cat over the age of four
months be vaccinated against rabies with an approved anti-rabies vaccine
administered by a veterinarian or certified vaccinator in accordance with G.S.
§ 130A-185.
      (2)   All dogs and cats must wear a collar and identification tag and a
rabies vaccination tag at all times.
   (B)   Bites. Wounds inflicted by an animal upon human beings shall be
reported immediately to the Police Department who will than notify an animal
control officer to investigate.
      (1)   Every dog or cat that bites a human being and does not have a valid
rabies vaccination tag shall be delivered within eight hours of the bite
incident by the owner to an animal control officer or the animal control
shelter, where the animal shall be confined for observation for not less then
ten days. Confinement in a veterinary clinic will be at the discretion of the
animal control officer. Both confinement in the shelter and the veterinary
clinic will be at the expense of the owner.
      (2)   Every dog or cat that bites a human being and has a valid rabies
vaccination tag shall be delivered within eight hours of the bite incident to a
animal control
officer or the county shelter. At the discretion of the animal control officer,
the animal may be confined at a veterinary clinic of the owners choice or may
be confined on the property of the owner. The expense of confinement at the
county shelter or at a veterinary clinic shall be the responsibility of the
animal owner.
      (3)   In the case of stray animals whose ownership is not known, the
supervised quarantine required by this section shall be at the county animal
control shelter.
      (4)   (a)   If rabies does not develop within ten days after an animal is
quarantined under this section, the animal may be released to the owner.
         (b)   If the animal was confined at the county shelter, the owner
shall pay a per-day boarding fee, according to the county fee manual.
   (C)   Dog or cat bitten by rabid animal. Any dog or cat bitten by a rabid
animal or an animal suspected of having rabies that is not available for
laboratory diagnosis shall be destroyed immediately by its owner, animal
control officer or a peace officer unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated in
accordance with this section more than three weeks prior to being bitten, is
given a booster dose of rabies vaccine within three days of the bite and the
owner agrees to a strict six weeks of confinement either at the owner's
property or at a veterinary clinic depending on circumstances and the
discretion of the animal control officer.
(`86 Code, § 4-8) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-9 FAILURE TO SURRENDER ANIMAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or release any animal under
observation for rabies, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies
or any animal having bitten a human being or to remove the animal from the
corporate limits of the city or from the county without the written permission
of the animal control officer and the Director of Public Health.
(`86 Code, § 4-9) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-10 IMPROPER RABIES TAGS; UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit a rabies
vaccination tag or to use a rabies vaccination tag that has not been properly
obtained from a licensed veterinarian or a certified vaccinator in accordance
with this chapter or to use a rabies vaccination tag for an animal other than
the animal for which the tag was issued.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a rabies vaccination tag
or identification tag from any animal belonging to another person residing in
the city unless by the direction of the animal's owner.
   (C)   It shall unlawful for any owner to permit their dog or cat to be off
the property of the owner without a rabies vaccination tag and identification
tag.
(`86 Code, § 4-10) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-11 DOGS AT LARGE; DEFECATION ON STREETS AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow the animal to
be at large in the city or on any city property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog to fail to remove feces deposited by the dog on any street,
sidewalk, park or other publicly-owned area.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog to fail to remove feces deposited by they dog on any private
property unless the owner of the property has given permission allowing the use
of the property.
(`86 Code, § 4-11) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-12 FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.
   Every female dog, while in heat, shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure in a manner that she will not be in contact with another dog, nor
create a nuisance by attracting other animals. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed
area on the premises of the owner of an animal being bred.
(`86 Code, § 4-12) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-13 PUBLIC NUISANCE AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to own, keep or harbor a public nuisance or
vicious animal within the city.
   (B)   The following procedure shall apply with respect to the detection and
disposition of animals which are alleged to be public nuisance or vicious
animals, in addition to the issuance of a citation or summons.
      (1)   Complaint and notice. Upon receipt of a written detailed and signed
complaint being made to the Animal Control Division of the Police Department by
any resident or residents that any person is maintaining a public nuisance or
vicious animal as defined herein, the animal control officer shall cause the
owner of the animal or animals in question to be notified that a complaint has
been received and shall conduct an investigation into the situation complained
of prepare a written report of his or her findings.
      (2)   Abatement. If the written findings of the animal control officer
indicate that the complaint is valid, then the Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall cause the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question
to be so notified in person by the animal control officer and the owner or
keeper shall thereby be ordered to abate the nuisance within two days and
further shall be issued a citation for the violation. In the event the owner of
the animal or animals is unknown or cannot be ascertained, the animal control
officer is hereby authorized to impound the animal or animals immediately
pending notification of the owner.
      (3)   Impoundment upon failure to abate. If any person, after being
notified as set forth above, shall fail or refuse to abate the nuisance upon
the order of the Chief of Police within the specified time, the Chief of Police
may cause the animal or animals to be impounded, as set forth in this chapter.
      (4)   Right of appeal. Within the two-day notice period set forth above,
the owner or keeper of the nuisance or vicious animal may appeal the findings
of the Chief of Police to the City Manager by giving written notice to the
Chief of Police or the City Manager. The final determination shall be made by
the City Manager.
      (5)   Redemption; destruction. If the owner or keeper shall so request,
the animal or animals may be redeemed pursuant to the procedure set forth in
this chapter and upon the further condition that the owner or keeper execute a
written agreement to comply with the abatement order. If no redemption and
execution of agreement is made, as specified in this chapter, then the animal
or animals shall be disposed of in a humane manner.
      (6)   Vicious animals.
         (a)   All animals determined to be vicious, including dogs that have a
history of unlawfully biting human beings, shall be confined by the owner
within a building or secure enclosure or by the animal control officer in the
animal control shelter. The animals shall not be released from confinement
unless securely muzzled and restrained.
         (b)   An animal that has been determined to be vicious, as set forth
herein, and is found to be at large may be tranquilized or destroyed by the
animal control officer with or without prior notification to the owner, but
only after attempts to capture the animal have been unsuccessful.
         (c)   The animal control officer may also tranquilize or destroy any
vicious animal if the animal poses an immediate threat to the safety of any
human being or animal.
(`86 Code, § 4-13) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-14 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The animal control officer and any law enforcement officers are
empowered to seize or capture and impound any animal in violation of this
chapter and may issue a court summons or citation, as deemed necessary by the
investigating officer.
   (B)   Impoundment of any animal does not relieve the owner thereof from any
penalty that may be imposed for violation of this chapter, any other city
ordinance or any state or federal law.
   (C)   The animal control officer shall not be required to pick up dead
animals.
   (D)   The animal control officer shall not, in the process of seizing or
impounding animals, place himself or herself in a situation that may jeopardize
his or her health and safety.
   (E)   Upon impounding an animal, the animal control officer will make a
reasonable attempt to determine ownership of the impounded animal and notify
the owner(s) of the impoundment.
   (F)   Impounded animals shall be held in the animal control shelter for the
minimum allowable time under state
law unless deemed necessary or appropriate to extend the minimum holding time
or to waive the minimum holding time and destroy any animal that may be
suffering from an affliction of a disease that may be contagious or a serious
injury.
   (G)   Owner-relinquished animals may be disposed of immediately by way of
adoption or euthanasia or by any other means authorized by the laws of the
state.
   (H)   Owners may redeem their animal or animals upon notification by the
animal control officer or as soon as the owner discovers that the animal has
been impounded provided that discovery is within the minimum allowable holding
time. Animals held after the minimum allowable time may be disposed of by any
humane means allowable under state law.
(`86 Code, § 4-14) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-15 METHODS OF IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The animal control officer shall be empowered to seize and impound
animals that are determined to be a nuisance and or in violation of the
articles set forth in the city animal control ordinances. The following
approved methods and equipment may be used:
      (1)   An approved humane trap;
      (2)   An approved net;
      (3)   Humane animal immobilizing equipment; and/or
      (4)   Tranquilization.
   (B)   An animal shall be considered impounded if the animal control officer
has had to utilize the method of tranquilization. The animal becomes impounded
the moment the tranquilizer dart has penetrated the animal and injected the
tranquilizer solution.
(`86 Code, § 4-15) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-16 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   During the time an animal is impounded, it shall be available for redemption
to the owner when the following provisions have been met:
   (A)   Any control, restraint or enclosure modifications necessary to comply
with this chapter have been completed; and
   (B)   A redemption service fee of $10 per day or the boarding fees, as shown
in the county fee manual, have been paid.
(`86 Code, § 4-16) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-17 DECEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or person in
charge of any animals that die from any cause and the owner, lessee or person
in charge of any property upon which any animals die shall bury or cause to be
buried, the carcass to a depth of at least three feet beneath the surface of
the ground, or to completely burn the animal carcass within 24 hours after
death of the animal is known, or to otherwise dispose of the animal's remains
in a manner as approved by the State Veterinarian.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the carcasses of any
dead animals from their premises to the premises of another person without the
written permission of the person having charge of the premises and without
burying or otherwise disposing of the carcasses, as provided in this section.
(`86 Code, § 4-17) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-18 WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   Neither this section nor any section of this chapter shall have the
effect of permitting any activity or condition with respect to a wild animal
native to the state which is prohibited or more severely restricted by state
statutes or by regulations of the State Wildlife Resources Commission or of
permitting any activity or condition with respect to any animal which is
prohibited or more severely restricted by federal statute or regulation.
   (B)   Wild animals and the owners of wild animals shall be subject to this
chapter, except those that are applicable solely to dogs and or cats and the
owners of dogs and or cats.
   (C)   Wild animals shall be maintained, at all times, in a secure enclosure
on the owner's property or, with consent, on the property of another unless the
animal is under restraint of the owner. For the purposes of this section, a
chain attaching the animal to a stationary object shall not be considered to be
a secure enclosure.
   (D)   All owners of wild animals shall register their animals with the
animal control officer within ten working days of acquisition or upon coming
within the definition of a wild animal. The registration shall be for
information and safety only and there shall be no fee for the registration.
(`86 Code, § 4-18) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-19 COMMERCIAL BREEDING; LIMITATION ON NUMBER WITHIN CITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep, breed or raise any dogs or
cats or any other animal for commercial purpose within the incorporated limits
of the city. A person is deemed to be keeping, breeding or raising any dogs or
cats or any other animal for a commercial purpose if such is a primary source
of income for the purpose. No owner shall keep, harbor or own more than three
dogs or cats as pets or for private use at any time, provided this provision
shall not apply to dogs or cats less than four months of age.
   (B)   The purpose of this section is to prohibit the keeping, breeding and
raising of dogs and cats or any other animal to the extent that doing so may
cause or create a public nuisance.
(`86 Code, § 4-19) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-20 DOMESTIC FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any turkeys, geese, ducks,
chickens or any other domestic fowl to run at large within the corporate limits
of the city. The domestic fowl shall be confined to a pen or other secure
enclosure or otherwise restricted to the property of the owner. The owner
having received notice of the violation and after three days fails to or
refuses to confine the fowl to their property will be subject to fine and the
fowl may be destroyed by order of the Chief of Police.
(`86 Code, § 4-20) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-21 UNLAWFUL TO KEEP LIVESTOCK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep livestock within the corporate
limits of the city. Livestock includes, but is not limited to cattle, mules,
donkeys, sheep, goats or swine.
(`86 Code, § 4-21) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01; Am. Ord. 08-02-01,
passed 2-12-08)
§ 4-22 BEEHIVES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a hive of bees within 50
feet of:
   (A)   Any street or alley; or
   (B)   The property line of an adjoining land owner.
(`86 Code, § 4-22) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
§ 4-23 PERMIT TO KEEP LIVESTOCK NEAR RESIDENCE.
   (A)   No person shall stable, tie, or otherwise keep any horse or pony
within 500 feet of any dwelling, house, apartment, or other residence occupied
by any person, without first obtaining a livestock permit duly signed by the
City Manager.
   (B)   Any person desiring such permit shall apply therefor in writing to the
City Manager. Such application shall, at a minimum, state:
      (1)   The type and number of horses or ponies to be stabled, pastured,
tied or otherwise kept;
      (2)   The places such animals will be stabled, pastured, or otherwise
kept. The minimum pasture size shall be one acre. The pasture shall be enclosed
with a five foot fence having a minimum height of five feet and suitable to
keep all horses within the pasture. There shall be a maximum of two horses for
the first acre, and one additional acre for every additional horse over two.
Each horse shall be provided with a stable capable of providing adequate
shelter from the outside elements;
      (3)   The name of one adult occupant, if any, of each dwelling house,
apartment, or residence within 500 feet of such places;
      (4)   The distance of each such dwelling house, apartment, or other
residence from such places; and
      (5)   Any other pertinent information that the applicant wishes to submit
in connection with the application for permit.
   (C)   Each applicant for such permit shall pay to the city the fee
established by the Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   Upon determining that a proper application has been filed; that all
applicable fees have been paid and upon finding that the stabling, pasturing,
tying, or otherwise keeping of such animals in the location designated on the
application will not endanger the health of any person occupying a dwelling
house, apartment, or residence within 500 feet of such place, or any other
citizen or inhabitant of the city, the City Manager shall issue a permit
specifying the number and type of animals to be stabled, pastured, or kept, and
the places such animals may be stabled, pastured, tied, or otherwise kept. The
written assent to the issuance of such permit shall be signed by one adult
occupant of each such dwelling, apartment, or other residence then occupied by
human beings and within 500 feet of the places such animals are to be stabled,
pastured, or otherwise kept.
   (E)   Each permit shall be and remain valid until December 31 of each
calendar year, or until the permit is revoked as provided herein. At any time
within 30 days before the expiration of any permit, the holder thereof may
apply for its renewal, which renewal shall be issued upon the same conditions
as hereinabove provided for the issuance of the original permit unless the City
Manager determines that there has been a change in circumstances regarding the
issuance of the permit and in that event, a new permit shall be issued based on
said changes provided each of the conditions set forth herein are met.
   (F)   Any such permit issued shall be revoked upon a finding that the
stabling, pasturing, or otherwise keeping of such animal endangers the health
or safety of the city or any person living within 500 feet of the permit
location. Such revocation shall be effective ten days after the mailing by
registered or certified mail of a notice thereof to the last known address of
the holder of the permit.
   (G)   The permit is not assignable or transferable in any way.
(Ord. 08-02-01, passed 2-12-08)
§ 4-24 PENALTIES.
   Violations of this chapter shall be punishable, as follows:
   (A)   First offense: $25;
   (B)   Second offense: $50;
   (C)   Third offense: $100; and
   (D)   Fourth or subsequent offenses: mandatory court appearance, but the
penalty shall not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment of not more than 90 days.
(`86 Code, § 4-23) (Am. Ord. 01-09-01, passed 9-18-01)
CHAPTER 5: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS; LAND USAGE CODES
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   [Reserved]
Article II: State Building Code
   [Reserved]
Article III: Insulation and Energy Utilization Equipment Installation
   [Reserved]
Article IV: Housing Code
   
5-61.   Adoption
   
5-62.   Enforcement
Article V: Unsafe Structures
   
5-81.   Definition
   
5-82.   Interpretation
   
5-83.   Duty of Building Inspector
   
5-84.   Duty of owner; procedure generally
   
5-85.   Notice and hearing
   
5-86.   Order to remedy or demolish
   
5-87.   Appeals
   
5-88.   Report of failure to comply
   
5-89.   Order of Board of Commissioners; assessment of costs
   
5-90.   When notice of Board hearing required
   
5-91.   Presumption of danger to public
   
5-92.   Wilful failure or refusal to comply with order
Article VI: Flood Damage Prevention
   
5-101.   Incorporated by reference
Article VII: Land Use Plan; Zoning
   
5-116.   Adopted
   
5-117.   Land use plan for extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction
   
5-118.   Annexation
   
5-119.   Political signs
Article VIII: Pump Stations
   
5-126.   Pump station policy
Article IX: Subdivision Regulation Ordinance
   
5-140.   Incorporation by reference
Article X: Reimbursement Agreements
   
5-150.   Purpose
   
5-151.   Definitions
   
5-152.   Authorization
   
5-153.   Public hearing required
   
5-154.   Requirements of agreement
   
5-155.   Law in effect at time of agreement governs; exceptions
   
5-156.   Review by city
   
5-157.   Miscellaneous
Cross-reference:
   Demolitions, see
TSO II
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
[Reserved]
Editor's note:
   This Article was rescinded by the Board of Commissioners on 2-8-83 wherein,
the Building Inspector Department of Granville County will perform all
inspections within the City of Oxford and its extra territory area with all
fees imposed for the services to be paid directly to Granville County and no
additional charge will be made to the City of Oxford by Granville County for
the building inspection services rendered.
ARTICLE II: STATE BUILDING CODE
[Reserved]
Editor's note:
   This Article was rescinded by the Board of Commissioners on 2-8-83 wherein,
the Building Inspector Department of Granville County will perform all
inspections within the City of Oxford and its extra territory area with all
fees imposed for the services to be paid directly to Granville County and no
additional charge will be made to the City of Oxford by Granville County for
the building inspection services rendered.
ARTICLE III: INSULATION AND ENERGY UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION
[Reserved]
Editor's note:
   This Article was rescinded by the Board of Commissioners on 2-8-83 wherein,
the Building Inspector Department of Granville County will perform all
inspections within the City of Oxford and its extra territory area with all
fees imposed for the services to be paid directly to Granville County and no
additional charge will be made to the City of Oxford by Granville County for
the building inspection services rendered.
ARTICLE IV: HOUSING CODE
§ 5-61 ADOPTION.
   The North Carolina Minimum Standards Housing Code, as the same exists on the
date of adoption of this code, of which not less than three copies have been
and are now on file in the office of the City Clerk, is adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and the provisions
therein shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all
dwellings and dwelling units and/or structures within the city.
(`86 Code, § 5-61)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption by reference, see G.S. § 160A-76
§ 5-62 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Zoning Officer and/or the Fire Chief shall be responsible for the
enforcement of any ordinances or codes adopted by the Board relating to the
repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation,
pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-441 et seq.
(`86 Code, § 5-62)
ARTICLE V: UNSAFE STRUCTURES
§ 5-81 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The County Building Inspector.
(`86 Code, § 5-81)
§ 5-82 INTERPRETATION.
   This article shall be supplemental to all other ordinances.
(`86 Code, § 5-82)
§ 5-83 DUTY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Any building or structure or part thereof, partially destroyed or
otherwise, which is found by the Building Inspector to be in a dilapidated
state of disrepair or other substandard condition as to be dangerous to life,
health or other property, or to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a public
nuisance shall be declared by the Building Inspector to be unsafe.
   (B)   The unsafe condition may be caused by defective construction,
overloaded structural parts, decay, susceptibility to fire, exits or any other
hazardous conditions or circumstances.
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall have authority, and it shall be his or
her duty, to declare all buildings or structures unsafe and to take appropriate
action to have the conditions corrected or removed.
   (D)   The declaration by the Building Inspector shall constitute an order of
condemnation for the purposes of this article.
(`86 Code, § 5-83)
§ 5-84 DUTY OF OWNER; PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
   (A)   Whenever any building or structure has been condemned by the Building
Inspector, and the existence of the building or structure in a dilapidated
state of disrepair or other substandard condition is found and determined by
the Building Inspector or, upon appeal from or report by the Building
Inspector, as hereafter provided by the Board, to be dangerous to life, health
or other property, or is in a condition as to constitute a fire or safety
hazard or a public nuisance, the owner or owners of the building or structure
shall be required to demolish and remove the same and remedy the conditions
under the regulations and procedures provided in this article.
   (B)   If the owner fails or refuses so to do within the time directed by the
Building Inspector or provided by the Board, the Board may cause the same to be
demolished and removed or other steps taken as it may find to be necessary to
suppress and abate the nuisance and remove the fire or safety hazard and the
danger to life, health or other property found to exist, and specially assess
the cost and expense of doing the work against the lot or parcel of land on
which the building or structure is located.
(`86 Code, § 5-84)
Statutory reference:
   Alternative procedures for unsafe buildings, see G.S.
   §§ 160A-424 et seq.
§ 5-85 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Before any building or structure may be ordered to be demolished and
removed, as provided in § 5-84, the Building Inspector shall notify the owner
of the building, in writing, by certified or registered mail to the last known
address of the owner, or by personal service of the notice by the Building
Inspector or his or her assistant or by posting notice as hereinafter provided,
that the building or structure is in a condition as appears to constitute a
fire or safety hazard or is dangerous to life, health or other property, or to
be a public nuisance, and that a hearing will be held before the Building
Inspector at a designated place at a time not less than ten days after the date
of the written notice, at which time and place the owner shall be entitled to
be heard in person or by counsel upon all legal or factual questions relating
to the matter and shall be entitled to offer the evidence as he or she may
desire which is relevant or material to the questions sought to be determined
or the remedies sought to be effected.
   (B)   If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot, after due diligence,
be discovered, the notice herein referred to shall be considered properly and
adequately served if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building or
structure in question at least ten days prior to the date fixed for the hearing
and a notice of the hearing is published one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city at least one week prior to the date fixed for the
hearing. The notice shall state the address or location of the building or
structure and the time, place and purpose of the hearing.
   (C)   A hearing shall be held as required by the notice.
(`86 Code, § 5-85)
§ 5-86 ORDER TO REMEDY OR DEMOLISH.
   If, after the required hearing, the Building Inspector finds that the
building or structure in question is in a dilapidated or substandard state of
disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to life,
health or other property, or is a public nuisance, he or she shall make an
order in writing, directed to the owner of the building or structure, requiring
the owner to remedy the conditions so found to exist by demolishing and
removing the building or structure or taking other steps as may be necessary to
abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, within the period, not less than 60
days, as the Building Inspector may prescribe.
(`86 Code, § 5-86)
§ 5-87 APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of any building or structure ordered by the Building
Inspector to be demolished and removed, or who is directed by the Building
Inspector to take any other steps to abate a nuisance or remove hazards found
by the building inspector to exist, may appeal from the order to the Board,
provided, the owner gives notice of appeal to the Building Inspector at the
time of the hearing at which the order is made, or, within ten days after the
order is made, files with the Building Inspector a written notice of the
appeal. Notice of appeal shall state the grounds therefor.
      (2)   Unless an appeal is taken within the time and in the manner herein
prescribed, the action of the Building Inspector shall be deemed final, subject
only to the action as the Board may take as provided elsewhere in this article.
   (B)   (1)   When an appeal has been properly taken and notice thereof given
in accordance with the provisions of this section, it shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector to report the same to the City Manager or City Clerk who
shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda for action by the Board at
its next ensuing regular meeting.
      (2)   The Board may continue the hearing of the appeal from time to time.
(`86 Code, § 5-87)
§ 5-88 REPORT OF FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   In the event the owner does not appeal from the final order or
direction of the Building Inspector requiring that the building or structure be
demolished and removed or the taking of other steps as may be required to abate
the nuisance and remove the hazards, and fails or refuses to comply with the
order and direction, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to file a
written report thereof with the City Manager or City Clerk, who shall cause the
report to be placed on the agenda for action by the Board at its next ensuing
regular meeting or to some subsequent meeting, which the Board may continue the
same.
   (B)   (1)   The Building Inspector shall mail a copy of the report by
certified or registered mail to the owner at his or her last known address or
have a copy of the report delivered to the owner.
      (2)   The report shall specify the date of the meeting of the Board for
which the matter will be docketed for action.
(`86 Code, § 5-88)
§ 5-89 ORDER OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   (A)   In all cases referred to in this article which reach the Board for
action, either upon appeal of the owner from the ruling of the Building
Inspector or upon report of the Building Inspector that the owner fails or
refuses to comply with his or her order or direction, the Board shall hear the
matter, and if it finds and determines that the building or structure in
question is in a dilapidated or substandard state of disrepair as to constitute
a fire or safety hazard, to be dangerous to life, health or other property, is
a public nuisance and that the owner of the building or structure has failed or
refused to abate the nuisance and has failed or refused to have the building or
structure demolished and removed or has failed or refused to take other steps
as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards found to
exist, it may cause the demolition and removal of the building or structure to
be done or effect the other remedies as may be necessary to abate the nuisance
and remove the hazards, and specially assess the cost of the work against the
lot or parcel of land on which the building or structure was situated.
   (B)   The assessment shall constitute a specific lien upon the lot or parcel
of land, which may be enforced by an action instituted in the name of the city
in the nature of an
action to foreclose a mortgage as provided by G.S. §§ 105-374 through 105-376
in the case of ad valorem taxes and local improvement assessments.
(`86 Code, § 5-89)
§ 5-90 WHEN NOTICE OF BOARD HEARING REQUIRED.
   In cases in which the Building Inspector has been unable to give the owner
actual notice of hearing in the manner provided in this article, and has given
the notice by posting and publishing the same as authorized in § 5-86, and the
owner has failed or refused to comply with the order or direction of the
building inspector to demolish and remove the building or structure or take
other remedial action as will remove the hazards and the case has been referred
to the Board for action, before taking action, the Board shall cause to be
posted on the outside of the building or structure in question at least ten
days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and published one time in a
newspaper having general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the
date fixed for the hearing, a written notice stating the address or location of
the building or structure involved and the time, place and purpose of the
hearing and other information as the Board deems advisable.
(`86 Code, § 5-90)
§ 5-91 PRESUMPTION OF DANGER TO PUBLIC.
   In all cases in which the Board causes the demolition and removal of any
building or structure to be carried out, or directs other remedial steps to be
taken as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, it
shall be conclusively presumed that the public nuisance and the fire and safety
hazard and danger to life, health or other property, created and maintained by
the continued presence of the building or structure in a condition as is found
to exist, constitute a clear and present danger amounting to a situation of
emergency involving the public health, safety and general welfare, which
requires entry upon private property for the summary abatement and removal of
the danger, in the public interest.
(`86 Code, § 5-91)
§ 5-92 WILFUL FAILURE OR REFUSAL TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any final order or direction of the Building Inspector or Board made in
accordance with this article.
(`86 Code, § 5-92)
ARTICLE VI: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 5-101 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to
time, is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if appearing in
total. An updated copy of this ordinance is on file with the City Clerk and
City Engineer.
(Ord. 07-04-03, passed 4-10-07)
ARTICLE VII: LAND USE PLAN; ZONING
§ 5-116 ADOPTED.
   The zoning regulations of the city, copies of which are now on file in the
office of the City Clerk, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set forth at length herein.
§ 5-117 LAND USE PLAN FOR EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING JURISDICTION.
   The land use plan for extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction is adopted by
reference and incorporated by reference as if appearing in total.
(Ord. 99-3-4, passed 3-16-99)
§ 5-118 ANNEXATION.
   (A)   A noncontiguous area proposed for annexation must meet all of the
following standards:
      (1)   The nearest point on the proposed satellite corporate limits must
be not more than five miles from the primary corporate limits of the annexing
city.
      (2)   No point on the proposed satellite corporate limits may be closer
to the primary corporate limits of another city than to the primary corporate
limits of the annexing city.
      (3)   The area must be so situated that the annexing city will be able to
provide the same services within the proposed satellite corporate limits that
it provides within its primary corporate limits.
      (4)   If the area proposed for annexation, or any portion thereof, is a
subdivision as defined in G.S. § 160A-376, all of the subdivision must be
included.
      (5)   The area within the proposed satellite corporate limits, when added
to the area within the other satellite corporate limits, may exceed 10% of the
area within the primary corporate limits of the annexing city.
   (B)   This applies to the city of Oxford.
Cross-reference:
   Annexations, see
TSO I
Statutory reference:
   Related law, see G.S. § 160A-58.1(b)
§ 5-119 POLITICAL SIGNS.
   Political signs are not permitted on city property more than sixty days
prior to an election and are to be removed by the Police Department if placed
on city property earlier than said sixty days.
(Ord. 00-2-1, passed 2-8-00)
ARTICLE VIII: PUMP STATIONS
§ 5-126 PUMP STATION POLICY.
   (A)   All pump stations shall have a backup generator on site.
   (B)   All pump stations shall be equipped with a programmable logical
controller (PLC) and dialer for emergency condition notification. As a minimum,
the following shall be reported:
      (1)   Overflow; and
      (2)   No power.
   (C)   All pump stations shall have a suitable all-weather drive with
sufficient turnaround space and dedicated ROW at the developer's expense which
the ROW will be accepted by the city.
   (D)   If the pump station has a long force-main, greater than 750 feet,
chemical feed equipment shall be provided to control hydrogen sulfide.
   (E)   The Public Works Department shall approve all plans and specifications
for pump stations and shall inspect all construction.
   (F)   The pumps shall have been sized correctly to accommodate existing and
future flow.
   (G)   The pump station shall be surrounded by a six- foot fence, with three
strands of barbed wire, have an area light and have an adequate gate for pump
station servicing.
   (H)   Every lift station shall have an outdoor spigot, with metal post in
front for protection, if lift station is within 300 feet of municipal water
line, or the developer shall install a well.
(Ord. 99-1-2, passed 1-12-99)
ARTICLE IX: SUBDIVISION REGULATION ORDINANCE
§ 5-140 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   The Subdivision Regulation Ordinance is incorporated by reference.
(Ord. passed 10-1-72; Am. Ord. passed 1-10-95; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-98; Am.
Ord. passed 7-11-06; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-09)
Cross-reference:
   Planning board and subdivision regulations, see §
2-454
ARTICLE X: REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 5-150 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The city enacts the following article to allow for the city to enter
into long-term reimbursement agreements for developments greater than 100
acres, which may or may not be within the city limits or ETJ of the city, and
hereby finds the following:
      (1)   Large-scale development projects often occur in multiple phases
extending over a period of years, requiring a long-term commitment of both
public and private resources;
      (2)   Because of their scale and duration, such large-scale projects
often require careful integration between public capital facilities planning,
financing, and construction schedules and the phasing of the private
development;
      (3)   Because of their scale and duration, such large-scale projects
involve substantial commitments of private capital by developers, which
developers are usually unwilling to risk without sufficient assurances that
public resources will remain available through the extended period of the
development and that the public resources provided are constructed according to
the standards maintained by the city; and
      (4)   That it is in the public interest of the citizens of the city to
participate, to the extent allowed by law, in the development of properties
that have the potential of providing employment and other economic benefits to
the city and its citizens.
   (B)   This article is supplemental to the powers conferred upon the city and
does not preclude or supersede rights and obligations established pursuant to
other laws regarding building permits, site-specific development plans, phased
development plans, or other provisions of law.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-151 DEFINITIONS.
   For purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPER. A person or other legal entity, including a governmental agency
or redevelopment authority, who intends to undertake any development and who
has a legal or equitable interest in the property to be developed.
   DEVELOPMENT. The planning for or carrying out of a building activity, the
making of a material change in the use or appearance of any structure or
property, or the dividing of land into two or more parcels. DEVELOPMENT, as
designated in a law or development permit, includes the planning for and all
other activity customarily associated with it unless otherwise specified. When
appropriate to the context, DEVELOPMENT refers to the planning for or the act
of developing or to the result of development. Reference to a specific
operation is not intended to mean that the operation or activity, when part of
other operations or activities, is not development. Reference to particular
operations is not intended to limit the generality of this item.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Board of Commissioners of the city.
   LAWS. All ordinances, resolutions, regulations, comprehensive plans, land
development regulations, policies, and rules adopted by a local government
affecting the development of property, and includes laws governing permitted
uses of the property, density, design, and improvements.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The City of Oxford.
   PUBLIC FACILITIES. Major capital improvements, including, but not limited to
sanitary sewer and potable water systems and facilities.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-152 AUTHORIZATION.
   The city is hereby authorized to enter into a written reimbursement
agreement pursuant to this article with a developer for the development of
property, provided the property contains 100 acres or more of developable
property (exclusive of wetlands, mandatory buffers, unbuildable slopes, and
other portions of the property which may be precluded from development at the
time of application). Reimbursement agreements shall be of a term specified in
the agreement, provided they may not be for a term exceeding 20 years. Nothing
contained herein shall obligate the city to enter into such agreements and such
agreements shall be entered into only at the request of the developer. A simple
majority vote of the Board of Commissioners, after a public hearing, shall be
required for approval.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-153 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   Before entering into a reimbursement agreement, the city shall conduct a
public hearing on the proposed agreement. The notice for the public hearing
must specify the location of the property subject to the reimbursement
agreement, the development uses proposed on the property, and must specify a
place where a copy of the proposed reimbursement agreement can be obtained. The
developer shall reimburse the city for all costs associated with the public
hearing and advertisement.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-154 REQUIREMENTS OF AGREEMENT.
   (A)   A reimbursement agreement shall at a minimum include all of the
following:
      (1)   A legal description of the property subject to the agreement and
the names of its legal and equitable property owners;
      (2)   The duration of the agreement. However, the parties are not
precluded from entering into subsequent reimbursement agreements that may
extend the original duration period;
      (3)   The development uses permitted on the property and a general
description of the nature and extent of the proposed uses;
      (4)   A description of the public facilities that will service the
development, including who provides and maintains the facilities, the date any
new public facilities, if needed, will be constructed, and a schedule to assure
public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of the development;
and
      (5)   A description of any other conditions, terms, restrictions, or
other requirements determined to be necessary by the local government for the
public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens.
   (B)   A reimbursement agreement may provide that the entire development or
any phase of it be commenced or completed within a specified period of time.
The reimbursement agreement must provide a development schedule, including
commencement dates and interim completion dates at no greater than five-year
intervals; provided, however, the failure to meet a commencement or completion
date shall not, in and of itself, constitute a material breach of the
development agreement pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.27, but must be judged based
upon the totality of the circumstances. The reimbursement agreement may include
other defined performance standards to be met by the developer or any of its
contractors. The developer may request a modification in the dates as set forth
in the agreement. Consideration of a proposed major modification of the
agreement shall follow the same procedures as required for initial approval of
a reimbursement agreement.
   (C)   If more than one local government is made party to an agreement, the
agreement must specify which local government is responsible for the overall
administration of the development agreement.
   (D)   The reimbursement agreement also may cover any other matter not
inconsistent with this section.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-155 LAW IN EFFECT AT TIME OF AGREEMENT GOVERNS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Unless the reimbursement agreement specifically provides for the
application of subsequently enacted laws, the laws applicable to development of
the property subject to a reimbursement agreement are those in force at the
time of execution of the agreement.
   (B)   In the event state or federal law is changed after a reimbursement
agreement has been entered into and the change prevents or precludes compliance
with one or more provisions of the reimbursement agreement, the local
government may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change
in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the reimbursement
agreement, by ordinance after notice and a hearing.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-156 REVIEW BY THE CITY.
   (A)   During any period of time in which a reimbursement agreement is
active, the city shall review the development at any and all times that the
city deems necessary to ensure compliance with the agreement. The city shall
notify the developer in writing of its findings if in the discretion of the
City Manager or City Engineer, a breach of the agreement has occurred, the
developer must be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms
of the development agreement.
   (B)   If, as a result of a review, the city finds and determines that the
developer has committed a material breach of the terms or conditions of the
agreement, the city shall serve notice in writing, within a reasonable time
after the periodic review, upon the developer setting forth with reasonable
particularity the nature of the breach and the evidence supporting the finding
and determination, and providing the developer a reasonable time in which to
cure the material breach.
   (C)   If the developer fails to cure the material breach within the time
given, then the local government unilaterally may terminate or modify the
reimbursement; provided, the notice of termination or modification may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment in the manner provided by G.S. § 160A-388
(b).
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
§ 5-157 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   A reimbursement agreement may be amended or canceled by mutual consent
of the parties to the agreement and may not be assigned without the prior
written consent of the city.
   (B)   In the event that any of the obligations of the city in the
reimbursement agreement constitute debt, the city shall comply, at the time of
the obligation to incur the debt and before the debt becomes enforceable
against the city, with any applicable constitutional and statutory procedures
for the approval of this debt. The agreement shall be signed by the City
Attorney, City Finance Director, and the City Manager. The total debt incurred
shall be secured by the developer by a letter of credit or other security
deemed acceptable to the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   No member of the Board of Commissioners may vote on a reimbursement
agreement if it is reasonably likely that the agreement or development would
have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the
member.
(Ord. 07-06-02, passed 6-12-07)
CHAPTER 6: CEMETERIES
Section
   
6-1.   City Manager to control
   
6-2.   Old cemetery discontinued
   
6-3.   Grave digging permit
   
6-4.   Grave opening fees
   
6-5.   Private sale of grave spaces authorized
   
6-6.   Planting of trees restricted
   
6-7.   Unlawful damage to cemetery property
   
6-8.   Deposits of filth
   
6-9.   Playing in cemetery
   
6-10.   Use as meeting place
   
6-11.   Discharge of firearms
   
6-12.   Vehicles
   
6-13.   Markers in Elmwood Cemetery
   
6-14.   Interments of animals
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority relative to cemeteries, see G.S. §§ 160A-341 through
160A-348
§ 6-1 CITY MANAGER TO CONTROL.
   The public cemetery of the city shall be under the control and management of
the City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 6-1)
§ 6-2 OLD CEMETERY DISCONTINUED.
   No further interments shall be allowed in the old cemetery on Hillsboro
Street or elsewhere in the city, except in Elmwood Cemetery or other cemetery
maintained by the city.
(`86 Code, § 6-2)
§ 6-3 GRAVE DIGGING PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, cause or permit to be dug
any grave on any plot or lot in Elmwood or other municipal cemetery without
permission from the City Manager.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the City Manager to grant a permit to any
person to dig a grave on any plot or lot of Elmwood or other municipal cemetery
which is not fully paid for or for which a deed has not been executed.
(`86 Code, § 6-3)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 6-4 GRAVE OPENING FEES.
   The fees to be paid to the city for the opening of graves in Elmwood
Cemetery shall be as established by resolution.
(`86 Code, § 6-4) (Ord. 80-6-1, passed 6-10-80)
§ 6-5 PRIVATE SALE OF GRAVE SPACES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Purchase of surplus grave spaces on cemetery lots owned by persons
wishing to sell same is authorized; provided, the owners can furnish sufficient
evidence that they are the true owners of the lots in question. The grave
spaces shall be purchased for the fee tied to resolution.
   (B)   The sale of grave spaces on lots where titles are questionable may be
sold by owners to purchasers willing to assume the risks involved in the
purchases. This section does not apply to lots sold with the restriction that
the lots be sold back to the city only.
(`86 Code, § 6-5)
§ 6-6 PLANTING OF TREES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No trees shall be planted in the cemetery lots or any curbing or
coping to be placed around the cemetery lots, except sides bordered by
driveways.
   (B)   The placing of curbing or coping around cemetery lots shall be done
only under the supervision of the City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 6-6)
§ 6-7 UNLAWFUL DAMAGE TO CEMETERY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break or in any other way
to damage or destroy any tree, shrub or plant, or wantonly damage or destroy
any flower, either wild or cultivated, in any cemetery or to deface any
tombstone, monument or building in any cemetery.
(`86 Code, § 6-7)
   (B)   The maximum penalty for violation of this section shall be no less
than $50 and no greater than $250. A penalty schedule, which may be amended
from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City Clerk.
(Am. Ord. 92-1-1, passed 1-14-92)
§ 6-8 DEPOSITS OF FILTH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited,
any filth or unclean or offensive substance in any cemetery.
(`86 Code, § 6-8)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 6-9 PLAYING IN CEMETERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any cemetery as a playground or
passageway.
(`86 Code, § 6-9)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 6-10 USE AS MEETING PLACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use any cemetery as a
meeting place.
(`86 Code, § 6-10)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 6-11 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in any cemetery
unless the same is done as a part of the burial or memorial ceremony.
(`86 Code, § 6-11)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 6-12 VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful to drive any motor or other vehicle upon or over any
lot, public or private, in any cemetery.
(`86 Code, § 6-12)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 6-13 MARKERS IN ELMWOOD CEMETERY.
   All markers placed in the new section of the Elmwood Cemetery lying south of
McClanahan Street and north of the Southern Railway right-of-way shall be
restricted to ground level markers and no marker shall be allowed to extend
above ground level in that section of Elmwood Cemetery.
(`86 Code, § 6-13)
§ 6-14 INTERMENTS OF ANIMALS.
   No interments of animals shall be allowed in Elmwood Cemetery or other
cemeteries maintained by the city.
(Ord. 96-2-1, passed 2-13-96)
CHAPTER 7: CIVIL DEFENSE AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
7-1.   State of emergency; curfew and the like authorized
   
7-2.   Operation of public shelters
Article II: Continuity of City Government
   
7-16.   Short title
   
7-17.   Definitions
   
7-18.   Designation and the like; interim successors
   
7-19.   Assumption of powers and duties; interim successors
   
7-20.   Recording and publication
   
7-21.   Formalities of taking office
   
7-22.   Quorum and vote requirements
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-1 STATE OF EMERGENCY; CURFEW AND THE LIKE AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times
of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety or
property.
   (B)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city
or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor of the city is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of a state of emergency and, in order more effectively to
protect the lives, safety and property of people within the city, to define and
impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to limit the application of a curfew
specifically designated and described within the corporate limits of the city
and to specific hours of the day or night, and to exempt from the curfew police
officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses and other classes of persons as may be
essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to
serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city.
   (D)   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency and curfew
as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Board.
   (E)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency when a curfew
has been imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to the curfew:
      (1)   To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon
public property unless in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity
or service necessary to sustain the well-being of himself or herself or his or
her family or some member thereof;
      (2)   To possess off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or
otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or
dangerous weapon of any kind;
      (3)   To sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind or to
possess or consume the same off one's own premises; and/or
      (4)   To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any
other flammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of
the curfew imposed.
(`86 Code, § 7-1)
   (F)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be no less than $50 and no greater than
$250. A penalty schedule,
which may be amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office
of the City Clerk.
(Am. Ord. 92-1-2, passed 1-14-92)
§ 7-2 OPERATION OF PUBLIC SHELTERS.
   (A)   In case of national emergency, public shelter managers appointed by
the Emergency Preparedness Director shall open shelters, take charge of all
stocks of food, water and other supplies stored in the shelters, admit the
public according to the shelter's operational plan as approved by the Emergency
Preparedness Director, take whatever control measures are necessary for the
protection and safety of the occupants and for turning over the shelter in good
condition to its lawful owner at termination of occupancy.
   (B)   Public shelter managers and their authorized deputies are authorized
to use whatever restraint is necessary against those who refuse to cooperate in
orderly entry into the shelter and with the routine of shelter living under
emergency conditions as set forth in the approved operation plan for the
shelter.
(`86 Code, § 7-2)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal emergency management, see G.S. § 166A-7
   North Carolina Emergency Management Act, see G.S. §§ 166A-1 et seq.
ARTICLE II: CONTINUITY OF CITY GOVERNMENT
§ 7-16 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Continuity of
Government Article of the City of Oxford, North Carolina.”
(`86 Code, § 7-16)
§ 7-17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTACK. Any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States
causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property
or persons in the United States in any manner by sabotage or by the use of
bombs, missiles, shell fire or atomic radiological, chemical, bacteriological
or biological means or other weapons or processes.
   DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY. A person who is presently authorized to perform all
of the functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of
an office in the event the office is vacant or at such times as it lacks
administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent
officer.
   EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR. A person designated pursuant to this article
for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office,
of a city officer in the event that the officer or any duly authorized deputy
is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office.
   UNAVAILABLE. Either a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy
authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the
office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office, including any deputy
exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a
vacancy, and his or her duly authorized deputy are absent or unable, for
physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the powers and discharge the
duties of the office.
(`86 Code, § 7-17)
§ 7-18 DESIGNATION AND THE LIKE; INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
   (A)   (1)   Within 30 days after first entering upon the duties of his or
her office, the Mayor and each member of the Board shall, in addition to any
duly authorized deputy, designate the number of emergency interim successors to
his or her office and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly
authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly authorized
deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof for the office.
      (2)   All actions taken under this section shall be approved by the Mayor
and Board.
   (B)   The Board shall, within the time specified in division (A) above, in
addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate for appointive officers
including the City Manager, Chief of Police, City Fire Chief, City Health
Officer, the City Clerk and Treasurer, the number of emergency interim
successors to these officers and specify their rank in order of succession
after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof for
each officer.
   (C)   The incumbent in the case of those elective officers specified in
division (A) above, and the Board, in the case of those appointive officers
specified in division (B) above, shall review and, as necessary, promptly
revise the designations of emergency interim successors or duly authorized
deputies or any combination thereof for each officer specified.
   (D)   No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim
successor unless he or she may, under the State Constitution and statutes and
the Charter or ordinances of the city, hold the office of the person to whose
powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed, but no provision of any
ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of the city from holding another
office shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor.
   (E)   A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that
designation at the pleasure of the designator; provided, that he or she must be
replaced if removed. He or she retains this designation as emergency interim
successor until replaced by another appointed by the authorized designator.
(`86 Code, § 7-18)
§ 7-19 ASSUMPTION OF POWERS AND DUTIES; INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
   (A)   If in the event of an attack any officer named in § 7-18(A) and (B)
and any duly authorized deputy is unavailable, his or her emergency interim
successor highest in rank in order of succession who is not unavailable shall,
except for the power and duty to appoint emergency interim successors, exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of the officer.
   (B)   An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and
discharge these duties only until the time as the lawful incumbent officer or
any duly authorized deputy or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in
order of succession exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers and
discharge of the duties of the office, or until, where an actual vacancy
exists, a successor is appointed to fill the vacancy or is elected and
qualified as provided by law.
(`86 Code, § 7-19)
§ 7-20 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION.
   The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy shall be filed with the City Clerk and each designation, replacement or
change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor shall become
effective when the designator files with the City Clerk the successor's name,
address and rank in order of succession. The City Clerk shall keep on file all
data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors and it
shall be open to public inspection.
(`86 Code, § 7-20)
§ 7-21 FORMALITIES OF TAKING OFFICE.
   At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take
the oath and do other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them to
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may
succeed.
(`86 Code, § 7-21)
§ 7-22 QUORUM AND VOTE REQUIREMENTS.
   In the event of an attack:
   (A)   Quorum requirements for the City Council shall be suspended.
   (B)   Where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members for
approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would otherwise be
required, the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be sufficient.
(`86 Code, § 7-22)
   Oxford - Fire Prevention and Protection
CHAPTER 8: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
8-1.   False alarms
   
8-2.   Interference with firefighters or protection equipment
Article II: Fire Department
   
8-21.   Duties of Fire Chief
   
8-22.   Power to summon aid
   
8-23.   Nonmember mounting truck
Article III: Fire Prevention and Protection Code
   
8-36.   Title
   
8-37.   Purpose and intent
   
8-38.   Adoption of technical codes and standards; copies on file
   
8-39.   Definitions
   
8-40.   Jurisdiction
   
8-41.   Fire official to enforce code
   
8-42.   Duties and authority of the fire official
   
8-43.   Applications and permits
   
8-44.   Fee schedules
   
8-45.   Wrongful denial or entry
   
8-46.   Obstructions and prohibited parking
   
8-47.   Fire hydrants
   
8-48.   Tank installation
   
8-49.   Bonfires and other outdoor fires
   
8-50.   Fireworks
   
8-51.   Hazardous chemicals; Right to Know Act
   
8-52.   Violations a misdemeanor
   
8-53.   Citations, stop work orders and penalties
   
8-54.   Other remedies
   
8-55.   Service of citations, orders and notices
   
8-56.   Refusal, denial or revocation of permit
Article IV: Fireworks
   
8-61.   Definition
   
8-62.   Exceptions
   
8-63   Permits for use at public exhibitions
Article V: Fire District Map
   
8-76.   Fire district map amendment
Article VI: Firefighting Services Outside City Limits; Industrial Storage
Buildings
   
8-81.   Fees for firefighting services outside city limits and for buildings
used for industrial service
   
8-82.   Cost recovery of motor vehicle accident expenses
Statutory reference:
   Fire protection force authorized, see G.S. § 160A-291
   Fire protection outside city limits, see G.S. § 160A-293
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-1 FALSE ALARMS.
   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire.
(`86 Code, § 8-1)
Statutory reference:
   False alarms, see G.S. § 14-286
§ 8-2 INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS OR PROTECTION EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a firefighter in the
discharge of his or her duties or with the reels, hose or other apparatus of
the Fire Department.
(`86 Code, § 8-2)
ARTICLE II: FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 8-21 DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to:
   (A)   Supervise and direct the extinguishing of fires;
   (B)   Preserve and safely keep all equipment of the Fire Department;
   (C)   Compel, when necessary, all officers of the city or other persons to
aid in the extinguishing of fire;
   (D)   Enforce all rules and ordinances relative to fire prevention;
   (E)   Perform all the duties, assigned to the Fire Inspector;
   (F)   Inspect all equipment of the Fire Department and report all needed
repairs to the Board; and
   (G)   Report all violations of any rules or ordinances.
(`86 Code, § 8-21)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of fire chief, see G.S. § 160A-292
§ 8-22 POWER TO SUMMON AID.
   During any fire, the Chief, his or her assistant, or the City Manager or
Mayor shall have power to call out all persons to assist in extinguishing the
same, in pulling down or blowing up any building, removing any goods or
furniture or other property from any building on fire or in danger of being set
on fire to some place of safety and to assist in making arrests. It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to obey any order.
(`86 Code, § 8-22)
§ 8-23 NONMEMBER MOUNTING TRUCK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the Fire Department,
to mount or ride on any fire truck or other apparatus of the Fire Department
while the same is going to or returning from a fire.
(`86 Code, § 8-23)
ARTICLE III: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION CODE
§ 8-36 TITLE.
   (A)   This article shall be known as the “Fire Prevention and Protection
Code of the City of Oxford, North Carolina,” and may be cited as such and
referred to herein as the “code.”
   (B)   The adoption of the code hereby repeals, replaces and voids any and
all other codes or ordinances previously adopted by the city with respect to
fire prevention.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-37 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this code to prescribe regulations consistent with
nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding of life and property
within the jurisdiction of the city from the hazards of fire and explosion
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices and from hazardous conditions in the use or occupancy of buildings
or premises.
   (B)   The code shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any
damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection
authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect or the permits issued or
denied as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
equipment authorized herein.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-38 ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL CODES AND STANDARDS; COPIES ON FILE.
   (A)   The Board of City Commissioners hereby adopts and incorporates the
State Building Code, Volume 1-A, Administration and Enforcement Requirements,
Volume V, Fire Prevention, and all appendixes of the volumes, into this Fire
Prevention and Protection Code of the city. In addition to all of the chapters
of Volume V, Fire Prevention, it is specifically noted that Chapter 4 is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Copies of this code and all
technical codes and standards adopted by reference, shall be filed with, and
made available for public inspection in the offices of the Clerk to the Board
of City Commissioners and the Fire Chief.
   (B)   Amendments to codes and standards adopted by reference herein which
are adopted and published by the State Building Code Council shall be effective
in the city at the time the amendments become a part of Volume 1A,
Administration and Enforcement Requirements, and Volume V, Fire Prevention, of
the State Building Code.
   (C)   All appendixes to this code are hereby adopted as part of this code.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-39 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION or FIRE OFFICIAL. The city's Fire
Chief or his or her officers.
      FIRE PREVENTION. Those services and actions undertaken to eliminate fire
hazards and perils, reduce the risk of occurrence of fire and passively protect
property and persons from damage and injury and reduce the extent of the same
in the event of fire.
      FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU. The City Fire Prevention Bureau.
      PERSON. Any and all individuals, owners, tenants, businesses,
associations, firms, groups, partnerships, joint ventures and corporations.
   (B)   Other words, phrases and terms used in this code to the extent
possible, shall be given the meaning set forth in Section 202 of Volume V, Fire
Prevention, of the State Building Code, as it may be from time to time amended.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-40 JURISDICTION.
   This code shall be applicable to all parts of the city.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-41 FIRE OFFICIAL TO ENFORCE CODE.
   The Fire Prevention and Protection Code of the city, state and federal laws
and ordinances as they pertain to fire
safety and fire prevention, shall be enforced by the Fire Chief and his or her
authorized representatives or as otherwise provided herein. The Fire Chief is
hereby authorized to promulgate rules, regulations and procedures necessary to
enforce this code.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-42 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE FIRE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to the limitations and conditions stated in the State
Building Code, it shall be the duty of the fire official to inspect or cause to
be inspected as often as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate all
buildings, structures, and premises, such as schools, churches, day care
facilities, commercial buildings, foster homes, group homes, nursing homes and
hospitals, within his or her jurisdiction, for the purposes of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any condition which may cause fire or explosion, or any
violations of the provisions of the code, or any other ordinances pertaining to
fire or explosion hazards. Inspections may be announced or unannounced.
Included in the fire official's power to inspect is the authority to take
photographs or video tapes of violations.
      (2)   The fire official shall make inspections of buildings,
institutions, facilities and premises required to be inspected by Volume V,
Fire Prevention, of the State Building Code and G.S. § 115C-525(b), based on
the following schedule:
         (a)   Once every year: hazardous, institutional, high rise, assembly
and residential, except one- and two-family dwellings and only interior common
areas of dwelling units of multi-family occupancies.
         (b)   Once every two years: educational, except public schools, and
industrial.
         (c)   Once every three years: business, mercantile, storage, churches
and synagogues.
         (d)   Twice every year: public and private schools.
      (3)   Frequency rates for inspections of occupancies as mandated by the
general statutes shall supersede the above schedule. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the fire official from conducting more frequent inspections than
the schedule listed above or any schedule promulgated by any state regulatory
agency.
   (B)   (1)   The fire official shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring in the city which is of a suspicious
nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons or when
circumstances warrant. The investigation shall begin immediately upon
occurrence of the fire. Any information obtained pursuant to any investigation
shall be confidential as authorized by law. The Police Department, upon request
of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized representatives, may render the
assistance as necessary in the investigation of any fire determined to be of
suspicious origin. The fire official's investigatory powers shall include the
right to take photographs or make video tapes of the scene.
      (2)   The fire official shall keep a record of all fires and of all the
facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of the fires
and damages caused thereby. All records shall be public, except those deemed
confidential by law. The fire official shall keep records of all reports of
alleged violations of this code.
   (C)   The fire official shall assist fire departments, schools, industries
and the general public in developing fire prevention programs. The fire
official shall also plan and conduct public fire prevention and safety
programs, answer public inquiries on fire prevention matters and speak before
clubs, societies, schools and other organizations on fire prevention and
safety.
   (D)   The fire official shall provide fire prevention advice to engineers,
architects and contractors responsible for the construction or alteration of
buildings. The fire official shall also review and approve building plans, site
plans, water distribution plans and all plans necessary for construction.
   (E)   The fire official shall require and evaluate applications and issue,
if approved, all permits for those conditions as prescribed in Volume V, Fire
Prevention, of the State Building Code and this code. The fire official may
refuse or deny the issuance of a permit if all of the conditions of the code or
other rules, regulations and procedures, promulgated by him or her, have not
been met.
   (F)   The fire official shall charge and collect the fees and penalties as
the Board of Commissioners may authorize and adopt as a part of this code. The
fire official shall also charge and bill users of services, any user fees
instituted and adopted by the Board of City Commissioners. Fees shall be due
and payable as provided by rules promulgated by the fire official.
   (G)   For the purpose of conducting inspections, responding to complaints
and making investigations pursuant to this code, the fire official and his or
her officers are hereby authorized to enter upon private premises, including
any building or other structure subject to this code, after obtaining the
consent of the owner or occupant. If consent to enter is withheld or denied by
the owner or occupant the fire official or his or her designated representative
shall seek an administrative inspection warrant. If consent to enter is
wrongfully withheld or denied, the fire official in addition to seeking an
administrative inspection warrant, is authorized to issue a monetary penalty
and/or initiate the issuance of a criminal summons.
   (H)   The city fire official or his or her authorized representatives shall
have the right to enter any building or premises without permission or warrant
in the event of any emergency situation constituting a threat to human life,
property or the public safety, for the purpose of eliminating, controlling or
abating the dangerous condition or situation.
   (I)   The city fire official shall have the authority to require the
designation of fire lanes. He or she shall also have authority to require
owners or occupants to erect all signs necessary to designate an area a fire
lane. Fire lanes shall be designated pursuant hereto.
   (J)   The city fire official or his or her officers shall have the authority
to remove any vehicle found obstructing any fire station, fire hydrant, fire
protection equipment or designated and marked fire lane.
   (K)   In enforcing this code, the fire official is authorized to issue
notices of violation, corrective or abatement orders, stop work orders,
citations and monetary penalties, to cause the issuance of criminal summons and
to seek injunctive relief from the Courts. The fire official shall have the
authority to summarily abate any condition that is in violation of any
provision of this code or Volume V, Fire Prevention, of the State Building Code
that prevents immediate fire hazard to life or property.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-43 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any activity, which
requires a permit as listed in Volume V, Fire Prevention, of the State Building
Code, shall obtain, complete and file an application with the fire official.
Failure to obtain, complete and file an application shall
constitute a violation of this code. The fire official is authorized to refuse,
deny or revoke any permit sought or granted for non-compliance or violation of
this article of the technical codes adopted herein by reference.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall maintain, store or handle materials or conduct
processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property or install
equipment used in connection with the activities without filing an application
and obtaining a permit as required by the fire official and prescribed in
Volume V, Fire Prevention, of the State Building Code and this code.
      (2)   Failure to file an application and obtain a permit shall constitute
a violation of this code. Before a permit may be issued, the fire official
shall approve the application, then inspect and approve the receptacles,
vehicles, buildings, structures, storage areas, devices, processes and
conditions related to the permit.
   (C)   Permits shall be renewed on or before the expiration date indicated on
the permit. The fire official may require the completion and filing of a new
application and inspection.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-44 FEE SCHEDULES.
   (A)   All persons engaging in or desiring to engage in any activity which
requires a permit or inspection may be subject to fees as identified in the
appendixes attached to Ord. 95-8-2. These fees may be changed from time to time
by the Board of City Commissioners.
   (B)   A current fee schedule shall be filed with the Clerk to the Board of
City Commissioners and the fire official for public inspection. All fees shall
be paid within the time specified in the billing or notice to make payment.
Failure to pay any and all fees shall constitute a violation of this code.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-45 WRONGFUL DENIAL OR ENTRY.
   (A)   For the purpose of conducting inspections, responding to complaints
and making investigations pursuant to this code, the fire official and his or
her officers must have access to buildings, facilities and premises which are
subject to this code.
   (B)   Any person who wrongfully and intentionally denies the fire official
or his or her officers, while in the exercise of duty, entrance or access to a
building, facility or the premises shall be in violation of this code.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-46 OBSTRUCTIONS AND PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be a violation of this code to obstruct, with a
vehicle, a fire hydrant, fire protection equipment or fire station.
      (2)   It shall also be a violation of this code to park a vehicle, at any
time, in a designated and marked fire lane. Any vehicle found obstructing any
fire hydrant, fire protection equipment or fire station, or parked in a
designated and marked fire lane may be removed or towed away by or under the
direction of the fire official or his or her officers to a storage area or
garage.
   (B)   The owner of the vehicle shall be deemed to have appointed the fire
official as his or her agent for the purpose of arranging for the
transportation and safe storage of the vehicle. The owner of the vehicle,
before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay all reasonable cost incidental
to the removal and storage of the vehicle due for violation of obstructing or
prohibited parking. The driver of the vehicle shall also be subject to a
citation and monetary penalty. Neither the fire official nor his or her
officers shall be held criminally or civilly liable in any way or manner for
any acts or omissions arising out of or caused by carrying out or enforcing any
of the provisions of this section, unless the conduct of the fire official or
his or her officers amounts to wanton misconduct or intentional wrong doing.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-47 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All premises where buildings or portions of buildings are located more
than 300 feet from a fire hydrant shall be provided with approved on-site fire
hydrants and water mains capable of supplying the water flow required by the
fire official. The location and number of on-site hydrants shall be designated
by the fire official, with the minimum arrangement being so as to have a
hydrant available for distribution of hose to any portion of any building on
the premises at distances not exceeding 300 feet.
   (B)   (1)   All fire hydrants shall be installed on water lines that are a
minimum of six-inches in diameter, wherever water main lines are reasonably
accessible as determined by the fire official. Fire hydrants are required in
business and multi-family dwelling areas and shall not be more than 600 feet
apart. Fire hydrants are also required in all one- and two-family dwelling
areas and the hydrants shall not be more than 600 feet apart.
      (2)   The placement of all hydrants is subject to the written approval of
the fire official, which must be obtained at the time or prior to the time the
building permit is issued.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-48 TANK INSTALLATION.
   (A)   (1)   Before any tank or lines for underground or aboveground storage
of volatile flammable or combustible liquids or any other hazardous material
covered by the provisions of Volume V, Fire Prevention, State Building Code or
this Code shall be installed, removed or retrofitted, a permit must be issued
and shall be granted only upon written application made to the fire official
setting forth therein the location, character, size and capacity of the tank or
lines, and the purpose for which it is to be used or removed and an agreement
that the applicant or user will conform to all the provisions of this code and
all other regulations then existing, and in case a pump is to be used in
connection therewith, the application shall state its location with respect to
the tanks and with respect to the property line.
      (2)   The fire official is hereby authorized to issue a stop work order
if work is performed before a permit has been issued. The person engaged in
installing, removing or retrofitting a tank or line shall cease work
immediately.
   (B)   (1)   The fire official shall have five working days to determine
whether the proposed tank or work on the line complies with the provisions of
this code, the ordinances of the city, and laws of the state and shall issue
the permit if he or she finds there is compliance. The fire official and
officials from other agencies that police the installation, removal or
retrofitting of tanks or lines shall have the right to inspect the tanks, lines
and appliances before and after installation, and see that its location,
installation and operation are in accordance with this code, the ordinances of
the city and laws of the state.
      (2)   After the tank and line is placed in the excavation, and fittings
and connections have been attached, thereto, and before it has been covered or
concealed from inspection, the applicant for the permit shall notify the fire
official and shall wait until the installation of the tank connections, lines
and fittings have been approved by the fire official before covering them.
      (3)   The fire official is hereby authorized to order the unearthing of
tanks or lines that have not been inspected pursuant to this section of the
code.
   (C)   (1)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this section shall
constitute a violation of this code.
      (2)   The owner of the property, the person performing the work and the
tenant of the premises may be separately and collectively cited for a violation
of this section of the code, irrespective of any contract between the parties.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-49 BONFIRES AND OTHER OUTDOOR FIRES.
   (A)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, rubbish fire or other
outdoor fire or authorize any fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit
or other proper authorization.
   (B)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, or rubbish fire or
other outdoor fire or authorize any fire to be kindled or maintained on any
land unless the location is not less than 100 feet from any structure and
adequate provisions are made to prevent fire from spreading to within 100 feet
of any structure or other property.
   (C)   Any person who receives a permit to burn must notify all surrounding
property owners who meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Who own property within a 100-foot radius from the location of the
proposed burning; and
      (2)   Who own an occupied dwelling is located on the aforementioned
property.
   (D)   Bonfires, rubbish fires or other outdoor fires shall be constantly
attended by a competent person until the fire is extinguished. The person shall
have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire extinguishing
equipment readily available for use.
   (E)   The fire official or the Police Department may prohibit any or all
bonfires, rubbish fires and other outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or
local circumstances make the fires hazardous.
   (F)   Opening burning of leaves, tree branches or yard trimmings originating
on the premises of private residences may be burned on the premises, pursuant
to the above regulations, only if no public curbside pickup service is
available.
   (G)   (1)   A permit must be obtained from the Division of Forest Resources,
if the fire is in or within 500 feet of woodlands, as defined by G.S. § 113-57,
or more than 100 feet from a structure.
      (2)   The fire is to burn during the hours of midnight and 4:00 p.m.
   (H)   (1)   If any outdoor burning or smoke from the burning shall cause a
nuisance the fire official or the Police Department shall order that the
burning be extinguished. Whether an outdoor burning constitutes a nuisance is
in the sole discretion of the fire official or police officer called to the
scene.
      (2)   Burning permits shall be denied if the burning is within 300 feet
of a dwelling occupied by a person with a certified medical problem which can
be aggravated by smoke.
      (3)   As an exception to the aforementioned provisions, a burning permit
may be issued only if all individuals with certified medical problems and who
live within 300 feet of the proposed burning, consent in writing.
      (4)   Written consent must be obtained each time a separate burning
occurs.
   (I)   Any burning permitted under this section shall not be commenced and
shall be immediately terminated, upon declaration of an alert warning or
emergency stage of an air pollution episode when proclaimed by the Fire
Department or any other federal or state regulatory agency.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-50 FIREWORKS.
   In addition to the rules and regulations stated in Chapter 20 of Volume 5,
Fire Prevention, of the State Building Code, which is hereby adopted by
reference, the Board of City Commissioners herein adopts the following
provisions.
   (A)   The fire official is hereby granted the authority, given to the Board
of City Commissioners, by G.S. § 14-413, to issue permits for use of
pyrotechnics (fireworks) within the city.
   (B)   No person shall engage in the use of pyrotechnics without first
completing an application and obtaining a permit from the fire official ten
days in advance of the use. The names and addresses of all operators must
appear on the application and they must be approved by the fire official before
any display or use of the pyrotechnics.
   (C)   The fire official shall issue the permit after all requirements of
Chapter 20 of Volume 5, Fire Prevention, of the State Building Code have been
met, the appropriate fees paid and the applicant has posted a bond or
certificate of insurance. The bond or certificate of insurance shall be in the
amount of at least $1,000,000 to cover damages to real or personal property and
an additional $1,000,000 to cover damages for personal injuries.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-51 HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS; RIGHT TO KNOW ACT.
   The fire official is hereby designated and empowered with authority to act
as the “Fire Chief,” as defined in the Hazardous Chemicals Right to Know Act,
G.S. § 95-173 et seq. As such, the fire official shall do and perform all acts
and functions required by the Act, which shall also include local enforcement.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-52 VIOLATIONS A MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   A violation of this chapter, which includes the technical codes and
standards adopted herein by reference, is punishable as a misdemeanor and shall
subject the offender to a maximum fine of $500 or imprisonment for not more
than 30 days.
   (B)   Each day the violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense for the purpose of the prosecution.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-53 CITATIONS, STOP WORK ORDERS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The fire official and any fire prevention inspector employed in
his or her office are authorized as public officials to investigate violations
of this chapter and, upon a determination that a violation has occurred, issue
citations, stop work orders and monetary penalties.
      (2)   The fire official shall include written procedures, in rules he or
she is authorized to promulgate pursuant to this chapter, for investigating
violations, issuing citations, issuing stop work orders and collecting
penalties.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter, which includes the technical codes and
standards adopted herein by reference, shall subject the offender to the
issuance of a citation, a stop work order, and the assessment of a penalty in
an amount set forth in Ord. 95-8-2. These penalty amounts may be changed from
time to time by the Board of City Commissioners. Penalties assessed shall be
paid to the City Finance Department within 30 days after the offender has been
cited for the violation. Each day the violation continues to exist shall
constitute a separate offense for the purpose of assessing a penalty. The fire
official may file a civil action to collect an outstanding penalty or the fire
official may initiate the issuance of a criminal summons for the person's
failure to pay the penalty.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-54 OTHER REMEDIES.
   (A)   This code may be enforced by any other remedy at law or equity which
the city is authorized to pursue, to include actions in the General Court of
Justice for injunctive relief, other remedies authorized in G.S. § 160A-175 and
remedies authorized in the Fire Prevention Code. The penalties, criminal
prosecution and other remedies provided in this code are cumulative and not
exclusive, and may be independently and separately pursued against the same
person for the activity constituting violation of this code. The enforcement of
any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other
remedy or remedies in other provisions of this code or other laws and
regulations.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent the fire official from seeking criminal
arrest warrants for violations of this code and the technical codes and
standards adopted herein by reference.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-55 SERVICE OF CITATIONS, ORDERS OR NOTICES.
   (A)   The service of citations, orders or notices for the
correction of violations of the code shall be made upon an owner, occupant,
manager, plant executive or other person responsible for the conditions, either
by personally delivering a copy of same to the person or by delivering the same
to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises or by sending a
copy of the citation, order or notice by certified or registered mail to the
owner's last known address. Any citation issued pursuant to § 8-45 may be
affixed to the vehicle obstructing or illegally parked.
   (B)   When building or other premises are occupied by one other than the
owner under a lease or other agreement, the citation, order or notice issued to
correct violations of the code shall apply to the occupant thereof; provided
that where the citation, order or notice requires the making of additions to or
changes in the premises which may become part of the real property of the
owner, then in such cases, the citation, order or notice shall also be issued
to the owner of the premises or real property. Failure to deliver a citation,
order or notice to the owner, if other than the occupant, shall not invalidate
the citation, order or notice.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
§ 8-56 REFUSAL, DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   An owner may appeal the fire official's refusal, denial or revocation
of a permit to the Board of City Commissioners. Written notice of appeal shall
be mailed or delivered to the fire official's office and to the Clerk to the
Board of City Commissioners.
   (B)   The Board of City Commissioners or a committee designated by the Board
to hear these appeals shall hear the appeal within 20 days from receiving the
notice of appeal.
   (C)   The owner may appeal the Board or Committee's final decision to the
County Superior Court within ten days of receiving the final written decision.
(Ord. 95-8-2, passed 8-8-95)
ARTICLE IV: FIREWORKS
§ 8-61 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PYROTECHNICS. Any and all kinds of fireworks and explosives which are used
for exhibitions or amusement purposes.
(`86 Code, § 8-61)
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks, see G.S. §§ 14-410 et seq.
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 14-414
§ 8-62 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this article shall prevent the manufacture, purchase, sale,
transportation and use of explosives or signaling flares used in the course of
ordinary business or industry, or shells or cartridges used as ammunition in
firearms. This article shall not apply to the sale, use or possession of
explosive caps designed to be fired in toy cap pistols, provided, that the
explosive mixture of explosive caps shall not exceed twenty-five hundredths of
a grain for each cap.
(`86 Code, § 8-62)
§ 8-63 PERMITS FOR USE AT PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the Board may
issue permits for use of pyrotechnics in connection with the conduct of public
exhibitions, such as fairs, carnivals, shows of all descriptions and public
exhibitions, but only after satisfactory evidence is produced to the effect
that the pyrotechnics will be used only for those purposes.
(`86 Code, § 8-65)
ARTICLE V: FIRE DISTRICT MAP
§ 8-76 FIRE DISTRICT MAP AMENDMENT.
   The 1925 primary fire district map shall be amended to exclude the Winston
and Williams office building and land parcel on W. Spring Street and 122 Wall
Street from the Primary Fire District.
(Ord. 00-6-1, passed 6-6-00; Am. Ord. 02-09-02, passed 9-10-02)
ARTICLE VI: FIREFIGHTING SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS; INDUSTRIAL STORAGE
BUILDINGS
§ 8-81 FEES FOR FIREFIGHTING SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS AND FOR BUILDINGS
USED FOR INDUSTRIAL STORAGE.
   (A)   Contracts. The city will contract with industries outside the city
limits and with owners of buildings rented for industrial storage purposes, for
the furnishing of fire firefighting services furnished by the City of Oxford
Fire Department.
   (B)   Service area. The services will be provided in the area generally
within the zoning jurisdiction of the city which is approximately a one-mile
radius around the city limits; and generally not more than three miles from the
fire department quarters in a straight line distance.
   (C)   Fees. 
      (1)   The fire charges shall be based on the ad valorem tax listing of
the properties served based on the preceding year’s valuations and applied on a
calendar year basis as follows.
      (2) Outside industrial firefighting fees are increased to a flat $.15 per
$100 valuation to be phased in over a three-year period as follows:
         (a)   Calendar year 1997:
            1.   Category II: $.06 to $.09
            2.   Category I: $.09 to $.11
         (b)   Calendar year 1998:
            1.   Category II: $.09 to $.12
            2.   Category I: $.11 to $.13
         (c)   Calendar year 1999:
            1.   Category II: $.12 to $.15
            2.   Category I: $.13 to $.15
         (d)   Category I are values to $10,000,000 and Category II are values
over $10,000,000.
   (D)   Continuity of service. All existing services will be continued pending
execution of new contracts to be effective on an annual basis beginning January
1, 1989, with a deadline of February 10, 1989 as the cutoff date for any
service users that elect not to continue the service.
   (E)   Service for new users. In the event new users desire to be served the
rate will be based on an estimated valuation subject to the approval of the
city and the Oxford Fire Company (pro-rated on the calendar year).
   (F)   Definition.  INDUSTRY. A person, firm, or corporation engaged in the
processing or manufacturing or products for wholesale distribution. A
manufacturing concern that has a retail outlet is not disqualified for these
rates.
(Ord. 88-12-1, passed 12-29-88; Am. Ord. 96-6-3, passed 6-11-96)
§ 8-82 COST RECOVERY OF MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT EXPENSES.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. The City of Oxford is duly organized as a
municipality under the laws of the State of North Carolina. Pursuant to the
authority granted to it by the North Carolina General Statutes and its Charter,
the City of Oxford Fire Department provides fire suppression, fire rescue, fire
safety services and other related services in connection with motor vehicle
accidents which occur in the city limits, service area and in conjunction with
various mutual aid agreements with neighboring municipalities. In consideration
of providing these services, the city has desires to establish a policy which
provides for the payment of compensation for said services in order to defer
the costs to the city thereof.
   (B)   Definition of services. The city will seek compensation for the cost
of services provided by the City of Oxford Fire Department, which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following services:
      (1)   Scene and safety control at motor vehicle accidents;
      (2)   Disentanglement operations and assistance with extrication from
vehicles;
      (3)   Fluid mitigation at motor accidents;
      (4)   Fire prevention or suppression at motor vehicle accidents;
      (5)   Hazard mitigation operations arising at motor vehicle accident
scenes;
      (6)   Public utility stand-by services arising from motor vehicle
accidents;
      (7)   Pipeline rupture stand-by arising from motor vehicle accidents;
      (8)   Destruction of city-owned property caused by motor vehicle
accidents; and
      (9)   Any other service provided by the Oxford Fire Department that is
reasonably related to or caused by a motor vehicle accident.
   (C)   Reimbursable expense. Upon adoption of this section the Board of
Commissioners shall be authorized to review and establish the reimbursable
charges for the services provided pursuant to this section.
   (D)   Explanation of charges.
      (1)   Command and control scene safety. This service involves the
establishment of a incident command center to coordinate the positioning of
fire apparatus and any responding emergency service personnel or vehicles so as
to protect and secure the motor vehicle accident scene from other traffic and
deny entry into the scene of unauthorized personnel. This service also involves
mitigation and control of any gasoline or other fluids. Patient care is the
responsibility of emergency medical service personnel who may be assisted by
Oxford Fire Department personnel.
      (2)   Disentanglement/extrication. This service involves the removal of
an injured person from a motor vehicle and could involve forcible entry into a
damaged vehicle. This service could also include removal of an injured or
helpless person involved in an, industrial accidents, confined spaces, below
grade rescues, or even high angle rescues and may involve the use of ropes,
ladder devices, air monitoring equipment, self-contained breathing apparatus,
hydraulic equipment, shoring, saws, cribbing, air bags or other emergency
service materials and equipment.
      (3)   Fire suppression. Fire suppression involves the use of fire
department personnel have to contain or extinguish a fire and can include the
laying of hose lines and positioning a hand line for the protection of
individuals who may be exposed to fire, smoke, or leaking fluids that result
from a motor vehicle accident or other emergency.
      (4)   Hazard mitigation. This service involves the use of fire department
personnel to control, mitigate or otherwise manage, any hazardous substances
via containment or absorption with pads for carbon-based substances like gas or
oil, or removal via pads and sand or other means permitted by DENR (Department
of Environmental and Natural Resources). Hazard mitigation services could be as
a result of a motor vehicle accident or as a result of an industrial or other
accident. The mitigation of all hazardous material and substances must be done
in conjunction or compliance with DENR and EPA regulations then in effect.
   (D)   Billing procedures, considerations for write-off, and reimbursable
expenses.
      (1)   Bills will be mailed to insurance companies of the negligent party
within 48 hours after the city submits a completed report.
      (2)   Follow-up and additional billings will occur at reasonable
intervals designed to ensure compliance with this section.
      (3)   Denial of a claim for reimbursement and compensation may be charged
off or sent to collections within the discretion and approval of the City
Manager.
      (4)   Reimbursable expenses and compensation charged for cost recovery
are defined in the City of Oxford Budget Ordinance.
   (E)   Administration and enforcement. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk
and the City Manager to effectively pursue the requirements of this section for
payment of services rendered by the Fire Department as specifically outlined
above.
(Ord. 09-02-10, passed 9-14-10)
CHAPTER 9: GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RECYCLING
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
9-1.   Littering
   
9-2.   Accumulation of rubbish prohibited
   
9-3.   Unauthorized use of dumpster or trash receptacle
   
9-4.   Pilfering or rummaging through commercial containers
Article II: Collection and Disposal
   
9-16.   Receptacles generally
   
9-17.   Maintenance and placement of containers
   
9-18.   Replacement of receptacles unfit for use
   
9-19.   Receptacles to be kept free of water and other liquids
   
9-20.   Loose paper and similar materials
   
9-21.   Fluorescent lighting bulbs and broken glass
   
9-22.   Animals and animal wastes
   
9-23.   Ashes
   
9-24.   Leaves
   
9-25.   Building rubbish
   
9-26.   Yard trimmings
   
9-27.   Rates and charges
   
9-28.   Residential point of collection and storage
Article III: Payment Provisions; Utility Termination
   
9-40.   Partial payment and utility termination
Article IV: Landfills
   
9-60.   Landfill charges; remodeling
Article V: Garbage Collection
   
9-75.   Required service
   
9-76.   Collection fee
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide trash and garbage collection service, see G.S. § 160A-
192
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 9-1 LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall throw, scatter, spill or place or intentionally or
recklessly cause to be blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or placed or otherwise
dispose of any litter upon any public property or private property not owned by
him or her within the city or in the waters of the state including, but not
limited to any public highway, public park, beach, campground, forest land,
recreational area, trailer park, highway, road, street or alley, except:
      (1)   When the property is designated by the state or city for the
disposal of garbage and refuse and the person is authorized to use the property
for the purpose; or
      (2)   Into a litter receptacle in a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the private or public property or waters.
   (B)   When litter is so blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or placed from a
vehicle or watercraft, the operator thereof shall be presumed to have committed
the offense. This presumption, however, does not apply to a vehicle
transporting agricultural products or supplies when the litter from that
vehicle is a nontoxic biodegradable agricultural product or supply.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LITTER. Any rubbish, waste material, cans, refuse, garbage, trash,
debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description.
   VEHICLE. Defined as in G.S. § 20-4.01(49).
      WATERCRAFT.  Any boat or vessel used for transport upon or across the
water.
(`86 Code, § 9-1)
   (D)   The maximum penalty for violating this section shall be no less than
$50 and no greater than $250. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, is on record in the office of the City Clerk.
(Am. Ord. 92-1-3, passed 1-14-92)
§ 9-2 ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH PROHIBITED.
   All owners, proprietors or persons in charge of every business house,
including all factories, mills, stables, hotels, depots, offices and private
residences and all other houses, buildings or premises shall keep the same free
from all empty and unused boxes, wastepaper, ashes and all other rubbish and
all other things not kept for sale.
(`86 Code, § 9-2)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 9-3 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DUMPSTER OR TRASH RECEPTACLE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LIMITED USE DUMPSTER OR TRASH RECEPTACLE. Any dumpster or other trash
receptacle placed and intended for deposit of garbage, trash and other
materials only by residents of immediately surrounding apartment or residential
units or by employees of immediately surrounding business establishments, and
which is emptied on a regular basis by the city or its contractor.
      UNAUTHORIZED PERSON. Any person who is neither a resident or guest of a
resident of an apartment or residential unit in immediate proximity to a
limited use dumpster or trash receptacle, as defined above, nor an employee of
a business establishment in immediate proximity to a dumpster or receptacle.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deposit garbage,
trash or any other materials in any limited use dumpster or trash receptacle
located within the corporate limits of the city.
(`86 Code, § 9-3) (Ord. 83-6-1, passed 6-21-83)
   (C)   The penalty for violation of this section shall be no less than $50
and no greater than $250. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be amended
from time to time, is on record in the office of the City Clerk.
(Am. Ord. 92-1-4, passed 1-14-92; Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-4 PILFERING OR RUMMAGING THROUGH COMMERCIAL CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner or lessee, to
rummage through or pilfer from any deposit in any commercial garbage container.
(`86 Code, § 9-4)
Penalty, see § 1-99
ARTICLE II: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 9-16 RECEPTACLES GENERALLY.
   (A)   All occupied homes within the city limits shall be provided with roll
out trash containers by the city or its contractor for garbage and recycling
and shall place garbage and recycling in the appropriate container.
   (B)   Where refuse accumulates at stores, hotels, motels, apartment houses,
theaters, office buildings and similar places in quantities of more than 100
gallons, the owners may be required to use a container made and designed to
meet all standard requirements of a dumpmaster or Dempster dumpster-type
container, where the City Manager or designated representative sees the
necessity for it. The City Manager or his or her designated representative will
determine which type and size of container shall be used.
(`86 Code, § 9-16) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-17 MAINTENANCE AND PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.
All roll-out containers or dumpsters used for storage and collection of
garbage, trash, or similar material shall be kept clean, with covers on, and
maintained in good condition and repair by the owner or user thereof, and shall
be subject to inspection and approval or condemnation by the City Manager or
his or her designated representative. Dumpsters shall be kept in a place easily
accessible to city or private hoist trucks at all times, and no service shall
be given to those places permitting objects, obstructions, or vehicles to
hinder the servicing of the containers by the hoist trucks.
(`86 Code, § 9-17) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-18 REPLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES UNFIT FOR USE.
   (A)   Garbage receptacles provided by the city or its contractor shall be
maintained in good repair by residents and businesses at all times. Receptacles
which have deteriorated to the extent that they are unserviceable shall be
considered unsuitable.
   (B)   Any person failing to comply with this section will be served with a
notice by the City Manager or his or her agent in person or by first class
mail.
   (C)   The notice shall serve to notify the person that the above requirement
has not been met.
   (D)   The city will provide appropriate containers but when repeated loss or
destruction occurs, the city will charge the responsible homeowner/renter or
business to replace the container. This charge will be added to the utility
bill and include the cost of the container(s) plus a $25 processing fee per
container.
(86 Code, § 9-18) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-19 RECEPTACLES TO BE KEPT FREE OF WATER AND OTHER LIQUIDS.
   The users or owners of all receptacles and/or bulk containers in which
garbage and/or waste material is placed for collection shall keep the
receptacles and/or bulk containers free of water or other excessive liquids.
(`86 Code, § 9-19)
§ 9-20 LOOSE PAPER AND SIMILAR MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, place or cause to be
placed for collection by city collection crews or private collection agencies,
any loose paper or similar material in any receptacles or containers other than
regulation recycling receptacles or bulk containers, as defined in this
chapter.
(`86 Code, § 9-20) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 9-21 FLUORESCENT LIGHTING BULBS AND BROKEN GLASS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, place or cause to be
placed fluorescent lighting bulbs or broken glass of any kind in any garbage or
trash receptacle, without first having securely wrapped and completely covered
the material so as to prevent injury from the broken edges thereof.
(`86 Code, § 9-21)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 9-22 ANIMALS AND ANIMAL WASTES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow, place or cause to be
placed, in any garbage, trash, or recycling receptacle or bulk container, any
animals, parts of animals or animal waste of any kind whatsoever, except that
which constitutes garbage.
(`86 Code, § 9-22) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 9-23 ASHES.
   Cold ashes may be mixed with garbage in the same container. Hot ashes shall
not be placed in containers issued by the city or its conractor.
(`86 Code, § 9-23) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-24 LEAVES.
   Leaves shall be placed in piles immediately back of the street curb or
drainage ditch during leaf season (October 15 through January 15) but must be
placed in clear bags or boxes during other times.
(`86 Code, § 9-24) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-25 BUILDING RUBBISH.
   Building materials or refuse from any building, remodeling or repair
operations or any landscaping work or any household appliances or similar items
will not be removed from the site or curb by the city. All materials of this
nature shall be removed by the business, person or other entity who performed
the work or by the property owner. If said materials or debris are not removed
from the curb within six days of written notice from the city, the property
owner will be assessed a fine of $100 per day until removed which will be added
to their utility bill.
(`86 Code, § 9-25) (Am. Ord. 01-8-3, passed 8-14-01; Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed
7-12-11)
§ 9-26 YARD TRIMMINGS.
   (A)   The city will remove all limbs, brush, logs, stumps, tree trimmings
and related materials provided that the same are cut in lengths not to exceed
four feet where the same are in excess of two inches in diameter and provided
that the same are placed immediately back of the street curb or drainage and
are of a size and shape that removal can be made by one person.
   (B)   The city will not remove limbs, brush, logs, stumps, tree trimmings or
related materials exceeding four feet in length or associated with the removal
of an entire tree. Removal of these items shall be the sole responsibility of
the property owner. If the materials or debris are not removed within 15 days
of deposit, the same will be removed by the city, at the property owner’s
expense, at the rate of $25 for the first 15 minute period or portion thereof
and each subsequent 15 minute period the city force works removing the yard
trimmings. The Street Superintendent will be responsible for maintaining an
accurate accounting of the time. All work time will be rounded up to the
nearest 15 minute increment. The property owner will be invoiced for this
amount and the same shall be paid within 30 days of the billing date. Failure
to pay the invoice within the prescribed time period will result in water shut-
off to the residence.
   (C)   The city will not remove any trees, limbs, brush, logs, stumps, tree
trimmings and related materials from any lot on which a residence is not built.
The city will also not remove any such materials from a lot prior to a
residence being built thereon. Removal of these items is solely the
responsibility of the property owner.
(`86 Code, § 9-26) (Am. Ord. 01-8-3, passed 8-14-01; Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed
7-12-11; Am. Ord. 12-07-01, passed 7-10-12)
§ 9-27 RATES AND CHARGES.
   The fees that shall be paid to the city for garbage and trash collection
service shall be as established time to time by resolution.
(`86 Code, § 9-27) (Am. Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
§ 9-28 RESIDENTIAL POINT OF COLLECTION AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Residential point of collection for garbage, trash, and recycling
service shall be deemed curbside, no later than 6:00 a.m. EST and must be
removed back to the house by 9:00 p.m., on scheduled service day for all
service points with the exception of the following: aged, feeble, or
handicapped residents for whom it would be impractical or difficult to
transport the container to curbside, shall be serviced from an easily
accessible point adjacent to their home. In no case shall the city or its agent
be requested to enter garages, carports, on decks, and the like for the
collection of exempted back door solid waste collection. The resident shall
complete art approved application for back door service verifying the sole
residency (or physical impairment of ALL residents of the residence) and
physical impairment per the agreed upon request for back door pickup, thus
qualifying them for back door collection. The city also agrees to work to
minimize the number of back door collection accounts by offering various sized
roll-out carts to said residents as described as aged, feeble, or handicapped.
   (B)   If a resident’s roll-out cart is not out when the garbage or recycling
vehicle comes to pick it up on collection day and the resident is unable to
wait until the following week for garbage and two weeks for recycling, a $15
service call-back fee is available to empty the container on a day that is not
the regularly scheduled service day.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful if garbage, trash, or recycling roll-out
containers are not placed back to the house by 9:00 p.m. for storage. If the
carts are left out after 9:00 p.m. on the scheduled service day, a one time
courtesy letter will be sent to all new accounts reminding the resident or
business that the container must be removed from the curb by 9:00 p.m. on the
scheduled service day. If roll out cart remains on the curb for five days after
this letter is sent, a $25 fee will be assessed and placed on the utility bill.
If the container is not rolled back to the house by 9:00 p.m. on subsequent
scheduled service days a $25 fee will be assessed and placed on the utility
bill after verification by a city employee.
(Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
ARTICLE III: PAYMENT PROVISIONS; UTILITY TERMINATION
§ 9-40 PARTIAL PAYMENT AND UTILITY TERMINATION.
   (A)   The city’s Water and Sanitation Utilities bill has multiple public
enterprise utility services listed for payment. These include water, sewer,
garbage, sprinkler, and pollution control. When only partial payment is made
and a customer does not pay the service charges for all the utilities on the
bill, the partial payment will be applied to the respective service charges in
the following order: delinquent solid waste (garbage) charges, first;
stormwater (pollution control) charges, second; and then to all other city
utility service charges.
   (B)   Solid waste (garbage) service charges are due at the collection office
in City Hall within the time period stated on the bill. Bills not paid within
this time shall be charged a late fee as set forth in the adopted fee schedule.
   (C)   In the event that solid waste (garbage) service charges and delinquent
fees are not paid on or before the cut off date, city water utility services
shall be discontinued.
   (D)   In hardship cases the Finance Director can provide a two-month payment
arrangement. The bill must be paid in full at the end of this agreement or city
water utility services will be discontinued. In order to be eligible for this
payment arrangement the customer shall not have been disconnected in the last
12 months. This arrangement can only be considered once a year.
(Ord. 07-11-01, passed 7-12-11)
ARTICLE IV: LANDFILLS
§ 9-60 LANDFILL CHARGES; REMODELING.
   Any materials relating to remodeling buildings be prohibited insofar as
charges against the city by individuals taking them out to the county landfill
and that all building contractors and business people, including service
people, roofers and others be required to pay the landfill charges.
(Ord. 94-1-1, passed 1-11-94)
ARTICLE V: GARBAGE COLLECTION
§ 9-75 REQUIRED SERVICE.
   All city single-family/residential properties are required to use the
collection service provided by the city, and use a covered garbage can to
deposit all garbage and refuse.
(Ord. 09-06-02, passed 6-9-09)
§ 9-76 COLLECTION FEE.
   The garbage fee shall be collected in a manner and on terms set forth by the
city and/or in the contract with the collection service provider. Each customer
for whom the city collects garbage shall pay to the city a collection fee as
set forth by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 09-03-03, passed 3-10-09)
CHAPTER 10: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
10-1.   County Health Officer; general authority
   
10-2.   Right of entry to inspect and investigate conditions
   
10-3.   Hindering or obstructing
   
10-4.   Liability; duty of owner or occupant of premises
   
10-5.   Discharging industrial waste into streams; drainage area
Article II: Mosquito Control
   
10-26.   Definition
   
10-27.   Health Officer's right of entry
   
10-28.   Presumption of violation
   
10-29.   Breeding places prohibited
   
10-30.   Methods of abatement
   
10-31.   Abatement by city
Article III: Rat Control
   
10-51.   Authority of Health Officer
   
10-52.   Business buildings
   
10-53.   Feed bins and food containers
   
10-54.   Elevation of storage racks for lumber, boxes and the like
Article IV: Weeds and Noxious Growth
   
10-71.   Prohibition
   
10-72.   Removal generally
   
10-72.1   Notice to landowners
   
10-73.   Removal by city
Article V: Visual Blight as a Nuisance
   
10-81.   Duty of owners and occupants of premises; generally
Cross-reference:
   Deposits of filth, see §
6-8
   Garbage and Refuse, see
Ch. 9
   Pollution of water, see §
12-11
   Unsafe structures, see §§
5-81 through
5-92
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10-1 COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER; GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The County Health Officer may enter upon and inspect all premises
within the city to see that the same are kept in a sanitary condition, and in a
safe condition from fire hazard.
   (B)   (1)   He or she may notify the owners of property and require them to
remedy any unlawful conditions which he or she may observe or see on or about
the premises. The notice shall be given to the owner or to the person in charge
of the property.
      (2)   The officer shall have authority and power, in a lawful manner to
cause the owner or occupant of the premises to remedy the conditions or be
prosecuted. He or she shall be entitled to wear and exhibit a badge as special
officer.
(`86 Code, § 10-1)
§ 10-2 RIGHT OF ENTRY TO INSPECT AND INVESTIGATE CONDITIONS.
   The County Health Officer or any of his or her assistants shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any premises for the purpose of making
the inspections or investigations as required by this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 10-2)
§ 10-3 HINDERING OR OBSTRUCTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the County
Health Officer or any of his or her assistants in the lawful discharge of their
duties.
(`86 Code, § 10-3)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 10-4 LIABILITY; DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF PREMISES.
   The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building or premises where
there shall be a nuisance or any violation of any ordinance of the city
relating to health and sanitation shall be jointly and severally liable
therefor and may be required to abate the same or comply with the order of the
County Health Officer or his or her assistants within the specified time within
the order.
(`86 Code, § 10-4)
§ 10-5 DISCHARGING INDUSTRIAL WASTE INTO STREAMS; DRAINAGE AREA.
   For complete information on discharging industrial waste into streams and
drainage areas, reference
Chapter 21: Water, Sewers and Sewer Disposal, Article IV: Sewer Use Ordinance.
An updated copy of the Sewer Use Ordinance is on file with the City Clerk and
the City Engineer.
(Am. Ord. 92-1-5, passed 1-14-92; Am. Ord. 15-01- 02, passed 1-13-15)
ARTICLE II: MOSQUITO CONTROL
§ 10-26 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COLLECTION OF WATER. Those contained in ditches, pools, ponds (natural or
artificial), excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults,
fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse
troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective
house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar containers.
(`86 Code, § 10-26)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal authority to abate public health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193
§ 10-27 HEALTH OFFICER'S RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the Health
Officer or his or her duly authorized agent may, at all reasonable times, enter
in and upon any premises within the city.
(`86 Code, § 10-27)
§ 10-28 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION.
   The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall
be evidence that mosquitoes are there, and failure to prevent the breeding
within three days after notice by the Health Officer shall be deemed a
violation of this article.
(`86 Code, § 10-28)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 10-29 BREEDING PLACES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the
city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or
are likely to breed unless the collection of water is treated so as to
effectually prevent the breeding.
(`86 Code, § 10-29)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 10-30 METHODS OF ABATEMENT.
   The method of treatment of any collection of water directed toward the
prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, shall be approved by the Health Officer,
and may be one or more of the following:
   (A)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way
or with any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress
of mosquitoes;
   (B)   Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together
with their thorough drying or cleaning;
   (C)   Using an approved larvicide applied under the direction of the Health
Officer;
   (D)   Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum
or paraffin oil once every seven days;
   (E)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other
obstructions and stocking with mosquito destroying fish;
   (F)   Proper disposal by the removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes,
broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water; and
   (G)   Effective drainage of all impounded water in ditches, pools, ponds,
excavations, holes, depressions and marshes.
(`86 Code, § 10-30)
§ 10-31 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   Should the person responsible for the condition giving rise to the breeding
of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same,
within three days after due notice has been given to him or her, the city is
hereby authorized to do so and all necessary costs incurred by it for this
purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person
responsible.
(`86 Code, § 10-31)
ARTICLE III: RAT CONTROL
§ 10-51 AUTHORITY OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   The Health Officer may make unannounced inspections of the interior
and exterior of business buildings as, in his or her opinion, may be necessary
to determine full compliance with this article.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall make periodic inspections of all rat-proofed
buildings to determine evidence of rat-infestation and the existence of new
breaks or leaks in their rat-proofing.
   (C)   Whenever evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or openings
through which rats may again enter business buildings, the Health Officer shall
serve the owner or owners with notices and orders to abate the conditions found
and a failure to remedy the conditions within three days after notice shall be
deemed a misdemeanor.
(`86 Code, § 10-51)
§ 10-52 BUSINESS BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In the interest of the public health and to prevent the spread of
typhus fever and other rat-borne diseases and infections all business buildings
within the city shall be made rat-proof in order to prevent entry of rats into
and upon the premises and business buildings and the same shall be kept and
maintained in a rat-free condition.
   (B)   All newly constructed business buildings and additions to existing
business buildings shall be rat-proofed during the process of construction.
   (C)   The owners of all rat-proofed business buildings shall maintain the
same in a rat-proof condition and repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in
the rat-proofing and the occupants of all rat-proofed business buildings shall
take action as may be necessary and appropriate to eradicate any and all rats
from the buildings and to keep the same free from rats.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the rat-proofing from
any business building for any purpose and fail to restore the same in a
satisfactory condition or make any new openings and fail to close and seal same
against the entrance of rats.
(`86 Code, § 10-52)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 10-53 FEED BINS AND FOOD CONTAINERS.
   All food and feed kept for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses and other
animals shall be kept and stored in rat-free and rat-proof containers,
compartments or rooms unless kept in a rat-proof building.
(`86 Code, § 10-53)
§ 10-54 ELEVATION OF STORAGE RACKS FOR LUMBER, BOXES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or similar
materials unless the same are placed on open racks that are elevated not less
than 18 inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked so as not to afford
harborage for rats.
(`86 Code, § 10-54)
Penalty, see § 1-99
ARTICLE IV: WEEDS AND NOXIOUS GROWTH
§ 10-71 PROHIBITION.
   No person having control of any lot located within 200 feet of any building
occupied as a residence shall allow or maintain on any lot any growth of weeds
of a height of over ten inches.
(`86 Code, § 10-71)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 10-72 REMOVAL GENERALLY.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, to notify the owner, lessee or
occupant or the agent, servant, representative or employee of any owner, in
writing, that the owner, agent or representative of the owner, is permitting
weeds to grow on the lot or part of lot in violation of § 10-71. The notice
shall be served by the Chief of Police upon the owner, agent or representative
of the owner of the lot and each and every day the owner, agent or
representative of the owner shall permit the weeds to remain upon the lot or
any part of the lot after the notice, shall constitute a separate offense.
(`86 Code, § 10-72)
§ 10-72.1 NOTICE TO LANDOWNERS.
   (A)   The city may notify a violator of the city's weeded lot ordinance that
if the violator's property is found to be in violation of the ordinance again
in the calendar year in which notice is given, the city shall, without further
notice, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense of that action
shall be charged to the violator.
   (B)   The notice may also provide that, for each additional violation, the
city shall charge the violator the expense of the action and surcharge of up to
50% over the expense to remedy the preceding violation.
   (C)   Notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail.
(Ord. 05-04-03, passed 4-12-05)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 05-04-03 was subsequently read three times in the North Carolina
General Assembly, becoming effective upon ratification on July 12, 2005.
§ 10-73 REMOVAL BY CITY.
   In the event that the owner, lessee or occupant of any premises upon which
weeds have grown or are growing in violation of this article, does not cut or
have the same cut, or refuses to obey or abide by any notice from the city to
have the same cut, the city may, through its proper officers, enter the
premises and remove the weeds. The cost of the removal by the city shall be
charged and assessed against the owner of the premises in the same manner and
shall have the same force and effect as a tax lien against the premises.
(`86 Code, § 10-73)
ARTICLE V: VISUAL BLIGHT AS A NUISANCE
§ 10-81 DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS OF PREMISES; GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every person owning or occupying any premises in the city shall keep
the premises free from trash, and all other forms of animal or vegetable refuse
which may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health, or which may
constitute a public nuisance. No owner or occupant of any premises shall bury
therein any animal or vegetable matter which, upon decaying, may become
dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   No person shall store or allow to remain upon open porches, decks, or
other outdoor areas visible from streets or backyards facing the house or other
public areas, any materials that increase the likelihood of fire, conceal
dangerous conditions, provide a breeding place for vermin, or create an
unattractive condition or a visually blighted property. By way of illustration
and not limitation, such materials may include appliances, furniture,
equipment, broken or discarded machinery, containers, household goods, junk, or
other similar. This shall include cars and trucks, whether registered or not,
parked in areas other than designated driveways or parking areas demarcated by
a permanent border for periods in excess of two weeks. Provided, however, this
prohibition does not apply to furniture, appliances and equipment intended by
the manufacturer to be used outdoors.
   (C)   If any person shall violate any provision of this section, it shall be
the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to give notice, in writing, to the
owner, lessee or occupant, or the agent, representative or employee of any
owner, that within four days or sooner from the date of such notice, the
condition constituting a nuisance must be abated. Should any owner or occupant
fail to comply with such notice, the Code Enforcement Officer shall proceed to
have the condition abated and the offending materials removed, and such owner
or occupant shall be responsible to the city for the cost thereof. In the case
of offenses same in nature within a six-month period, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall not be required to give the owner or occupant notification prior
to taking action to have the offending material removed.
   (D)   Any violation of this section shall subject the owner or occupant of
the premises to the penalties provided in §
1-99. Each day of any violation of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 03-07-01, passed 7-8-03; Am. Ord. 07-10-03, passed 10-9-07)
CHAPTER 11: HUMAN RIGHTS
[Reserved]
(Ord. 82-4-1, passed 4-13-82; Am. Ord. 92-2-1, passed 2-11-92; Am. Ord. 98-5-1,
passed 5-12-98; Rescinding Ord. 00-9-1, passed 9-12-00)
CHAPTER 12: LAKE DEVIN RECREATIONAL AREA
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
12-1.   Scope
   
12-2.   General function of City Manager
   
12-3.   Posting copies of rules and regulations
   
12-4.   Alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
12-5.   Vehicles
   
12-6.   Boats
   
12-7.   Fireworks
   
12-8.   Firearms and hunting
   
12-9.   Cultivating or pasturing near bank
   
12-10.   Picnicking or camping
   
12-11.   Pollution of water
   
12-12.   Dwellings on watershed provided with sanitary facilities
   
12-13.   Carcasses of dead animals; animal offal
   
12-14.   Swimming and frogging
Article II: Fishing
Division 1: Generally
   
12-26.   Penalty
   
12-27.   When allowed
   
12-28.   Inspection of catch
   
12-29.   State fishing regulations adopted
   
12-30.   Use of banks
   
12-31.   Daily limit on fish
   
12-32.   Use of authorized fishing equipment
   
12-33.   Sale and the like of fish
   
12-34.   Harvesting, preservation, education and incentive programs
Division 2: Permit
   
12-46.   State and local permits required
   
12-47.   Transfer of license
   
12-48.   Persons eligible
   
12-49.   Fee
   
12-50.   Term
   
12-51.   Special permit for senior citizens
   
12-52.   Revocation
   
12-53.   Permit for physically challenged persons
   
12-54.   Permit for city employees
Article III: Conference Center
   
12-71.   Rules, regulations and rental fees
   
Appendix:   Maximum penalty schedule
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 12-1 SCOPE.
   Except as otherwise specified, the provisions of this chapter shall apply
only to the Lake Devin Recreational Area (“Lake Devin”) as designated by the
city.
(`86 Code, § 12-1) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-2 GENERAL FUNCTION OF CITY MANAGER.
   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce all rules and
regulations adopted by the Board.
(`86 Code, § 12-2) (Ord. 76-9-1, passed 9-14-76; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-
13-15)
§ 12-3 POSTING COPIES OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city shall post copies of the rules and regulations governing Lake Devin
at all docking sites and other conspicuous places about the lake premises.
(`86 Code, § 12-3) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to possess any alcoholic beverage within the Lake Devin
area. Alcoholic beverages are allowed within the premises of the Harry Currin
Barn and Kitchen during the course of a duly permitted function being held at
those premises.
(`86 Code, § 12-4) (Ord. 76-9-1, passed 9-14-76; Am. Ord. 88-3-3, passed 3-8-
88; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-5 VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle upon the Lake
Devin Dam, except for a city-owned vehicle being operated in an official
capacity.
(`86 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 78-10-1, passed 10-10-78)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, as amended.
(Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-6 BOATS.
   (A)   No boat shall be placed on Lake Devin unless the same has been
approved and authorized by the city. Every boat being operated on the lake
shall be supplied with a life preserver for each occupant, two paddles and an
anchor.
   (B)   Boats operated on Lake Devin shall be propelled only by means of
electric motors or manually operated oars or paddles, unless the authorized
agent of the city or the lessee, or a duly authorized agent of a lessee of the
city shall specifically authorize the use of gasoline motor propulsion for
emergency purposes. Boats with gasoline outboard motors may be allowed as long
as the gasoline outboard is not operated while the boat is in the water.
   (C)   (1)   No more than four persons shall occupy a boat at the same time,
and a boat shall not be rented to a person under 16 years of age.
      (2)   Persons under 16 years of age may be a passenger on a boat if
accompanied by an adult.
      (3)   No private boat shall carry more than its boat capacity.
      (4)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall determine the
capacity of a boat.
      (5)   All physically challenged persons, as hereinafter defined, are
required to wear a life preserver or other flotation device at all times while
occupying a boat.
   (D)   No boat shall enter or leave the lake, except from the area designated
for boat launching.
(`86 Code, § 12-6) (Ord. 87-10-1, passed 10-13-87; Am. Ord. 05-04-01, passed 4-
12-05)
   (E)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, as amended.
(Am. Ord. 03-02-02, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-7 FIREWORKS.
   It shall be unlawful to possess or discharge fireworks of any type within
the Lake Devin Recreational Area.
(`86 Code, § 12-7) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15) Penalty, see §
1-99
§ 12-8 FIREARMS AND HUNTING.
   The possession of or display of firearms in prohibited within the Lake Devin
Recreational Area, except that concealed weapons are permitted in accordance
with North Carolina law, provided that the person possesses a valid concealed
carry permit issued in accordance with the laws of the State of North Carolina,
and the person is not in violation of the conditions of that permit. It shall
be unlawful to discharge a firearm within the Lake Devin area unless the
discharge is necessary to protect a person or persons from imminent bodily
injury. Hunting of any type is prohibited.
(Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-9 CULTIVATING OR PASTURING NEAR BANK.
   No plowing, cultivating or pasturing shall be permitted within 50 feet of
Lake Devin.
(`86 Code, § 12-8) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15) Penalty, see §
1-99
§ 12-10 PICNICKING OR CAMPING.
   Camping and cookouts are permitted but only if with adequate provisions for
the disposal of waste of any kind in accordance with guidelines approved by the
State Board of Health. All trash and rubbish shall be kept collected in
containers and removed from the watershed. No overnight use is allowed without
written permission from the City Manager or his or her designee.
(`86 Code, § 12-9) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15) Penalty, see §
1-99
§ 12-11 POLLUTION OF WATER.
   No person shall cause pollution of the water, by the discharge of any
pollutant into any waters of Lake Devin or the contamination of any waters of
Lake Devin so as to create a nuisance or render such waters unclean, noxious,
or impure so as to be actually or potentially harmful, detrimental or injurious
to public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, agricultural, commercial,
industrial, recreational or other legitimate uses, or to livestock, animals,
birds, fish or other aquatic life.
(`86 Code, § 12-10) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15) Penalty, see §
1-99
§ 12-12 DWELLINGS ON WATERSHED PROVIDED WITH SANITARY FACILITIES.
   No dwelling houses, or other places where persons reside, congregate or are
employed, shall be built or maintained on the Lake Devin watershed without a
duly permitted septic system for the disposal of sewage, which shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
applicable state or local agency having jurisdiction.
(`86 Code, § 12-13) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15) Penalty, see §
1-99
§ 12-13 CARCASSES OF DEAD ANIMALS; ANIMAL OFFAL.
   (A)   No carcass of any dead animal, nor animal offal, shall be thrown into
Lake Devin, nor deposited upon the surface within the area of the watershed,
nor shall any carcass be permitted by the owner of the land where found to
remain unburied for a period exceeding ten hours after being known to, found by
or reported to the owner.
   (B)   The carcass shall be buried with not less than two feet of cover at a
point distant from any of the streams or tributaries of Lake Devin, not less
than 500 feet, except that in cases where a carcass is found that has been
decomposed to the extent as to prevent its removal, it may be buried near the
point found, but not less than 50 feet from any stream or tributary.
(`86 Code, § 12-14)
   (C)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix to this
chapter. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be amended from time to
time, shall be incorporated into the city fiscal year budget ending June 30.
(Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-14 SWIMMING AND FROGGING.
   (A)   Swimming is not permitted in Lake Devin at any time.
   (B)   No person shall at any time be allowed to shoot, spear or gig frogs in
or around Lake Devin.
(`86 Code, § 12-15) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15) Penalty, see §
1-99
ARTICLE II: FISHING
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 12-26 PENALTY.
   Violation of any of the rules and regulations relating to the privilege of
fishing in Lake Devin shall be an infraction punishable in accordance with §
1-99.
(`86 Code, § 12-26) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-27 WHEN ALLOWED.
   Fishing is permitted daily, year-round, from sunrise to sunset.
(`86 Code, § 12-27) (Ord. 79-2-1, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-
10-09; Amend., passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-28 INSPECTION OF CATCH.
   (A)   Upon completion of fishing, each person shall submit his or her catch,
other than fish for which there is no limit, for inspection by the Manager's
designee to determine compliance with this section.
   (B)   Compliance with this section is not mandatory if the Manager’s
designee is not present.
(`86 Code, § 12-29) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-29 STATE FISHING REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The regulations of the State Wildlife Resources Commission relating to the
kinds and sizes of fish and the times and seasons of taking fish in
noncommercial waters are adopted as the fishing regulations for Lake Devin,
except as herein specified.
(`86 Code, § 12-30) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-30 USE OF BANKS.
   No one shall fish or attempt to fish from the banks of Lake Devin, except in
designated areas as posted and in accordance with the Community Fishing
Program.
(`86 Code, § 12-31) (Ord. 05-04-01, passed 04-12-05; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed
10-13-15)
§ 12-31 DAILY LIMIT ON FISH.
   (A)   The daily limit for any fish taken out of Lake Devin shall be in
accordance with the regulations of the NC State Wildlife Resources Commission,
which shall be duly posted within the Lake Devin area.
   (B)   Israeli Carp may not be taken from Lake Devin.
(`86 Code, § 12-33) (Ord. 05-04-01, passed 04-12-05; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed
10-13-15)
§ 12-32 USE OF AUTHORIZED FISHING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Fish may be taken only with rod or pole, line and hooks, baited with
natural bait, tied with artificial flies or with spoons, plugs or artificial
minnows.
   (B)   No Baltimore minnows shall be used as bait in Lake Devin.
   (C)   There shall be no trot lines or nets set in Lake Devin.
   (D)   When using a rod or pole and fishing from the pier(s), every qualified
angler is restricted to a maximum of two rods or poles.
(`86 Code, § 12-34) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-33 SALE AND THE LIKE OF FISH.
   The sale, barter or exchange of any fish taken from Lake Devin is
prohibited.
(`86 Code, § 12-35) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-34 HARVESTING, PRESERVATION, EDUCATION AND INCENTIVE PROGRAMS.
   (A)   Guidelines may be adopted in order to improve fishing conditions and
water quality as well as to promote fishing and preservation.
   (B)   The Manager or his or her designee, may impose guidelines that modify
adopted regulations, but not so as to conflict with regulations promulgated by
the North Carolina Wildlife Commission.
   (C)   Such guidelines shall be posted and may be enforced by the city, its
designee, or other authorized agent.
(Ord. 05-04-01, passed 04-12-05; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
DIVISION 2: PERMIT
§ 12-46 STATE AND LOCAL PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No person shall fish in Lake Devin without obtaining a local fishing permit
issued by the city, and a fishing license issued by the North Carolina Wildlife
Commission. Any person fishing In Lake Devin shall have the permit, the license
and another form of identification in their possession while fishing.
(`86 Code, § 12-46) (Ord. 05-04-01, passed 04-12-05; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed
10-13-15)
§ 12-47 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   Neither the local fishing permit or the fishing license issued by the North
Carolina Wildlife Commission are transferable.
(`86 Code, § 12-47) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-48 PERSONS ELIGIBLE.
   Any person who has knowingly violated the rules and regulations governing
fishing in Lake Devin shall not be issued a local fishing permit.
(`86 Code, § 12-48) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-49 FEE.
   The fees to the city for a fishing permit shall be incorporated in the
city’s fiscal year budget ending June 30.
(`86 Code, § 12-49) (Ord. 79-2-1, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-
13-15)
§ 12-50 TERM.
   (A)   A fishing permit is not valid when the Board declares the lake closed
for any reason.
   (B)   A fishing permit will be valid for the period of one year from the
date of purchase.
(`86 Code, § 12-50) (Ord. 79-2-1, passed 2-13-79; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-
13-15)
§ 12-51 SPECIAL PERMIT FOR SENIOR CITIZENS.
   A person 65 years of age or older may obtain a fishing permit that is good
for the lifetime of the holder thereof.
(`86 Code, § 12-51) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-52 REVOCATION.
   Violation of the rules or regulations governing fishing in Lake Devin shall
result in the revocation of the local fishing permit.
(`86 Code, § 12-52) (Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-53 PERMIT FOR PHYSICALLY CHALLENGED PERSONS.
   (A)   A person that is physically challenged, as defined herein, is eligible
for a lifetime local fishing permit and may apply for a lifetime license issued
by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission.
   (B)   A person is deemed to be PHYSICALLY CHALLENGED if one or more of the
following criteria are met:
      (1)   A person whose mobility requires permanent use of a wheelchair,
braces, walker, motorized chair or crutches, and those who have lost the use of
one or both legs; or
      (2)   A person who, as determined and certified by a physician, is
severely restricted in mobility by a pulmonary or cardiovascular disability,
arthritic condition, orthopedic or neurologic impairment.
   (C)   All physically challenged persons, as defined herein, are required to
adhere to all rules and regulations in this chapter.
(Ord. 91-5-1, passed 5-14-91; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
§ 12-54 PERMIT FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Any full-time employee of the city is eligible for a local fishing
permit at no cost. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the
date of issuance and is non-transferable. The employee is also required to
obtain a fishing license from the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission.
   (B)   The local permit is voided upon the employee's’ separation from
employment with the city.
   (C)   City employees shall, at all times, comply with all of the regulations
governing Lake Devin.
(Ord. 06-08-01, passed 8-8-06; Am. Ord. 15-10-02, passed 10-13-15)
ARTICLE III: CONFERENCE CENTER
§ 12-71 RULES, REGULATIONS AND RENTAL FEES.
   Rules, regulations and rental fees for the Lake Devin Conference Center
shall be as determined, from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners.
(`86 Code, § 12-71) (Ord. 88-4-3, passed 4-12-88)
APPENDIX: MAXIMUM PENALTY SCHEDULE
 
Maximum Penalty Schedule
Code Section            Maximum Penalty                 Ord. No.
§                      No less than $50 and no greater 92-1-6, passed 1-14-92
12-5 Vehicles           than $500
§                      No less than $50 and no greater 92-1-7, passed 1-14-92
12-6 Boats              than $250
§                      No less than $50 and no greater
12-13 Carcasses of dead than $500                       92-1-8, passed 1-14-92
animals; animal offal
Note to Table: These penalties may be amended from time to time.
 
CHAPTER 13: LICENSES, TAXATION AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
13-1.   Registration of motor vehicles
Article II: Privilege Tax
   
13-26.   Purpose
   
13-27.   Who must pay
   
13-28.   Definitions
   
13-29.   Levy
   
13-30.   Duty to determine whether tax due
   
13-31.   Unlawful to conduct business without a license
   
13-32.   License period; due date
   
13-33.   Proration of tax
   
13-34.   Multiple businesses
   
13-35.   Separate places of business
   
13-36.   Application
   
13-37.   Ability to produce additional facts
   
13-38.   Requested information
   
13-39.   Administrator’s authority; duties of business owner
   
13-40.   Duty to notify Administrator of changes
   
13-41.   Reasons for refusal or revocation
   
13-42.   Tax disputed and/or unqualified applicants; right to conference
   
13-43.   Collection of unpaid tax
   
13-44.   Licensee’s remedies
Article III: Pedicabs
Division 1: General Provisions
   
13-48.   Purpose
   
13-49.   Definitions
   
13-50.   Application and fees
Division 2: Driver’s Permit
   
13-51.   Driver’s permit required
   
13-52.   Insurance requirements
   
13-53.   Appearance
Division 3: Pedicab Equipment Requirements
   
13-54.   Pedicab condition
   
13-55.   Pedicab lighting and reflectors
   
13-56.   Pedicab brakes
   
13-57.   Pedicab trailer; limitation on number
   
13-58.   Pedicab width
   
13-59.   Pedicab horn
   
13-60.   Pedicab mirrors
   
13-61.   Pedicab tires
   
13-62.   Pedicab inspection
Division 4: Pedicab Operating Requirements
   
13-63.   Pedicabs operating on roadways
   
13-64.   Operation of pedicab
   
13-65.   Fares
   
13-66.   Receipt for payment of fare
   
13-67.   Accident reports
 
   
13-99.   Penalty
   
Appendix A: License tax schedules
Statutory reference:
   Authority to register motor vehicles, see G.S. § 20-97
   Municipal authority to regulate and license businesses, trades and the like,
see G.S. 160A-194
   Privilege license taxes on trades, professions and the like, see G.S. §
160A-211 and G.S. §§ 105-33 et seq.
   Taxation, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 et seq. and G.S. Ch. 105
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13-1 REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   In addition to other taxes, there is hereby levied a special resident
motor vehicle tax in the amount of $20 on each and every resident motor vehicle
in the city.
   (B)   The tax so levied will be collected along with other ad valorem
property taxes of the city by the County Tax Collector.
   (C)   Only resident vehicles exempt from ad valorem taxation by reason of
governmental or other legal exemption will be exempt from this levy. No vehicle
required to be listed for taxation is exempt.
(`86 Code, § 13-1) (Ord. 81-11-1, passed 12-10-81; Am. Ord. 89-3-1, passed 3-
28-89; Am. Ord. 08-07-01, passed 7-8-08)
ARTICLE II: PRIVILEGE TAX
§ 13-26 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this article is to raise funds for general municipal
purposes. The general policy of the city is to require payment of the maximum
tax permitted for the privilege of owning or operating a qualifying business
within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   A license issued pursuant to this article is only evidence that the
appropriate tax has been paid and does not constitute regulatory approval and
does not excuse a licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance,
regulation or statute. The issuance of a license hereunder does not reflect
that the recipient is in compliance with any applicable local, state or federal
regulation or law, other than this article, or that the recipient is otherwise
engaged in a legal activity or operating a business in a legal manner.
   (C)   The issuance of a license under this article does not authorize the
carrying on of a business for which additional licenses or qualifications are
required by state or local law, nor does the issuance of a license prevent the
city from enacting additional regulations applicable to the licensee.
   (D)   This article does not prevent the city from imposing license taxes on
additional business activities, from increasing or decreasing the amount of any
license tax or from regulating any business taxed.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
§ 13-27 WHO MUST PAY.
   Each person who conducts a qualifying business as shown in
Appendix A of this chapter within the city is subject to this article.
   (A)   A person “conducts a qualifying business” when he or she engages in
one act of any qualifying business.
   (B)   A person conducts a qualifying business “within the city” if he or she
maintains a business location within the city, or if, either personally or
through agents, he or she:
      (1)   Solicits business within the city;
      (2)   Picks up or delivers goods within the city; or
      (3)   Performs services within the city.
   (C)   A person or business listed in the local telephone directory issued by
the telephone system or any other avenue of advertising directed toward city
residents , including, but not limited to, electronically maintained business
data bases and Internet shall be prima facie evidence that the person is
“conducting a qualifying business within the city” within the meaning of this
article.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
§ 13-28 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person authorized to promote, represent and/or sell for an agency
or business.
   BUSINESS. Includes every trade, occupation, profession, business and
franchise or other activity engaged in by any person or legal entity for gain,
profit, benefit or advantage, taxed under this article.
   BUSINESS LICENSE ADMINISTRATOR (“ADMINISTRATOR” HEREINAFTER). The designated
individual employed by the city who is charged with the responsibility of
administering this chapter. The governing body charges the Administrator to
collect these taxes by all lawful means necessary as pursuant to G.S. § 105-
350.
   CITY. City of Oxford.
   FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning with July 1 and ending on June 30.
   LICENSEE. A person who has properly obtained a privilege license pursuant to
this chapter.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm or
other legal entity.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The designated individual(s) in the city who is charged with
the responsibility of administering this article. The governing body charges
the Tax Collector to collect these taxes by all lawful means necessary as
pursuant to G.S. § 105-350.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
§ 13-29 LEVY.
   Levy of tax. An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each
qualifying business conducted within the city, in the amounts set forth in this
article. Any person engaged in a qualifying business shall be responsible for
ensuring that the applicable license tax is paid. Any license issued under this
article is not transferable.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
§ 13-30 DUTY TO DETERMINE WHETHER TAX DUE.
   (A)   Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he or she
conducts is taxed under this article, and if so, whether that tax has been paid
for the current tax year.
   (B)   No license shall be transferable or assignable.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09) Penalty, see §
13-99
§ 13-31 UNLAWFUL TO CONDUCT BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent to engage in or
carry on a qualifying business in the city without a license issued hereunder
or an expired license. A violation of this article shall be a Class 3
misdemeanor and each day shall constitute a separate offense. A conviction
under this article does not relieve a person or business of tax imposed by this
article.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17) Penalty, see
§
13-99
Statutory references:
   Every day's failure a separate offense, see G.S. § 105-235
   Unlawful to operate without license, see G.S. § 105-103
§ 13-32 LICENSE PERIOD; DUE DATE.
   (A)   If the license issued pursuant to this article is valid for the 12-
month period beginning July 1 and ending June 30.
   (B)   The privilege license tax is due and payable on or before August 1 of
each year. Qualifying businesses that begin after July 1 must obtain a license
prior to the commencement of operation.
   (C)   Any beer and wine license tax is due and payable when a permit is
issued by the state and shall be renewed no later than May 1 of each year.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
§ 13-33 PRORATION OF TAX.
   (A)   Except when a tax is based on gross receipts, if a business begins
after January 31 but before July 1, the amount of tax due is half the total
otherwise due unless otherwise provided.
   (B)   Beer and wine licenses are never prorated.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
§ 13-34 MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.
   If a person is engaged in more than one qualifying business, the licensee
may be subject to additional license taxes under this article. Depending on the
licensee’s business, the person shall pay the license tax prescribed in the tax
schedules of this article for each business activity, even if the activities/
businesses are operating at the same business location.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
§ 13-35 SEPARATE PLACES OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by state law, a person who engages in a
business in two or more separate locations, a separate license tax shall be
required to obtain a license for each place of business.
   (B)   For purposes of this article, if a business, under common ownership,
engages in the same business at two or more locations within the city, in which
the locations open directly into each other, are contiguous, communicate with
and operate as a unit, the person is liable for only one license tax.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-14-17)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 105-105
§ 13-36 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a license hereunder shall apply to the
Administrator for each license required by this article prior to beginning
operations.
   (B)   The information shall be submitted on a dated application provided by
the Administrator, which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, a partnership, a corporation or some other legal entity;
      (2)   The address where the business is conducted, and a mailing address
for the business, if different;
      (3)   All telephone numbers used by the business;
      (4)   The starting date on which the business will begin to operate in
the city;
      (5)   The name and address of the person filling out the application, and
his or her relationship to the business;
      (6)   The nature of the business;
      (7)   The gross receipts of the business for the most recently completed
federal tax year, if applicable; and
      (8)   Any other information the Administrator determines deems to be
necessary to compute the amount of tax due.
   (C)   Each applicant has the responsibility to comply with any and all other
legal requirements, whether local, state or federal, prior to the commencement
of business operations.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
§ 13-37 ABILITY TO PRODUCE ADDITIONAL FACTS.
   The Administrator or designee may require a sworn statement of sales or
other proof as needed prior to the imposition of tax liability and issuance of
a license hereunder.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
§ 13-38 REQUESTED INFORMATION.
   (A)   Any proposed licensee shall timely provide all information as may be
reasonably requested by the Administrator.
   (B)   The following shall be provided by the proposed licensee at the
request of the Administrator.
      (1)   Information that identifies the taxpayer/licensee;
      (2)   Information needed to determine the tax liability of a taxpayer/
licensee;
      (3)   Information that enables the Administrator to collect any amount
owed hereunder; and
      (4)   Other information as may be needed by the Administrator to perform
the duties required by the article.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 105-251
§ 13-39 ADMINISTRATOR’S AUTHORITY; DUTIES OF BUSINESS OWNER.
   (A)   Providing notice to an applicant or licensee. Whenever this article
requires the Administrator to give a written statement or notice to an
applicant or a licensee, he or she may do so in any one of three ways, each of
which shall be presumed to constitute actual notice:
      (1)   By personally delivering the notice to the applicant or licensee;
      (2)   By mailing the notice by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address specified for that purpose in the licensee
application or to the last known address; and
      (3)   By causing the notice to be served on the applicant or licensee in
accordance with the procedures for service or process under Rule 4, North
Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (B)   Investigations by the Tax Collector. If the Administrator has reason
to believe that a person is conducting a business in violation of this article,
the Administrator is hereby authorized to conduct an investigation to determine
the person’s tax liability. The results of the investigation shall be deemed
confidential and shall be conducted in keeping with sound business and
investigatory practices.
   (C)   Duty to keep books. Any person who conducts a business taxed under
this article shall keep all records and books necessary to enable the tax
liability to be accurately conducted. If a person fails to keep books and
records as required, the Administrator or designee shall make a determination
of the applicant’s tax liability from the information available which the
determination may be based on information imputed to the person or business..
   (D)   Duty to permit inspection. Each person who conducts business in the
city shall permit the Administrator or designee to inspect the business
premises during normal business hours to determine the nature of the business
conducted there and to examine the books and records to determine the nature
and amount of business transacted.
   (E)   Administrator to issue license; payment of tax a prerequisite. After
receipt of the completed application, and a determination by the Administrator
that the license should be issued, the Administrator shall determine the amount
of tax due and notify the applicant of that amount. The Administrator shall not
issue a license until the tax is paid.
   (F)   Display of license. Every license issued by the city must be
prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named therein.
Failure to post this license shall raise the presumption that no such license
exists or that the same is expired. If there is no regular place of business,
the licensee must keep the license wherever the business is being operated and
in a place where it can be seen and inspected. If a machine or other item of
personal property is the subject of the license, the license shall be affixed
to the machine or item.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
§ 13-40 DUTY TO NOTIFY ADMINISTRATOR OF CHANGES.
   (A)   Change in the business during the tax year.
      (1)   Information change. A licensee under this article shall report a
change in the information contained in the license application to the
Administrator within ten days after the change occurs. If information shown on
the license itself is affected thereby, the licensee shall surrender the
license to the Administrator when reporting the change. The Administrator will
reissue a license reflecting the change of name or address.
      (2)   Change affecting amount due. If changes affect the amount due, the
Administrator shall reissue a separate or additional license reflecting the
change upon payment of the additional tax. The license shall be subject to
cancellation for failure to comply with this article.
      (3)   Duplicate copy. Upon satisfactory proof that the current license
has been lost or destroyed, the Administrator will furnish a duplicate license
at a cost to be determined by the city. Any other duplication of a license
shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor which shall be punishable as provided in
§
13-99 .
   (B)   Notice of discontinuation, sale or transfer of business. Any person
who sells, transfers or goes out of business, shall give notice of the same to
the Administrator at least 48 hours prior to the date of the pending sale,
transfer or termination of business.
(G.S § 105-366(d))
      (1)   Transfer. All licenses issued hereunder are non-transferable and
any transferee or successor of the licensee shall be required to obtain a
license prior to the commencement of business.
      (2)   Refunds for discontinued business. Any tax paid hereunder is non-
refundable.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09) Penalty, see §
13-99
§ 13-41 REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Administrator or designee shall refuse to issue or shall revoke a
license required by this article for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of tax
due or the qualifications for a license;
      (2)   The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to compute
the amount of tax due; and
      (3)   The applicant fails or refuses to provide all information required
in the application.
   (B)   Upon the revocation of any license, it shall be unlawful for the
person to whom the license was granted to continue to conduct the business.
   (C)   The Administrator or designee shall revoke a license for reason set
forth in this section. However, before the Administrator or designee may revoke
a license, he or she shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds of
revocation, pursuant to §
13-39(A).
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09) Penalty, see §
13-99
§ 13-42 TAX DISPUTED AND/OR UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO CONFERENCE.
   (A)   At the time as the Administrator or designee believes that a reason
exists for refusing to issue or revoking a license based on the amount of tax
due or pursuant to §
13-41, the Administrator shall send notice of refusal or revocation to the
applicant or licensee. The notice shall specify the amount of tax due, the
section of this article upon which the tax calculation is based, the amount of
tax paid, any interest due, the balance owed, the manner and time period in
which the person may respond to the notice of deficiency, and the consequences
to the person if he or she fails to respond. If the applicant or licensee
disagrees with the determination, he or she may request a hearing within ten
days after the day on which notice is served. The request must be in writing
and shall specify the applicant’s objections to the matters set forth on the
notice. By way of illustration, but not limited to, an applicant who receives a
notice may object on the following grounds:
      (1)   That the tax due has already been paid;
      (2)   The Administrator miscalculated the amount of tax due;
      (3)   The Administrator based the calculation on incorrect or
insufficient information concerning either the nature or the amount of business
conducted; and
      (4)   The Administrator based the determination on an erroneous
interpretation of a section of this article that establishes a category of
business subject to a particular tax.
   (B)   The conference shall be held within 30 days from receipt of objections
and no action may be taken by the Administrator with respect to the application
or license within that time period. If the applicant fails to request a
conference, the determination becomes final and the Administrator shall proceed
to take necessary actions to resolve or collect the deficiency. (See §§
13-41 through
13-44)
   (C)   If the Administrator revokes or refuses to issue a license, the
applicant may reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for
which the application was refused no longer exists, and if no other reason
exists for refusing to issue a license, the Administrator shall issue the
license.
   (D)   The Administrator shall maintain a record of each conference held
pursuant to this article for a period of three years. The record shall contain
the name of the applicant or licensee, the date of the conference and a brief
statement of the issues discussed and the results reached. After three years,
the Administrator shall dispose of the record pursuant to G.S. § 121-5.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
§ 13-43 COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAX.
   If a person begins or continues to engage in a business taxed under this
article without payment of the required privilege license tax, the
Administrator may use any of the following methods to collect the unpaid tax.
   (A)   Garnishment and levy remedies. The Administrator may propose the sale
of tangible personal property (levy) or attach wages, rents, bank deposits and
other compensation (garnish) to eliminate any delinquent license taxes in
accordance with G.S. §§ 105-368 and 160A-207. The remedies of levy and sale of
real and personal property of the taxpayer within the city in the same manner
and to the same extent as apply to taxes levied by the state pursuant to G.S. §
105-109(d) and as per the provisions of G.S. § 105-242.
   (B)   Criminal remedies. Conducting business within the city without having
paid the privilege license tax imposed by this article, without a valid license
issued pursuant to this article, or without posting a license pursuant to §
13-39(G), is a Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable as provided in §
13-99. Each day that a person conducts business in violation of this article is
a separate offense.
   (C)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in
division (B) above and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d), the city may seek an
injunction against any person conducting a business in violation of this
article.
   (D)   Payment. Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business
taxed under this article without payment of the tax is liable for the
additional tax as defined in §
13-99. No license shall be granted until the tax plus the additional tax has
been paid.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
§ 13-44 LICENSEE’S REMEDIES.
   (A)   Assertions of valid defense. A licensee may obtain a release or refund
of a tax if he or she can demonstrate a valid defense to the enforcement of the
collection of any tax levied in this article and shall proceed as provided in
this section:
      (1)   A valid defense shall include the following:
         (a)   A tax imposed through clerical error;
         (b)   An illegal license; and
         (c)   A license levied for an illegal purpose.
      (2)   If the license tax has been paid, the licensee, at any time within
three years after the license became due or within six months after the date of
payment, whichever is later; may request a refund of the license by submitting
to the Board of Commissioners a written statement of his or her defense and a
request for a refund thereof.
   (B)   Action of governing body. Upon receiving a licensee’s written
statement of defense and request for release or refund, the Board of
Commissioners shall, within 90 days after receipt of the request, determine
whether the licensee has a valid defense to the license imposed or any part
thereof and shall either release or refund that portion of the amount that is
determined to be in excess of the correct license liability or notify the
licensee in writing that no release or refund will be made. The action of the
Board of Commissioners on applications for refunds shall be recorded in its
minutes. If a refund is made, the Finance Department shall forward the refund
to the finance designee, who shall note on all records the amount of refund,
check number and refund date.
   (C)   Suit for recovery of license taxes. If within 90 days after receiving
a licensee’s request for refund and the Board of Commissioners have failed to
refund the full amount requested by the licensee, or has notified the licensee
that no refund will be made, or has taken no action on the request, the
licensee may bring a civil action against the city for the amount claimed. The
action may be brought at any time within three years from the expiration of the
period in which the Board of Commissioners are required to act.
   (D)   Civil action. Civil action brought pursuant to division (C) above
shall be brought in the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice in
the county. If, upon the trial, it is determined that the license or any part
of it was illegal, or levied for an illegal purpose, or excessive because of a
clerical error, judgment shall be rendered therefore with interest thereon at
6% per annum plus costs. The judgment shall be collected as in other civil
actions.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
ARTICLE III: PEDICABS
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13-48 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate pedicabs in order to preserve the
health and welfare of the citizens of the city and the protection of their
property.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-49 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings provided in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly
indicates another meaning:
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Oxford or his or her designee.
   DRIVER. Any person who physically operates a pedicab.
   DRIVER’S PERMIT. The permit issued by the city to a person to enable that
person to operate a pedicab within the city.
   PEDICAB. Any vehicle with three or more wheels propelled or pedaled by human
power which is used for, or is capable of, transporting passengers if the
driver receives direct or indirect compensation for providing such
transportation and includes any vehicle to which a decal has been issued
pursuant to this article. No pedicab shall be motorized. For the purposes of
this article, pedicabs shall be deemed vehicles, and every operator of a
pedicab upon a street shall be subject to this article.
   STREET. Any road, alley, avenue, highway, terminal roadway or any other
public vehicular area within the corporate limits as they may exist or may be
extended.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-50 APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Each person desiring to obtain a company operating certificate or
driver's permit shall apply on forms provided by the City Clerk and shall
include all information required by this article.
   (B)   There shall be a fee of $25 payable upon the filing of an application
for a driver's permit.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
DIVISION 2: DRIVER'S PERMIT
§ 13-51 DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab without first
obtaining a valid driver's permit pursuant to the terms of this division.
   (B)   Each applicant for a permit required by this division must:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Possess eyesight correctable to 20/20 and not suffer from epilepsy,
vertigo, heart disease or any other physical or mental condition which renders
him or her unfit for safe operation of a passenger vehicle for hire;
      (3)   Be able to read, write and speak the English language and conduct
financial transactions;
      (4)   Be neat and clean in dress and person;
      (5)   Not be addicted to the use of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances;
      (6)   Possess a valid North Carolina driver's license issued to the
applicant; and
      (7)   Produce, at the applicant's expense, the applicant's court records,
including any criminal record of the applicant in the applicant's country of
origin. If the applicant has no criminal record, the applicant shall provide an
affidavit indicating the lack of such record.
   (C)   Each applicant must also disclose whether the applicant has been
charged with any criminal offense or infraction and produce evidence of the
disposition thereof upon seeking issuance or renewal of a driver's permit.
Failure to do so will result in the suspension or refusal to issue or renew a
driver's permit.
   (D)   No application for a driver's permit shall be accepted from an
applicant who has criminal charges pending against the applicant at the time of
application. For purposes of this subsection, pending criminal charges shall
not include traffic infractions.
   (E)   No application for a driver's permit shall be accepted from an
applicant who does not meet all of the requirements stated in subsection (B) of
this section.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of each permit holder to submit to the City
Manager any change in information required to be submitted pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-52 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each pedicab company shall maintain a liability and property damage
insurance policy insuring all of its pedicabs in the amount of, at least,
$1,000,000 combined single limit for each accident, or bodily injury, death,
and/or property damage written by a company authorized to transact business in
the State of North Carolina and be rated B+ VI or higher by A.M. Best. The
declarations page of such policy indicating the liability amounts and the
policy period must be provided to the City Manager prior to issuance or renewal
of any company operating certificate. Each separate part of the pedicab shall
have a serial number affixed thereto and shall be listed on the insurance
certificate. All such policies shall be kept in full force and effect at all
times while any pedicab is operated within the city, and must cover a minimum
period of 12 months. Proof of such insurance must be maintained within the
vehicle at all times when operated within the city.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-53 APPEARANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every holder of a driver's permit to be
hygienically clean, well-groomed, neat, and suitably dressed in compliance with
the requirements of this section at all times while operating a passenger
vehicle for hire.
   (B)   Each passenger vehicle for hire driver shall wear in plain view a tag
containing the driver's name and the name of his or her company.
   (C)   Each driver shall wear clean clothing consisting of shoes, shirt,
pants or short pants, knee length skirt or dress and, when necessary, an outer
winter garment while operating a pedicab. If a hat is worn, it shall be free of
any writing or logo except the passenger vehicle for hire company's name and
logo.
   (D)   Clothing that is not considered appropriate and is not permitted for
holders of a driver's permit includes: underwear (as an outer garment), tank
tops, body shirts, swimwear, jogging suits, or similar types of attire when
worn as an outer garment, athletic shorts or trunks (jogging or bathing), or
sandals.
   (E)   Notwithstanding subsection (A), application for a driver's permit
shall not be approved if the applicant's court record or evidence regarding the
applicant supports a conclusion that it is not in the public interest for the
application to be granted. Convictions, admissions, pleas of guilty or no
contest to any of the following shall create a rebuttable presumption that the
approval of the applicant's application is not in the public interest:
      (1)   Murder, including first degree and second degree;
      (2)   Voluntary manslaughter;
      (3)   Involuntary manslaughter;
      (4)   Felony death by vehicle;
      (5)   Felonious assaults and/or batteries;
      (6)   Robbery;
      (7)   Rape and other sex offenses; or
      (8)   Felonious drug offenses.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall not issue a driver's permit to any applicant who
within the past five years has any driving while impaired (DWI) conviction or
two or more arrests for DWI, within the state, or any comparable provision of
the law of any other state, territory or possession of the United States of
America.
   (G)   A driver's permit shall be valid for two years from the date of
issuance. A driver's permit is personal to the driver's permit holder to whom
it is issued and may not be transferred or otherwise assigned.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
DIVISION 3: PEDICAB EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 13-54 PEDICAB CONDITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate, or cause to be operated,
a pedicab that is not in good working order, including, but not limited to, the
operation of a pedicab that has:
      (1)   Exposed rust;
      (2)   Ripped upholstery or fabric;
      (3)   Exposed wood that is not painted and not in good condition;
      (4)   Exposed sharp edges;
      (5)   Dirt or debris on any surface accessible to patrons; or
      (6)   No manufacturer's serial or identification number on a pedicab.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-55 PEDICAB LIGHTING AND REFLECTORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate, or cause to be operated, a
pedicab that does not have the following:
   (A)   Headlights. Every pedicab shall be equipped with a headlight capable
of projecting a beam of white light for a distance at a minimum of 500 feet,
which shall be clearly visible during nighttime hours and which must be
illuminated at all times during operation.
   (B)   Taillights. Every pedicab shall be equipped with a red tail-light
affixed to the rear of the passenger compartment, which shall be clearly
visible during nighttime hours from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of the
pedicab and which must be illuminated at all times during operation.
   (C)   Reflectors. Every pedicab shall be equipped with a slow moving vehicle
triangle on the rear of the vehicle or reflective tape which outlines the rear
of the pedicab from edge to edge.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-56 PEDICAB BRAKES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate, or cause to be operated,
a pedicab that is not equipped with a braking system capable of being
manipulated by the driver from his or her normal position of operation and is
capable of causing a pedicab with a loaded passenger compartment to come to a
stop on dry, level, clean pavement.
   (B)   Each pedicab shall be equipped with an operational brake or brakes
which will enable its driver to stop the vehicle within 15 feet from a speed of
ten miles per hour on dry, level, clean pavement. The brake systems shall
demonstrate a reasonable total braking force when tested, using the "quick stop
method."
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-57 PEDICAB TRAILER; LIMITATION ON NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a pedicab with more than one attached
trailer, sidecar, or similar device.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-58 PEDICAB WIDTH.
   No pedicab shall be wider than 54 inches at its widest point.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-59 PEDICAB HORN.
   A pedicab shall be equipped for sound produced by an electronic or
mechanical device or instrument from the pedicab so that the sound is plainly
audible at a distance of 25 feet or less from such pedicab.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-60 PEDICAB MIRRORS.
   Every pedicab shall be equipped with a side mounted mirror affixed to the
pedicab to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at
least 200 feet to the rear of the pedicab.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-61 PEDICAB TIRES.
   Tires shall be of the size appropriate for the pedicab and with no
mismatched tires. There shall be no cuts into the tire or localized worn spots
that expose the ply. No tire may be used when the tire has tread wear
indicators that are visible.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-62 PEDICAB INSPECTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
any pedicab unless the owner certifies, in writing, that the pedicab has been
inspected as required in this section; that the pedicab meets all of the safety
requirements; and that a current and valid company operating certificate is
affixed in a manner and location prescribed by this article.
   (B)   The City Manager or any city police officer may inspect any pedicab
and any records or documents required to be carried in or on the pedicab at any
time upon presentation of identification to the permit holder in order to
determine compliance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
DIVISION 4: PEDICAB OPERATING REQUIREMENTS
§ 13-63 PEDICABS OPERATING ON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   All pedicabs operating on a roadway shall comply with all traffic laws
of the state and applicable provisions of this code.
   (B)   All pedicabs operating on a roadway and moving slower than the other
traffic on the roadway shall ride as near as practicable to the right curb or
edge of the roadway, unless:
      (1)   The pedicab is passing another vehicle moving in the same
direction;
      (2)   The pedicab is preparing to turn left at an intersection or onto a
private road or driveway or thru movement where there are right turn only
lanes;
      (3)   A condition on or of the roadway, including a fixed or moving
object, parked or moving vehicle, pedestrian, animal, or surface hazard
prevents the pedicab from safely riding next to the right curb or edge of the
roadway;
      (4)   The person is operating a pedicab in an outside lane that is less
than 14 feet in width and does not have a designated bicycle lane adjacent to
that lane; or too narrow for a bicycle and a motor vehicle to safely travel
side by side; or
      (5)   There is a bicycle lane for use.
   (C)   A driver operating a pedicab on a one-way roadway with two or more
marked traffic lanes may ride as near as practicable to the right curb or edge
of the roadway.
   (D)   Drivers operating pedicabs on a roadway may ride two abreast on a
laned roadway and shall ride in a single lane. Drivers riding two abreast may
not impede the normal and reasonable flow of traffic on the roadway. Drivers
may not ride more than two abreast unless they are riding on a part of a
roadway set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles, tricycles, or other
similar forms of nonmotorized transportation.
   (E)   Each driver shall pull the pedicab to the curb when loading or
unloading passengers unless the streets are closed for an event
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-64 OPERATION OF PEDICAB.
   (A)   lt shall be unlawful for any driver to:
      (1)   Operate a pedicab:
         (a)   While carrying a number of passengers that exceeds the number of
passenger seats which such vehicle was designed to accommodate; or
         (b)   While any passenger is standing or while any passenger is
sitting anywhere other than in the passenger seat thereof; provided, however,
that children aged five years old or younger, may be seated in the lap of
another passenger and will not count as an additional passenger.
      (2)   Collect fares, make change, or embark or disembark passengers while
the pedicab is in motion.
      (3)   Operate, park, stand, or stop the pedicab in a manner which
violates any city ordinance or state law.
      (4)   Operate, maneuver, incline, spin, tilt, tip, slope, or position a
human-powered pedicab in any manner that would unnecessarily place a passenger
in other than an upright seated position.
      (5)   Operate a pedicab upon the sidewalk portion of a public right-of-
way, except at the direction of a police officer or as necessary to access
locations immediately adjacent to roadways through the use of points of ingress
and egress made available for use by motor vehicles operating in compliance
with all applicable traffic laws.
      (6)   Operate a pedicab with sound produced by an electronic or
mechanical device or instrument, aside from a horn, from the pedicab so that
the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from such
pedicab.
      (7)   Park on sidewalks unless in areas specifically designated as
pedicab stands.
      (8)   Use indecent or profane language while operating a pedicab.
      (9)   Operate a pedicab unless it is equipped with a braking system in
sufficient working order to control and stop the movement of the pedicab.
      (10)   Operate a pedicab while carrying a package, bundle, or article if
the package, bundle, or article prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand on the handlebars.
      (11)   Operate a pedicab to knowingly permit a person riding a bicycle,
coaster, sled, toy vehicle or roller skates to attach the bicycle, coaster,
sled, toy vehicle, roller skates or that person to the pedicab.
      (12)   Pick up or drop off any passenger or travel upon any street where
the posted speed limit is greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (13)   Operate the pedicab other than on or astride a permanent and
regular seat attached to the pedicab.
      (14)   Operate a pedicab that is not equipped with a radio, mobile
telephone, or other means of two-way communication that may be used to request
assistance in the event of an emergency.
      (15)   Operate a pedicab in a manner that results in damage to public or
private property. Fail to exercise due care to avoid colliding with a
pedestrian on any roadway or sidewalk.
      (16)   Operate a pedicab on any street or upon an adjoining sidewalk that
has been closed to vehicular traffic by barricade or similar barrier.
      (17)   Refuse to board and convey a passenger on the basis of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability, including the
refusal to board and convey any service animal or medical equipment utilized in
conjunction with a passenger's disability.
      (18)   Stop or start to pick up or discharge any passenger in a taxicab
zone or any other area designated for other categories of vehicles, including
city metered spaces.
      (19)   Operate a pedicab while having consumed any alcohol within the
past 12 hours.
      (20)   Transport or cause to be transported any passenger to any place
other than as directed by the passenger.
      (21)   Fail to comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of the
passenger as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken.
      (22)   Use a lit cigarette, cigar, pipe, tobacco of any kind or incense
while any passenger is being transported in a passenger vehicle for hire.
      (23)   Converse on a mobile telephone while passengers are inside the
pedicab, except in case of an emergency.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while operating a pedicab, to
obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic by remaining stopped by a
sidewalk, except for the time period necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (C)   lt shall be unlawful to operate a pedicab that does not have a clearly
visible manufacturer's serial or identification number. In the case of a
pedicab that is not of unibody design, it is sufficient for purposes of this
subsection that either the operator's portion or the passenger's portion of the
pedicab contains the manufacturer's serial or identification number.
   (D)   All pedicabs shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and
shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least once in each 24-hour
period.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-65 FARES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a driver to charge a fare, that was not agreed upon
in advance, to any passenger receiving pedicab service; provided, however, that
if any passenger requests additional pedicab service after arriving at the
prescribed destination then the driver and passenger must agree to the new
destination and fare before continuing the pedicab service.
   (B)   It is unlawful for the operator of a pedicab to demand a fare from a
passenger after agreeing to provide the service for a gratuity only.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-66 RECEIPT FOR PAYMENT OF FARE.
   No driver, upon receiving full payment for a fare as authorized by this
article, shall refuse to provide a receipt upon the request of any passenger.
The driver of the pedicab shall have a receipt book or other electronic
instrument capable of creating a payment record for this purpose.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-67 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   When a pedicab is involved in an accident or collision that results in
any injury or damage to any person or property, including, but not limited to,
damage to the pedicab or injury of the driver, the driver shall report the
accident or collision to the City Manager within twenty-four hours. The permit
holder shall keep records of all accidents, which shall include the following
information:
      (1)   The company operating certificate holders and the driver's names;
      (2)   The driver's license number; and
      (3)   The time and location of the accident or collision.
   (B)   Upon one hour's prior request by the City Manager during normal
business hours, the permit holder shall make the records available for
inspection and copying.
(Ord. 17-08-09, passed 8-8-17)
§ 13-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   All license taxes imposed by this article, excluding beer and
wine, shall be due and payable in advance of July 1 nevertheless no later than
July 31. If any person or business who conducts any business without first
paying the applicable tax and obtaining a license shall be assessed an
additional tax equal to 5% of the amount prescribed for the license per month
or fraction thereof until paid, not to exceed 25% of the amount so prescribed,
but in any event shall not be less than $5. Beer and wine licenses must be paid
in advance by May 1 and will be considered delinquent after May 31 and thus
subject to payment of the penalty. All taxes and any penalty must be paid prior
to the issuance of the license.
      (2)   Any tax imposed on a new business shall be paid prior to the
beginning of the business. If not paid within 30 days, the penalties provided
in division (A)(1) above and this section shall apply from the date the
business began.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any section of this
article or any ordinance of the city shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment in accordance with G.S.
§14-4. Unless otherwise provided, the maximum fine for a misdemeanor violation
is $500.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified, each day’s continuing violation of any
section of this article shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-175(g)
APPENDIX A: LICENSE TAX SCHEDULES
   Schedule A: Privilege license taxes limited under North Carolina General
Statutes. Listed below are classifications of business activities governed
within the North Carolina Revenue Laws, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-211. Businesses
conducting these activities are taxed under this division in addition to
divisions (A) and (C), if applicable.
(_)   Beer licenses, from May 1 to April 30, not prorated:
(a)   On-premises                              $15.00
(b)   Off-premises                              $5.00
(c)   Wholesale beer                           $37.50
(d)   Tax on additional license: the tax stated in (a) or (b) is the tax for
the first license issued to a person. The tax for each additional license of
the same type issued to that person for the same year is 110% of the base
license tax, that increase to apply progressively for each additional license.
(e)   Chain stores applicable, per State Revenue Act.
(G.S. §§ 105-113.77, 150-113.79 and 105-113.70)
(_)   Taxicabs, must comply with any restrictions of the city and state
regulations   $15.00
(G.S. §§ 20-97 et seq.)
(_)   Wine license, from May 1 to April 30, not prorated:
(a)   On-premises                              $15.00
(b)   Off-premises                              $10.00
(c)   Wholesale wine                           $37.50
(d)   Tax on additional license: the tax stated in (a) or (b) is the tax for
the first license issued to a person. The tax for each additional license of
the same type issued to that person for the same year is 110% of the base
license tax, that increase to apply progressively for each additional license.
(e)   Chain stores applicable, per State Revenue Act.
(G.S. § 105-113.77, 150-113.79 and 105-113.70)
(Ord. 09-03-02, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 09-06-02, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 02-
01-10, passed 2-9-10; Am. Ord. 11-06-01, passed 6-1-11; Am. Ord. 12-02-03,
passed 2-14-12; Am. Ord. 13-06-02, passed 6-11-13; Am. Ord. 17-02-01, passed 2-
14-17)
CHAPTER 14: OFFENSES; MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
14-1.   Throwing missiles; discharging firearms
   
14-2.   Failure to pay fare for vehicle for hire
   
14-3.   Damages to public or private property
   
14-4.   Writing or drawing obscene words or pictures
   
14-5.   Standing or sitting upon confederate monument
   
14-6.   Disturbing public meetings
   
14-7.   Disturbing school children
   
14-8.   Spitting in public places
   
14-9.   Unnecessary noise
   
14-10.   Use of parking lots regulated
   
14-11.   Trespass on city property
   
14-12.   Loitering
   
14-13.   Firearms and other weapons prohibited on city property
   
14-14.   Curfew for minors
   
14-15.   Criminal activity nuisance abatement
   
Appendix: Maximum penalty schedule
§ 14-1 THROWING MISSILES; DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Discharge any firearm or air rifle;
   (B)   Throw stones or other missiles; and
   (C)   Use a bean shooter or slingshot.
(`86 Code, § 14-1)
Penalty, see § 1-99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, see G.S.
   § 160A-189
   Authority to restrict discharge of pellet guns, see G.S.
   § 160A-190
   Shooting or throwing at trains or passengers, see G.S.
   § 14-280
§ 14-2 FAILURE TO PAY FARE FOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons entitled to free
transportation, to ride upon any bus, taxicab or other public conveyance
without paying therefor the fare prescribed or allowed by law.
(`86 Code, § 14-2)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 14-3 DAMAGES TO PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to damage or destroy any
fence, gate, sign, electric light fixture or any other property of the city or
of another person or to post any bill or poster upon the property of another
without the consent of the owner.
(`86 Code, § 14-3)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record at the office of the City
Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   Injuring houses, churches, fences and walls and the like, see G.S. § 14-144
   Injuring personal property, see G.S. § 14-160
   Injury to public buildings, see G.S. § 14-132
   Injuring wires, fixtures of telephone and power companies, see G.S.§ 14-154
   Malicious injury to real property, see G.S. § 14-127
§ 14-4 WRITING OR DRAWING OBSCENE WORDS OR PICTURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to do any obscene act in any public place, or to
write obscene language or to make obscene markings or drawings on any wall of
any public or private building, or upon the streets or sidewalks.
(`86 Code, § 14-4)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record at the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 14-5 STANDING OR SITTING UPON CONFEDERATE MONUMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or sit upon the Confederate
Monument.
(`86 Code, § 14-5)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 14-6 DISTURBING PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful to behave in a boisterous or disruptive manner at any
public entertainment or meeting, or to create any manner of disturbance at the
entrance thereto, or to in any way disturb or annoy the audience of the place.
(`86 Code, § 14-6)
Penalty, see § 1-99
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct in public buildings, see G.S.
   § 143-345.2
   Disturbing religious assembly by certain exhibitions,
   see G.S. § 14-200
§ 14-7 DISTURBING SCHOOL CHILDREN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person at or near any schoolhouse or property
within the town to engage by conversation, sign or otherwise attract the
attention of any of the pupils therein or thereon, to the disturbance of the
same and to the detriment of the discipline of the school or otherwise cause
any disturbance whatsoever on or near school property. It shall be unlawful for
any person to cause any disturbance or disrupt any school function, sport or
other gathering within the city, whether the same be on or off of school
property.
(`86 Code, § 14-7)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 14-8 SPITTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful to spit upon the floor of any public building or upon
any paved sidewalk.
(`86 Code, § 14-8)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 14-9 UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of the
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of
any individual is prohibited.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger
signal, or if in motion only as a signal necessitated by traffic conditions;
the creation by means of any signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of the device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time;
      (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police,
fire or other emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in
a manner or with the volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person;
      (4)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (5)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (6)   The blowing of any whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
      (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or any engine, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom;
      (8)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless
the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (9)   The erection, including excavating, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the
County Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three
days or less while the emergency continues;
      (10)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning or court while the same is in session, or
within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working
of the institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets
indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street;
      (11)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets
adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
      (12)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
      (13)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which disturb the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (14)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
      (15)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale or display
of merchandise;
      (16)   The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes, except where a
specific license is received from the Police Department; (Advertising sound
trucks may make not more than three continuous round trips in the fire district
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., on condition that the sound
devices on the trucks shall be kept silent unless the truck is moving at a
speed of not less than 15 miles per hour.)
      (17)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling
station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to
be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
      (18)   The maintenance and operation of radios, amplifiers, phonographs
or other mechanical instruments or devices of any kind whereby the sound
therefrom is cast directly upon the streets or other public places; (The
provisions hereof are not to apply to Christmas or religious music.)
      (19)   Playing or permitting to be played any piccolo, juke box or other
musical mechanical slot machine between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
and/or
      (20)   The gathering of ten or more persons for the purpose of rallies,
recreation events, speeches, parades or similar gatherings between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., particularly in close proximity to residential
neighborhoods, so that the sleep and repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel
or other type of residence is likely to be disturbed.
(`86 Code, § 14-9)
   (C)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record at the office of the City
Clerk.
Statutory reference:
   Noise regulations authorized, see G.S. § 160A-184
§ 14-10 USE OF PARKING LOTS REGULATED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PARKING LOT. Any area within the city on which more than ten automobiles
may be parked and shall include public parking lots and those parking lots
which are for the principal purpose of providing parking during business hours
for shopping centers, stores, restaurants, drive-ins, theaters and other
business or commercial establishments.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for more than five people to congregate on a
parking lot between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., if the closest part of the parking
lot is within 300 feet of a private residence. This section shall not apply to
a person parking a vehicle on a lot or being on a parking lot for the purpose
of patronizing a business establishment which is actually open for business
between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person on a parking lot in the city to:
      (1)   Talk in a loud or boisterous manner;
      (2)   Throw any type of bottle, can, container, trash or paper on a
parking lot;
      (3)   Use profanity or cursing in a manner that a person standing in the
immediate vicinity of the person may hear the profanity or cursing;
      (4)   Make a noise or disturbance that persons living in homes or other
dwelling accommodations within 300 feet of the parking lot are disturbed in
their place of living and deprived of their peace and quiet.
(`86 Code, § 14-10)
   (D)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record at the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 14-11 TRESPASS ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any real property
belonging to or under the control of the city unless the person does so under
the direction or the supervision of the City Manager or his or her duly
designated representative. This section is applicable to property of the city,
both inside and outside of the city limits.
(Ord. 90-12-1, passed 12-11-90)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record at the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 14-12 LOITERING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER.  A person who has, within
the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within the
state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the
substances referred to in the State Controlled Substances Act, G.S. Ch. 90,
Art. 5, of the state Statutes, or has been convicted of any violation of any
substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of the state or of any
other state or of federal law.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza,
park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and
entrance ways to any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor
vehicle in or on any of those places or any property owned by the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in a
public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to
engage in a violation of any subdivision of the State Controlled Substances
Act, G.S. Ch. 90, Article 5. The circumstances shall include:
      (1)   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping or attempting to stop passers-by
or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in conversation;
      (2)   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles;
      (3)   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons;
      (4)   The person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller;
      (5)   The person behaves in a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion
that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful drug related
activity;
      (6)   The person repeatedly passes to or receives from passers-by,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects;
      (7)   The person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a police
officer;
      (8)   The person is at a location frequented by persons who use, possess
or sell drugs; or
      (9)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor or seller or is known to be or have been involved in drug related
activities.
   (C)   Violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor, as
provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. 90-6-1, passed 6-12-90)
§ 14-13 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section, all persons are
prohibited from possessing any firearm, including a handgun carried under the
authority of a lawful concealed handgun permit, in city-owned buildings and
their appurtenant premises, as defined herein.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section, all persons are
prohibited from possessing any firearm, unless carried concealed under the
authority of a lawful concealed handgun permit, in any city park. However, the
exception for concealed carry of a lawfully concealed handgun permit does not
apply to those locations identified in division (C) of this section.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section, all persons are
prohibited from possessing any firearm, including a concealed handgun carried
under the authority of a lawful concealed handgun permit, at the following city
recreational facilities (i.e. athletic facilities, athletic field, pools, and
playgrounds) in accordance with G.S. § 14-415.23:
      (1)   The Oxford Recreation Complex facility including the gymnasium,
playground area, athletic fields, tennis courts, skate park, and basketball
court located at 320 Williamsboro Street, Oxford, N.C.;
      (2)   The entirety of the Oxford Park Athletic Complex located at 6048
Horner Siding Road, Oxford, N.C.;
      (3)   Rucker Park Facility, including Rucker Park Family Pool, athletic
field and basketball courts located at 1004 Stem Road, Oxford, N.C.:
      (4)   The Volleyball Court at Lake Devin Park located at 3049 Lake Devin
Road, Oxford, N.C.;
      (5)   Granville Street Park located at 500 Granville Street. Oxford,
N.C.;
      (6)   Any other property owned by the city which could be reasonably
designated as a pool, playground, athletic field or athletic facility.
   (D)   Except as provided in division (G) of this section all persons are
prohibited from possessing weapons other than firearms, as defined in G.S. §
14-269 in city-owned buildings, their appurtenant premises, and in city parks
and recreation facilities, as defined herein.
   (E)   Nothing herein is intended to prohibit a person from storing a firearm
within a motor vehicle while the vehicle is on the aforementioned properties
within the city.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, BUILDINGS is defined as set forth in
G.S. § 14-54(c) as including any dwelling, dwelling house, uninhabited house,
building under construction, building within the curtilage of a dwelling house,
and any other structure designed to house or secure within it any activity or
property.
   (G)   The prohibitions set forth herein shall not apply to the following
persons:
      (1)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of the United
States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under
orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;
      (2)   Civil officers of the United States while in the discharge of their
official duties;
      (3)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the national guard when
called into actual service;
      (4)   Sworn law enforcement officers;
      (5)   City of Oxford or Granville County animal control officers;
      (6)   Persons firing firearms without projectiles in organized
educational, entertainment, structional, or ceremonial events sponsored by the
city.
   (H)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted at each entrance to any property
set forth in division (A), (B), or (C) of this section outlining the
restrictions prescribed in this section.
   (I)   Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined up to $500 or imprisonment for
no greater than six months or both.
   (J)   Firearms and other weapons possessed in violation of this section are
hereby declared to be contraband. The Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall dispose of such weapons pursuant to applicable state law.
(Ord. 12-11-01, passed 12-13-11)
§ 14-14 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section shall be to establish a curfew for minors
in the city, thus assisting the parents and guardians of minors in the ever-
increasing difficult task of child-rearing and to promote the health, safety
and welfare of both minors and adults in the city by creating an environment
offering protection and security for all concerned.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CITY. The corporate limits of the City of Oxford, North Carolina.
      GUARDIAN. A person who has the legal care and management of a minor as
defined by this section, which shall include the term PARENT.
      MINOR. A person who has not reached his or her sixteenth birthday and is
not married, emancipated or a member of the armed services of the United
States.
      OFFICER. Any sworn law enforcement official employed by the city and
having authority to enforce laws of the city.
      POLICE DEPARTMENT. The City of Oxford Police Department.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground,
parking lot or place to which the general public has access and a right to go
for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. A PUBLIC PLACE shall
include, but not be limited to any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling
alley, café, theater, drug store, pool room, shopping center and any other
place devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall
also include the front of immediate area of the above.
   (C)   A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be enforced
within the corporate limits of the city as follows.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any public place
as defined in this section in the city between midnight Friday and 5:00 a.m. on
Saturday, or between midnight Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday, or between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following morning on Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday.
      (2)   The restrictions provided by division (C)(1) above shall not apply
to any minor:
         (a)   Who is accompanied by a guardian, parent or other person charged
with the care and custody of the minor or a person over 18 years of age
authorized by a parent or guardian to accompany the minor;
         (b)   Who is traveling between his or her home and place of
employment, or between his or her home and church, municipal building, if the
municipal building is open for some legitimate business purpose during the
hours when this curfew is in effect, or school where a function is being held;
         (c)   Who is attending a school or church function or activity
sponsored by the city;
         (d)   Who is seeking emergency, medical care for himself or herself or
some member of his or her immediate family;
         (e)   Who is engaged in travel with written parental permission;
         (f)   Who is engaged in bona fide interstate movement by motor vehicle
through the city or beginning or ending in the city;
         (g)   Who is engaged in situations in which a minor is outdoors but
attending sponsored organized and supervised activities, supervised by a
responsible adult or organization involving the First Amendment free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech or the right of assembly;
         (h)   Who is engaged in travel in instances of reasonable necessity if
the minor possesses a written statement signed by the parent which describes
the minor, states the facts establishing the reasonable necessity, specifies
the streets, the time and the origin-and destination of travel;
         (i)   Who is engaged in situations in which a minor is on a sidewalk
of the place where the minor resides, or on the sidewalk of a next-door
neighbor and not congregating outdoors on another person's private property
without the express permission of the owner or other person in lawful control
of the property;
         (j)   Who is engaged in travel by a direct route, between a minor's
place of residence and a school, religious, recreational, entertainment or any
other organized community activity, including activities involving the free
exercise of religion, speech or assembly.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other persons
charged with the care and custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit the
minor child to be in or upon, or remain in or upon a public place within the
city within the curfew hours set out in division (C)(1) above, except as
otherwise provided in division (C)(2) above.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating
a place of business, including a place of amusement, to knowingly allow or
permit any minor to be in or upon, or to remain in or upon, any place of
business, including a place of amusement, operated by them within the curfew
hours set out by division (C)(1) above, except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(2) above.
      (5)   (a)   When a minor is found to be in violation of this section, the
officer will determine if the juvenile is a first time offender; if so, he or
she will then be taken to the Police Department or the residence of his or her
parent or guardian. Written warning will be given to that parent or guardian.
An information report shall be taken by the officer, to include the name and
address of the juvenile and parent or guardian and the time, date and location
of the offense. This report will be filed in the Police Department records
division. The report shall be confidential and shall be subject to disclosure
only pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
         (b)   If, upon investigation, the juvenile is found to be a repeat
offender, he or she will be taken to the Police Department or to the residence
of his or her parent or guardian and the adult, parent or guardian will be
subject to a criminal citation, pursuant to division (C). A report will be
filed in the Police Department and entered into the Police Department records
division and shall contain the same information and be subject to the same
confidentiality provisions as set forth herein.
         (c)   If the juvenile is under 12 years of age, a report will be made
and a copy forwarded to the County Department of Social Services.
      (6)   It shall be a violation of this section for an adult, guardian or
parent to allow, permit, encourage, aid or abet a minor in the violation of
division (C)(1) above, except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) above.
      (7)   If any guardian or parent refuses to take custody of his or her
minor child found to be in violation of this section, the officer with custody
of the minor shall follow the procedure set forth in G.S. Ch. 7A, Art. 41.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
section shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment up to six
months.
(Ord. 97-10-1, passed 10-14-97)
§ 14-15 CRIMINAL ACTIVITY NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to remove criminal activity
from areas of the city using G.S. §§ 19-1 through 19-8.3. these criminal
activities shall include assignation, prostitution, gambling, illegal
possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, illegal possession or sale of
controlled substances as defined in the North Carolina Controlled Substances
Act, or illegal possession or sale of obscene or lewd matter, as defined in
this section, shall constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the
corporate limits of the City of Oxford.
   (C)   Declaration of a criminal nuisance. Any condition defined in G.S. Ch.
19 as a nuisance shall be defined herein as a nuisance and shall be prohibited
within the jurisdiction of the City of Oxford.
   (D)   Identification.
      (1)   The primary responsibility of identifying potential properties and/
or businesses rests with the Chief of Police and the Police Department as they
have the most direct contact with the types of activities to which the nuisance
law applies.
      (2)   All city officials, including members of the Board of
Commissioners, Mayor, City Manager, and City Attorney should assist the Chief
of Police in carrying out his or her responsibility of identifying nuisances
and should contact him or her if they have concern about ongoing illegal or
suspicious activity at a particular location in the city. A copy of the
nuisance law should be distributed to all city officials and they should
familiarize themselves with the types of activities to which it applies.
      (3)   Members of the general public should be encouraged by the Police
Department and city officials to assist them in identifying areas and locations
of concern. A copy of the nuisance law should be generally available at City
Hall for use of the citizens.
   (E)   Investigation.
      (1)   When a potential nuisance is identified, it shall be reported to
the Chief of Police who shall determine whether the reported nuisance is such
that additional investigation should be conducted.
      (2)   In the event it is determined that additional investigation should
be conducted, the Chief of Police or his designee within the Police Department
shall investigate the nuisance. Upon the completion of the investigation, a
written report shall be prepared and filed with the City Manager and City
Attorney. The report shall contain detailed findings of fact and all supporting
documentation. After the report has been reviewed, the Chief, City Manager, and
City Attorney shall decide whether or not the city should take steps to abate
the nuisance. If they decide to take steps to abate the nuisance then they
shall report the findings to the Board of Commissioners in closed session to
determine if the Board wishes to seek legal remedies and pay legal costs.
   (F)   Notification, abatement, actions of injunction, civil penalty, and
forfeiture.
      (1)   If it is determined as set forth above that a nuisance situation
exists and that the same should be abated, the city shall take such steps
necessary to do so, in accordance with the laws of the State of North Carolina.
The landowner(s) and/or business operator(s) shall be notified, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of the facts and circumstances, which
constitute the nuisance. The landowner and/or business owner shall be given a
reasonable time to respond to the allegations and shall be given a reasonable
time to voluntarily abate the nuisance. If requested by the landowner, the
Police Chief and/or City Manager and shall meet with the landowner to discuss
resolution of the nuisance.
      (2)   If, after notification, and upon the expiration of the notification
period, the landowner and/or business owner fails to voluntarily abate the
nuisance, then the City Manager shall report the same to the Board in executive
session. At this time, the Board, after consulting with the City Manager, Chief
of Police, and City Attorney, shall decide whether to pursue the matter through
the judicial process and seek abatement, injunction, civil penalty, and
forfeiture as deemed necessary and set forth in G.S. §§ 19-2.1 et seq. If the
Board so decides, then the procedures set forth in G.S. §§ 19-2.1 et seq.,
which are annexed hereto and incorporated by reference herein, shall be
followed.
(Ord. 09-09-02, passed 9-8-09)
APPENDIX: MAXIMUM PENALTY SCHEDULE
Maximum Penalty schedule
Code Section                                Maximum Penalty   Ord. No.
§ 14-3 Damages to public or private        Not less than $50 92-1-10, passed
property                                    and not greater   1-14-92
                                            than $500
§ 14-4 Writing or drawing obscene words or Not less than $50 92-1-11, passed
pictures                                    and not greater   1-14-92
                                            than $200
                                            Not less than $50 92-1-12, passed
§ 14-9 Unnecessary noise                   and not greater   1-14-92
                                            than $250
                                            Not less than $50 92-1-13, passed
§ 14-10 Use of parking lots regulated      and not greater   1-14-92
                                            than $200
                                            Not less than $50 92-1-28, passed
§ 14-11 Trespass on city property          and not greater   1-14-92
                                            than $500
Note to Table: These penalties may be amended from time to time.
 
CHAPTER 15: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
15-1.   Department of Recreation
   
15-2.   Director of Recreation
   
15-3.   Financing of activities
   
15-4.   Registration fees
Article II: Recreation Advisory Committee
   
15-26.   Creation
   
15-27.   Members
   
15-28.   Meetings
   
15-29.   Powers and duties
   
15-30.   Limitation on financial liability
   
15-31.   Annual report
Article III: Volunteer Coaching Requirements
   
15-45.   Application
   
15-46.   Background check
   
15-47.   Findings; necessary agreements
Article IV: Skateboard Parks
   
15-56.   Purpose
   
15-57.   Definitions
   
15-58.   Rules and hours of operation
   
15-59.   Sign posting
   
15-60.   Duties of persons engaged in hazardous recreational activities
   
15-61.   Violation and penalty
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 15-1 DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.
   Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager, there is
hereby created the Department of Recreation.
(`86 Code, § 15-1)
§ 15-2 DIRECTOR OF RECREATION.
   (A)   Subject to the general control and supervision of the City Manager,
there is hereby created the Office of the Director of Recreation.
   (B)   The rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the Director of
Recreation shall be as provided in this section.
   (C)   The Director of Recreation shall have general supervision, direction
and control, under the direction of the City Manager, over all matters
pertaining to public recreation, including public playgrounds, public parks and
other public property, used or intended for public recreational purposes in the
city.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Recreation to supervise
generally, administer and control the use of all the public playgrounds, public
parks and equipment owned by the city within the city and used or intended for
use for public recreation.
      (2)   The Director of Recreation shall have the duty and authority to
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with any
ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners, for the proper and efficient
administration of the Department of Recreation and for the wholesome use of the
recreational facilities and equipment by the general public, to the end that
the greatest benefit from the use of the facilities shall be gained by the
citizens of the city.
   (E)   For the purpose of properly and efficiently carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Director of Recreation shall have authority to
employ, and to discharge within the limits of the budget and with the approval
of the City Manager all play leaders, playground directors, supervisors,
recreation specialists, maintenance personnel and other employees, as the
Director may deem necessary and proper.
   (F)   (1)   The Director or his or her designated representative shall
enforce all the ordinances of the city regulating playgrounds and recreation
centers and their use and may, in furtherance of the duty, have power to remove
or cause to be removed and excluded from any of the playgrounds, amusement
facilities and recreation centers
owned, rented or leased by the city, any person violating any ordinances, or
any rules or regulations concerning their use, for a period of not to exceed 24
hours.
      (2)   He or she shall have the care and control of all equipment, grounds
and paraphernalia owned or controlled by the city for use for playgrounds or
recreation purposes, and shall be responsible for the custody of the property.
      (3)   The designated representatives will be subject to the approval of
the City Manager and a list of designees will be recorded.
(`86 Code, § 15-2) (Ord. 82-9-1, passed 9-14-82)
§ 15-3 FINANCING OF ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   The Board may appropriate moneys as it may deem necessary for the
purpose of carrying on the activities of the Recreation Department.
   (B)   (1)   The Recreation Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to
the Recreation Director and the City Manager in developing the annual budgetary
request to be presented for consideration by the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Except as otherwise directed by the Board, funds received by the
Committee and/or the Recreation Department, other than revenue from
appropriations and facilities of the Recreation Department, shall be used to
supplement the Department's budget.
      (3)   The funds shall be paid to the city, shall be disbursed for the
purposes for which the funds were accepted and shall be disbursed in the same
manner as other Department funds.
(`86 Code, § 15-3)
§ 15-4 REGISTRATION FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The registration fees for participants in city sponsored
recreation programs shall be established by the Director of Recreation with the
assistance of the Recreation Advisory Committee.
      (2)   County participants shall pay a higher fee than city residents for
the same activity or sport.
   (B)   The fee schedules as are established shall be subject to final review
and approval by the Board.
(`86 Code, § 15-4) (Ord. 78-10-2, passed 10-10-78)
ARTICLE II: RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 15-26 CREATION.
   There is hereby created the Recreation Advisory Committee.
(`86 Code, § 15-26)
§ 15-27 MEMBERS.
   (A)   (1)   The Recreation Advisory Committee shall be composed of six
appointed members, a Youth Advisory representative and one ex-officio member.
      (2)   Six members will be appointed by the Oxford Board of Commissioners
as follows:
         (a)   Three residents from the City of Oxford.
         (b)   Two residents from Granville County.
         (c)   One at-large (inside or outside Granville County).
         (d)   The Chairman of the Mayor’s committee that reviews recreational
policy shall serve as an ex-officio member and shall be the liaison between the
Board of Commissioners and the Recreation Advisory Committee.
      (3)   Each appointed member shall serve a term of three years with
staggered term limits or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified,
except for the Youth Advisory representative who shall be a resident of the
City of Oxford and who will serve a one-year term.
   (B)   A failure of any member of the Recreation Advisory Committee to attend
three consecutive regular meetings of the Committee without leave of the
Committee, or except when the absence is made necessary by sickness or other
similar emergency causes, shall operate to forfeit and declare vacant the seat
of the member on the Committee.
   (C)   (1)   Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled by the Board of Commissioners, for the unexpired term.
      (2)   All members shall serve without compensation.
(`86 Code, § 15-27) (Am. Ord. 14-01-02, passed 1-14-14; Am. Ord. 14-10-01,
passed 10-14-14)
§ 15-28 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be held at
least quarterly at a time designated by the Committee, in the City Hall or
other agreed upon place.
   (B)   Special meetings may be held at other times upon a call made by the
Director of Recreation or by the Chairperson of the Recreation Advisory
Committee.
(`86 Code, § 15-28) (Am. Ord. 14-01-02, passed 1-14-14)
§ 15-29 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be as
follows:
   (A)   To select from its membership its Chairperson and other officers as
considered necessary and to adopt bylaws under which it will operate;
   (B)   To plan and recommend, by regular and special reports to the Board of
Commissioners, such action as may be necessary to create and develop an
adequate and complete system of parks, playgrounds and recreation centers and
facilities;
   (C)   To advise with the City Manager concerning the supervision,
organization and management of parks and playgrounds (and activities thereon),
recreation and social centers, playfields, natatoriums and similar facilities,
in order that the best and most satisfactory provision for supervision of
community sports of all kinds, community singing, music, games, plays,
celebrations and similar activities will be properly developed;
   (D)   To cooperate with persons interested in public recreation;
   (E)   To recommend clean and wholesome recreation and amusement for the
citizens of the city as it shall deem advisable;
   (F)   To cooperate with any other public authority and to aid and assist in
coordinating recreational activities, pursuant to and in accord with the
Recreation Enabling Law and with the provisions of this chapter;
   (G)   To carry out the directions of the Board and the City Manager and,
subject to the directions of the Board and/or the City Manager, to make
recommendations to the Director in organizing and directing the use of
playgrounds and centers owned, operated or maintained by the city.
(`86 Code, § 15-29)
§ 15-30 LIMITATION ON FINANCIAL LIABILITY.
   Neither the Recreation Advisory Committee nor any person representing the
Committee shall incur any financial liability in the name of the city.
(`86 Code, § 15-30)
§ 15-31 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Recreation Advisory Committee shall annually present to the Oxford Board
of Commissioners a report of its activities, findings and recommendations.
(`86 Code, § 15-31) (Am. Ord. 14-01-02, passed 1-14-14)
ARTICLE III: VOLUNTEER COACHING REQUIREMENTS
§ 15-45 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to coach an organization sponsored by the city
shall make application to the Director of Parks and Recreation.
   (B)   The application shall include:
      (1)   Full name, address, date of birth, social security number, driver's
license information, race and sex;
      (2)   A statement acknowledging convictions of any crime, felony or
misdemeanor and authorizing a criminal background check; and
      (3)   A completed applicant fingerprint card.
(Ord. 99-5-2, passed 5-11-99)
§ 15-46 BACKGROUND CHECK.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, the Director of Parks and Recreation
shall conduct a background check of each applicant. If a conviction is found in
the FBI criminal history repository, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall
request a copy of the conviction from the Police Department of the locality in
which the offense occurred to make certain the individual in question is the
actual offender.
   (B)   If a question exists as to the actual offender in a case, the Director
of Parks and Recreation shall submit the applicants' fingerprints to the FBI
for verification of criminal history. Any applicant may be prohibited from
coaching an organization if she or he has been convicted of a crime involving:
      (1)   Narcotic drug law offense in the past ten years;
      (2)   Two or more alcohol related offenses in the past ten years;
      (3)   Violation of domestic abuse or child abuse law;
      (4)   Conviction of any offense against the welfare of a child;
      (5)   Aberrant behavior that presents a potential danger to self or
others;
      (6)   Conviction of any offense related to sex or sexual misconduct; and
      (7)   Falsifying their application form.
(Ord. 99-5-2, passed 5-11-99)
§ 15-47 FINDINGS; NECESSARY AGREEMENTS.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall provide the findings made
by use of the PIN to the Director of Parks and Recreation or his or her
designee, provided that all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of
Investigation's Division of Criminal Information have been executed.
(Ord. 99-5-2, passed 5-11-99)
ARTICLE IV: SKATEBOARD PARKS
§ 15-56 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish rules and procedures for persons
who engage in certain hazardousrecreational activities that occur in an area
designated for certain hazardous recreational activities and as required by
G.S. §§ 99E-21 through 99E-25, which is incorporated by reference herein as if
fully set forth.
(Ord. 03-10-01, passed 10-14-03)
§ 15-57 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY. Skateboarding, inline skating, scooters or
freestyle bicycling.
   SKATEBOARD PARK. Designated area located adjacent to the D.N Hix Gym
Complex, Belle Street, Oxford.
   INHERENT RISK. Those dangers or conditions that are characteristic of,
intrinsic to, or an integral part of skateboarding, inline skating, freestyle
bicycling, scooters or rollerblading.
(Ord. 03-10-01, passed 10-14-03)
§ 15-58 RULES AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall be permitted to ride a skateboard or skate within the
designated skateboard park unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads,
and kneepads.
   (B)   Hours of operation are from sunrise to sunset. No skateboarding or
rollerblading are allowed after dark or prior to sunrise.
   (C)   Bicycles and scooters of any type are not permitted on the skateboard
park.
   (D)   No person shall be permitted to use the skateboard park without first
registering for a permit through the Department of Recreation as determined by
the Department of Recreation and approved by the City Board of Commissioners.
Persons using the skateboard park must have the permit with them at all times
of use.
(Ord. 03-10-01, passed 10-14-03)
§ 15-59 SIGN POSTING.
   In accordance with G.S. § 99E-23(b)(2), the city has posted signs at the
skateboard park that include, but is not limited to, a listing of the minimum
requirements that any person riding a skateboard or rollerblades in or at the
skateboard park are required to wear a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads.
(Ord. 03-10-01, passed 10-14-03)
§ 15-60 DUTIES OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   In accordance with G.S. § 99E-24, any person who participates in or
assists in hazardous recreational activities assumes the known and unknown
inherent risks in these activities, irrespective of age, and is legally
responsible for all damages, injury, or death to himself or herself or other
persons or property that result from these activities. Any person who observes
hazardous recreational activities assumes the known and unknown inherent risks
in these activities, irrespective of age, and is legally responsible for all
damages, injury, or death to himself or herself that result from these
activities. The city, its agents, employees, officials and successors in office
are not required to eliminate, alter, or control the inherent risks in these
activities in any manner.
   (B)   While engaged in hazardous recreational activities, irrespective of
where such activities occur, a participant is responsible for doing all of the
following:
      (1)   Acting within the limits of his or her ability and the purpose and
design of the equipment used.
      (2)   Maintaining control of his or her person and the equipment used.
      (3)   Refraining from acting in any manner that may cause or contribute
to death or injury of himself or herself or other persons.
   (C)   Failure to comply with the requirement of division (B) of this section
constitutes negligence.
(Ord. 03-10-01, passed 10-14-03)
§ 15-61 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person failing to comply with this article shall be subject to
punishment for a violation as set forth in § 1-99. In addition, any violation
of this article may result in revocation of the permit issued pursuant to § 15-
58(D) hereof.
(Ord. 03-10-01, passed 10-14-03)
CHAPTER 16: PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
[Reserved]
Statutory reference:
   Planning and development, see G.S. §§ 160A-360 et seq.
Cross-reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Ch. 5
   Land use plan for extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, see §
5-117
Editor's Note:
   By Ord. 86-8-4, passed 8-12-86, the city adopted the Planning Board
Ordinance, filed in the offices of the City Clerk and City Planning Director.
Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect Ord.
1967-11-1 or the city's zoning or subdivision ordinances, and all such
provisions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out in length in this code.
CHAPTER 17: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
17-1.   Ordinances not affected by code
   
17-2.   Special police
   
17-3.   General powers and duties
   
17-4.   Service of tax levies
   
17-5.   Service of process
   
17-6.   Patrols outside city
   
17-7.   Authorization to summon aid
   
17-8.   Confinement of arrested persons
   
17-9.   Rewards to be publicized
   
17-10.   Burglar alarm systems
   
17-11.   Firearm policy for retiring officers or officers killed in the line of
duty
Article II: Auxiliary Police Division
   
17-26.   Generally
   
17-27.   Chief of Police to control; appointments and removals
   
17-28.   Duties
   
17-29.   Identification
   
17-30.   Firearms
   
17-31.   Law enforcement powers
   
17-32.   Benefits
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 17-1 ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect
Ordinance No. 75-4-2 adopted April 8, 1975, and the ordinance is hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length in this code.
(`86 Code, § 17-1)
§ 17-2 SPECIAL POLICE.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager, it shall be necessary to
employ a detective or extra or special police, the City Manager shall have the
power to do so; provided, that no greater expense than $150 shall be incurred
without a vote of the Board.
(`86 Code, § 17-2)
§ 17-3 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the police to suppress all disturbances in the city,
to maintain peace, quiet and good order, to prevent all injury to property, to
execute all warrants issued by the district court, and to arrest all persons
violating any of the ordinances of the city or any of the laws of the state.
The arrests may be made without warrants, when necessity may require it, but
when an arrest has been made without a warrant, the police officers making the
arrest shall procure a warrant for the offender as soon thereafter as is
practicable. The police officers shall also carefully inspect the streets and
sidewalks and endeavor to prevent injury thereto, reporting to the proper
authorities the need for any repairs that may exist.
(`86 Code, § 17-3)
Statutory reference:
   Law enforcement, see G.S. §§ 160A-281 et seq.
   Powers and duties of police, see G.S. § 160A-285
§ 17-4 SERVICE OF TAX LEVIES.
   Police lieutenants, in addition to the Police Chief and Assistant Police
Chief, are hereby authorized to serve tax levies on personal property.
(`86 Code, § 17-4)
§ 17-5 SERVICE OF PROCESS.
   It shall be the duty of the police officers to serve all process, such as
garnishments, levies on personal property for taxes and the like, placed in the
hands of officers by the Tax Collector.
(`86 Code, § 17-5)
§ 17-6 PATROLS OUTSIDE CITY.
   (A)   Police cars shall not patrol outside of the city limits at any time,
except in pursuit of persons suspected of having committed felonies such as
murder, arson or rape.
   (B)   The Police Department may answer calls from industries located within
one mile of the city.
(`86 Code, § 17-6)
Statutory reference:
   Territorial jurisdiction of police officers to make
   arrests, see G.S. §§ 15A-402, 160A-286
§ 17-7 AUTHORIZATION TO SUMMON AID.
   If resisted in executing the law, a police officer may summon a sufficient
number of persons to come to his or her assistance, as is necessary to make an
arrest and enforce the law, and it shall be unlawful for any person so summoned
to refuse or fail to so assist the police officer.
(`86 Code, § 17-7)
§ 17-8 CONFINEMENT OF ARRESTED PERSONS.
   All persons arrested by the police officers shall be confined in the County
Jail until trial unless the person gives the required bond.
(`86 Code, § 17-8)
§ 17-9 REWARDS TO BE PUBLICIZED.
   Whenever any notice of a reward ordered for the apprehension of any person
comes to the Chief of Police or other police officer, the same must be made
known by the recipient to all other police officers and to the City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 17-9)
§ 17-10 BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS.
   The initial charge for a burglar alarm system that is connected to the
Police Department shall be as established by resolution. The charge for
monitoring a system shall be as established by resolution.
(`86 Code, § 17-10) (Ord. 80-6-1, passed 6-10-80)
§ 17-11 FIREARM POLICY FOR RETIRING OFFICERS OR OFFICERS KILLED IN THE LINE OF
DUTY.
   (A)   The purpose of this policy is to establish a procedure for awarding
service weapons and badges to retiring police officers or to the survivors of
officers killed in the line of duty.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BADGE. The shirt badge issued to a police officer by the city through its
Police Department.
      DECEASED POLICE OFFICER. A police officer that is killed in the line of
duty.
      RETIRING POLICE OFFICER. A full-time police officer who will voluntarily
leave the employment of the city after becoming eligible for retirement under
the rules of the State Retirement System.
      SERVICE WEAPON. The sidearm that is issued by the city through its Police
Department to a police officer and is carried on duty by the officer.
      SURVIVOR. The immediate survivor of the deceased officer.
   (C)   (1)   Service weapon.
         (a)   Upon retirement of a full-time police officer who has served as
a police officer for the city and upon written request by the retiring officer
made within 30 days of the effective retirement date, the city may, pursuant to
G.S. § 17F-20 §§ 20-187.2, award the retiring officer their service sidearm,
badge and credentials. This shall be done at no cost to the retiring officer.
         (b)   The retiring officer must fully comply with the requirements set
forth in G.S. § 20-187.2 by either securing a permit for the sidearm pursuant
to G.S. §§ 14-402 et seq. or 14-409 et seq. or by having the sidearm rendered
incapable of being fired.
      (2)   Badge/credentials. Upon retirement as set forth herein, an officer
will be awarded their duty badge and photo identification issued by the Police
Department, both of which shall be stamped RETIRED.
      (3)   Eligibility of officers prior to September 10, 2013. Any award of
sidearm, badge and credentials prior to September 10, 2013 is hereby ratified.
Any police officer (as defined herein) that retired prior to September 10, 2013
who would now be eligible is hereby deemed eligible and may apply for their
sidearm, badge and credentials pursuant to this section.
      (4)   Killed in the line of duty. The immediate survivor of an officer
that is killed in the line of duty will be awarded that officer’s service
weapon, badge and credentials. This shall be done at no cost to the survivor
provided that the sidearm be rendered incapable of being fired. The order of
survivorship shall be in the following priority: spouse, children, parents,
brother or sister. This section shall apply regardless of the number of years
of service the officer had with the city.
(Ord. 00-4-1, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 13-09-03, passed 9-10-13)
 
ARTICLE II: AUXILIARY POLICE DIVISION
§ 17-26 GENERALLY.
   There is hereby established within the City Police Department, as a division
thereof, an Auxiliary Police Division. The Auxiliary Division shall be a
volunteer organization, composed of as many members as may be determined by the
Board.
(`86 Code, § 17-26) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish auxiliary police division, see
   G.S. § 160A-282
§ 17-27 CHIEF OF POLICE TO CONTROL; APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS.
   (A)   The Auxiliary Police Division shall be under the direct control of the
Chief of Police, acting under the general supervision of the City Manager. All
appointments and removals of members of the Auxiliary Police Division shall be
made in the same manner and under the same policies and procedures as may from
time to time be established for appointment and removal of regular police
officers.
   (B)   (1)   The Auxiliary Police Division shall have no commanding officer.
      (2)   However, the Chief of Police shall commission one auxiliary officer
to the rank of auxiliary lieutenant. The Auxiliary Lieutenant shall serve as
the official liaison officer between the Office of the Chief of Police, the
Assistant Chief of Police, the regular police lieutenants, and the members of
the Auxiliary Division. All other members of the Auxiliary Police Division
shall hold the rank of patrol person. The Chief of Police shall provide for
adequate training of members of the Auxiliary Police Division, and of
candidates for membership in compliance with the requirements of the state
criminal justice standards division.
(`86 Code, § 17-27) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
Statutory reference:
   Required standards for criminal justice officers, see
   G.S. § 17C-10
§ 17-28 DUTIES.
   The duties of the Auxiliary Police Division, subject at all times to the
direction and control of the Chief of Police, shall be to assist the regular
members of the Police Department in the enforcement of the law and the
maintenance of peace and order when called to active duty by the Chief of
Police, the Assistant Chief of Police or a regular police lieutenant. The Chief
of Police shall by order establish rules and regulations to govern the
Auxiliary Police Division, to fix the specific duties of its members, and to
provide for the maintenance of discipline. Members of the Auxiliary Police
Division shall obey the instructions of regular police officers in carrying out
their duties and comply with all other official rules, regulations, procedures
and be subject to the city personnel policy when applicable.
(`86 Code, § 17-28) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
§ 17-29 IDENTIFICATION.
   An identification card and other insignia or evidence of identity, as the
Chief of Police may prescribe, shall be issued to each member of the Auxiliary
Police Division who must carry the card and other identification at all times
while on duty and who must surrender them upon the termination of membership.
(`86 Code, § 17-29) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
§ 17-30 FIREARMS.
   (A)   No member of the Auxiliary Police Division shall carry or use any
firearms, except firearms issued or approved by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   All auxiliary police officers shall comply with rule number 1-8, page
8, and rule number 1-22, sections c and d, page 20, of the official Rules and
Regulations of the Oxford Police Department.
(`86 Code, § 17-30) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
§ 17-31 LAW ENFORCEMENT POWERS.
   All members of the Auxiliary Police Division shall be vested with the power
of arrest when called to duty by the Chief of Police or other commanding
officers of the Police Department. No member of the Auxiliary Police Division
shall attempt to enforce any laws or arrest any person while off-duty unless
accompanied by a regular police officer.
(`86 Code, § 17-31) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
§ 17-32 BENEFITS.
   (A)   While undergoing official training and while performing duties on
behalf of the Police Department, pursuant to orders or instructions of the
Chief of Police, members of the Auxiliary Police Division shall be entitled to
benefits under the State Workmen's Compensation Act.
   (B)   All members of the Auxiliary Police Division shall give eight hours
per month of duty in order to maintain certification. If called upon to perform
official duties beyond eight hours per month as authorized by the Chief of
Police, auxiliary officers may be paid at the rate of hourly salary comparable
to that of a regular police patrol person.
(`86 Code, § 17-32) (Ord. 84-7-1, passed 7-10-84)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to provide workmen's compensation benefit,
   see G.S. § 160A-282(b)
CHAPTER 18: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
18-1.   Construction standards
   
18-2.   Obstruction of drainage ditches; specifications for culverts
   
18-3.   Obstructing streets and sidewalks generally
   
18-4.   Growth of weeds, grass and the like
   
18-5.   Tree limbs obstructing sidewalks
   
18-6.   Cellar doors
   
18-7.   Occupant of lot to keep sidewalk open
   
18-8.   Barbed wire fences
   
18-9.   Planting certain trees prohibited
   
18-10.   Regulations for planting shrubbery
   
18-11.   Excavation permit
   
18-12.   Cutting asphalt or concrete
   
18-13.   Permit to lay pipes
   
18-14.   Permit to use sidewalk for grating or light
   
18-15.   Restoration of damaged streets or sidewalks
   
18-16.   Playing games
   
18-17.   Refusal to disperse
   
18-18.   Outdoor display: display and sale of merchandise on sidewalks
Article II: Parades, Demonstration and the Like
   
18-31.   Definitions
   
18-32.   Exceptions
   
18-33.   Permit
   
18-34.   Interference
   
18-35.   Carrying weapons
   
18-36.   Vicious animals
   
18-37.   Special provisions for picketing
   
18-38.   Street or sidewalk sales
Article III: Street Numbers
   
18-51.   Definitions
   
18-52.   Purpose
   
18-53.   Applicability
   
18-54.   Duty of owner to display number
   
18-55.   Fire Chief to assign numbers
   
18-56.   Display, visibility, size and placement
   
18-57.   Contrasting colors
   
18-58.   Violations
   
Appendix: Maximum penalty schedule
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 18-1 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   The state standards set forth in the document Minimum Design Construction
Criteria for Subdivision Streets contained in 19 NCAC 02C.0200, are hereby
adopted and shall be applicable to all streets developed outside of the city,
but within the zoning jurisdiction and water-sewer service area. Standards for
streets within the city shall be established on a street-by-street basis.
(`86 Code, § 18-1)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption by reference, see G.S. § 160A-76
§ 18-2 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES; SPECIFICATIONS FOR CULVERTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any drainage ditch in
the city.
   (B)   Construction of culverts shall comply with the specifications of the
City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 18-2)
   (C)   The piping of ditches along ribbon paved streets is prohibited except
for driveway access which shall be restricted to a minimum of 12 feet and a
maximum of 16 feet on a single driveway and a double driveway shall be
restricted to no more than a maximum of 24 feet.
(Am. Ord. 94-10-2, passed 10-11-94; Am. Ord. 08-04-01, passed 4-8-08)
   (D)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-3 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   No brick, stone, wood or other substance shall be placed or
allowed to lie in any street or alley of the city. No person shall place or
permit in or upon any sidewalk, street or alley any boxes, crates, barrels,
casks, tools, provisions or other material, substance or merchandise
whatsoever.
      (2)   Building material, earth and other obstructions of similar
character may be allowed in the streets with the written permission under the
restrictions as the City Manager may impose. No building material, earth and
other obstructions shall take up or occupy more than one-half of the street at
any one place.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the receiving of merchandise on the
sidewalks or to the opening of boxes or crates in which same may be shipped,
however, the opening of the boxes or crates and the receiving of the
merchandise shall be expedited as much as practicable.
(`86 Code, § 18-3)
   (C)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
(Am. Ord. 06-11-04, passed 6-14-11)
§ 18-4 GROWTH OF WEEDS, GRASS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To allow or permit any shrubbery, undergrowth, trees, weeds or any
other form of plant growth to grow upon, protrude or project into or upon any
sidewalk, street, alley or public square within the city; and
   (B)   To allow any shrubbery, undergrowth, trees, weeds or any other form of
plant growth to stand upon any property, at or near any street intersection so
that the same may obscure the view of pedestrians or persons traveling in
vehicles at the street intersections.
(`86 Code, § 18-4)
§ 18-5 TREE LIMBS OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALK.
   No person shall permit the limbs from any trees growing upon the land of the
person to grow or hang so as to obstruct or interfere with the free passage of
persons along the sidewalk or street.
(`86 Code, § 18-5)
§ 18-6 CELLAR DOORS.
   (A)   Every owner or occupant of a building which has a cellar door or vault
or entrance in a public footway shall keep the same in good repair and shall
keep the door closed at all times, except when in temporary use.
   (B)   Under the supervision of the Chief of Police, the owner or occupant
shall make the same safe for the public by placing substantial guard rails
where directed by the Chief of Police.
(`86 Code, § 18-6)
§ 18-7 OCCUPANT OF LOT TO KEEP SIDEWALK OPEN.
   Every owner or occupant of a lot on any street or alley shall keep the
footway or sidewalk adjacent to the lot and the gutter adjacent to the sidewalk
open and free from obstruction as far as the lot extends.
(`86 Code, § 18-7)
§ 18-8 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain along the edge of
any street of the city any barbed wire fence.
(`86 Code, § 18-8)
§ 18-9 PLANTING CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to plant, set out or cause to be planted or set out, on
any of the streets or sidewalks of the city or within 20 feet of the same, any
elm, mulberry or otaheite tree.
(`86 Code, § 18-9)
§ 18-10 REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING SHRUBBERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant vegetables in the parkways
between the sidewalks and the curb lines or on any part of any street in the
city, or to cultivate the soil in the parkways or any part of any street. The
Board may, upon request, allow the sowing of peas in the parkways and the
cultivation of same in preparation of the soil for the sowing of grass. This
section shall not prohibit the sowing of grass or planting of shrubbery, trees
or flowers for the purpose of beautifying the parkway's streets. No shrubbery
shall be permitted to grow on a parkway in the corporate limits of the city
within 50 feet from the end of the parkway.
(`86 Code, § 18-10)
§ 18-11 EXCAVATION PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to tear up, dig up, excavate or remove any dirt
or earth from any street or sidewalk within the city, without the written
permission of the Superintendent of Streets. The permission shall be granted if
the proposed will not endanger the public.
(`86 Code, § 18-11)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-12 CUTTING ASPHALT OR CONCRETE.
   (A)   No person shall cut the asphalt or concrete of a sidewalk or
streetwithout a permit issued by the Board.
   (B)   The work, as well as the restoration of the sidewalk or street to its
original condition, shall be performed by the permittee or the Superintendent
of Streets.
   (C)   If the work is to be performed by the city, the permittee shall pay to
the city a fee equal to 110% of the estimated cost of doing the work, including
the restoration of the street or sidewalk to its original condition.
   (D)   If the work is to be performed by the permittee, the permittee shall
post with the city a cash or surety bond in an amount equal to 110% of the
estimated cost of doing the work, including the restoration of the street or
sidewalk to its original condition. Upon satisfactory completion of the work
and restoration of the street or sidewalk to its original condition, the bond
shall be returned to the permittee and its surety released from his or her
obligation under the bond.
(`86 Code, § 18-12)
§ 18-13 PERMIT TO LAY PIPES.
   (A)   No person shall lay any pipe, mains or connections in any street of
the city without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent of
Streets to do the work.
   (B)   A permit shall be granted if the work will not endanger the public
safety.
(`86 Code, § 18-13)
   (C)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-14 PERMIT TO USE SIDEWALK FOR GRATING OR LIGHT.
   No person shall use or occupy any portion of a sidewalk in connection with
building operations for grating or for lights without permission of the Board.
The use shall be upon the terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Board.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to fail to repair a sidewalk
so used or occupied, after three days notice from the Superintendent of
Streets.
(`86 Code, § 18-14)
§ 18-15 RESTORATION OF DAMAGED STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who has damaged any street or
sidewalk to refuse, neglect or fail to replace the same in proper condition,
after being notified by the City Manager.
(`86 Code, § 18-15)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-16 PLAYING GAMES.
   No person shall play a game in or on any street or sidewalk.
(`86 Code, § 18-16)
§ 18-17 REFUSAL TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   No persons assembled on the sidewalks or passageways so as to obstruct
the free passage of persons along the same shall refuse or fail to disperse or
move on when ordered to do so by a police officer.
(`86 Code, § 18-17)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-18 OUTDOOR DISPLAY: DISPLAY AND SALE OF MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall obstruct entirely or partially any sidewalk or street in the
city by selling or offering for sale at auction or otherwise any goods, wares
or merchandise thereon, or use any sidewalk or street for the placing thereon
of any barrel, box crate, wood or other substance, except where expressly
permitted by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city.
   (A)   Permit generally. The Downtown Development Director on behalf of the
Downtown Oxford Economic Development Corporation may issue permits for the
display and sale of merchandise on city sidewalks in the area of the city
defined as the Central Business District.
   (B)   Application. Any merchant desiring to display and sell merchandise on
the city sidewalk shall prepare and file an application with the Downtown
Oxford Economic Development Corporation, which shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the business desiring to
display or sell merchandise on the sidewalk.
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the business owner.
      (3)   The type of merchandise to be sold or displayed.
      (4)   The hours of operation of the business.
      (5)   A drawing or site plan showing the section of the sidewalk to be
used for the sale and display of merchandise.
      (6)   Evidence of adequate insurance or other forms of security to hold
the city and its taxpayers harmless from claims arising out of the sale and
display of merchandise.
      (7)   The business agrees to indemnify and hold the DOEDC and the city
harmless, for all actions, claims, proceedings, injuries, damages and expenses.
      (8)   A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the state or the city.
Such additional information as may be requested by the Downtown Oxford Economic
Development Corporation to determine compliance with this section.
   (C)   Issuance of permit. No permit for the sale and display of merchandise
on the sidewalk may be issued unless the application is complete and unless the
following requirements are met:
      (1)   The sale and display of merchandise must occur under the same name
as the business and may not be opened or operated at anytime when the business
is closed.
      (2)   The sale and display of merchandise on the sidewalk must be clearly
incidental to the associated business.
      (3)   The placement of outdoor display merchandise shall be:
         (a)   Permitted adjacent to the primary facade (facade with principal
customer entrance) on either side and shall extend no more than eight feet.
         (b)   Outdoor display/merchandise shall not impair the ability of
pedestrians to use the sidewalk or parking areas. Provide a 36 inch minimum
width route with passing areas of 60 inches x 60 inches every 200 feet or less.
         (c)   Merchandise must be removed within four hours of notice from the
DOEDC or city. If such items are not removed upon four hours’ notice, the DOEDC
or city shall have the right to remove and dispose of these items and may
assess the property owner for the cost of such removal and disposal. The DOEDC
or city shall also have the right to remove such items immediately in emergency
situation. The DOEDC or city shall not be responsible for damage to the
merchandise under any circumstances.
         (d)   The owner of the business displaying or selling merchandise on
the sidewalk shall be responsible for repairing any incidental damage to public
sidewalks resulting from the display of merchandise.
   (D)   Denial. A permit may be denied if it is found that the granting of the
permit would not be in the public interest. Any applicant denied a permit to
display or sell merchandise on the sidewalk shall receive a written statement,
outlining the grounds on which the denial is based. The applicant may appeal
the denial of the permit to the City Commissioners at the next scheduled City
Commissioners meeting following receipt of the written denial. The City
Commissioners may take such corrective action as it shall find necessary. The
findings and determination of the City Commissioners shall be final.
   (E)   Permit revocation. The Downtown Oxford Economic Development
Corporation may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this section, if it finds
that the business owner has:
      (1)   Deliberately misrepresented or provided false information in the
permit application.
      (2)   Displayed or sold the merchandise in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare; specifically including failure to keep the area clean and free of
refuse.
      (3)   Failed to maintain any health, business or other permit or license
required by law for the operation of the business.
      (4)   Before the revocation of a permit, the DOEDC shall notify the
permit holder of its intent to revoke the permit and the reasons therefore and
shall afford the permit holder a reasonable opportunity to appear and be heard
on the question of such revocation. The DOEDC shall notify permit holder in
writing of the decision and the reasons therefore. A decision of the DOEDC to
revoke permit may be appealed to the City Commissioners in accordance with the
provision of this section.
   (F)   All permits are automatically renewed each year if there are no
changes to the original application. Permits are not transferable or
assignable.
(Ord. 06-11-04, passed 6-14-11) Penalty, see §
1-99
ARTICLE II: PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS AND THE LIKE
§ 18-31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. The portion of any street lying between its intersections with other
streets.
   GROUP DEMONSTRATION. Any assembly together or concert of action between or
among two or more persons:
      (1)   To protest any matter;
      (2)   To make known any position;
      (3)   To promote any person or cause;
      (4)   On behalf of any person, organization, class of persons or cause;
or
      (5)   Conducted for the purpose of attracting attention to the assembly.
   PARADE. Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or operating
any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind
in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public grounds
or places.
   PICKET LANE. Any two or more persons found together:
      (1)   To make known any position;
      (2)   To promote any person or cause; or
      (3)   On behalf of any person, organization, class of persons or cause.
(`86 Code, § 18-31)
§ 18-32 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions; and
   (B)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(`86 Code, § 18-32)
§ 18-33 PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or
participate in any parade, picket line or group demonstration upon any public
street, sidewalk, park, alley or other public place within the city unless a
permit therefor has been issued by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued unless a written application for the permit
has been filed not less than 48 hours in advance of the parade, picket line or
group demonstration.
   (C)   The application for a permit shall specify whether or not minors below
the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate in the parade, picket line
or group demonstration.
   (D)   (1)   The application for a permit shall specify and the permit shall
designate the person in charge of the activity.
      (2)   The person shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line
or group demonstration and shall carry the permit with him or her at that time.
      (3)   A permit shall not be valid in the possession of any other person.
   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall refuse to issue a
permit for a parade, picket line or group demonstration to commence before 6:00
a.m. or terminate after 9:00 p.m.
   (F)   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade,
picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
      (1)   The violation by any participant of §§ 18-35 or 18-36; or
      (2)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
(`86 Code, § 18-33)
   (G)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-34 INTERFERENCE.
   No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any parade, picket line
or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit duly issued
by the Chief of Police.
(`86 Code, § 18-34)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 18-35 CARRYING WEAPONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful when performed or undertaken in conjunction with
or as a part of any parade, picket line or group demonstration for any person
to carry on or about his person any firearm or any weapon or article,
including, but not limited to a blackjack, nightstick or flashlight, which by
its use might constitute a deadly weapon.
(`86 Code, § 18-35)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 18-36 VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful when performed or undertaken in conjunction with
or as a part of any parade, picket line or group demonstration for any person
to take or keep any dog or other vicious animal, whether leashed or unleashed.
(`86 Code, § 18-36)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in the appendix attached
hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be kept on record in the office of the City
Clerk.
Cross-reference:
   Animals and fowl, see
Ch. 4
§ 18-37 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PICKETING.
   (A)   Picketing shall be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement and shall not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any one
time.
   (C)   Pickets shall not carry written or printed placards or signs promoting
the object for which the picketing is performed that exceed two feet in width
or two feet in length.
   (D)   Pickets shall march in single file and not abreast, and shall not
march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets
shall not be allowed to walk more than five feet from the curbline and shall be
in continuous motion.
   (E)   If pickets promoting a different objective desire to use the same
sidewalk for picketing and the use would result in the presence of more than
ten pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group of
pickets for the use of the sidewalk on an equitable basis.
(`86 Code, § 18-37)
§ 18-38 STREET OR SIDEWALK SALES.
   All sales by any person from the streets and sidewalks of the city along a
parade route 30 minutes prior to the parade, during the parade or 15 minutes
after the parade are prohibited.
(`86 Code, § 18-38) (Ord. 83-9-1, passed 9-13-83)
Penalty, see § 1-99
ARTICLE III: STREET NUMBERS
§ 18-51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOUSES AND BUILDINGS and BUSINESS LOCATIONS.
      (1)   The principal house or building.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to accessory buildings or a lot
occupied by a principal or main building. Business locations without a
principal building will be required to display an identifying number that is
clearly visible. BUSINESS LOCATIONS include INDUSTRIES.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-52 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to provide for orderliness and ease of
identification of houses, buildings, industries and business locations, to
provide for identification of specific locations for the sake of expediting
quick response for all emergency services including police, fire, ambulance and
any others, and for the public good in general.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-53 APPLICABILITY.
   This section shall apply to all of the areas within the corporate limits of
the city and for subdivision review and development purposes, all of the
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction and all preexisting development must come
into compliance.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-54 DUTY OF OWNER TO DISPLAY NUMBER.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any and all of the building categories
listed above to clearly display street address numbers on the assigned building
so as to be visible from the nearest public vehicular area, according to the
definition of G.S. § 20-4.01.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-55 FIRE CHIEF TO ASSIGN NUMBERS.
   The Fire Chief and his or her duly designated representative will be
assigning street address numbers. Property owners shall be responsible for
applying for numbers by mail, or in person, at the Fire Department.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-56 DISPLAY, VISIBILITY, SIZE AND PLACEMENT.
   Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy for new construction or within
30 days of the receipt of a notice from the Fire Chief assigning an address to
a particular building, the owner or occupant of the building shall display or
cause to be displayed the assigned address. The displayed street address number
shall be no less than three inches high on single and duplex buildings, no less
than six inches high on multi-unit buildings, attached to the principal use
structure and clearly legible from the nearest public vehicular area. Should
the structure be too far from the public vehicular area for the numerals to be
seen, the property owner shall also display an additional set of numerals
legible from vehicles traveling at the prevailing speed on the roadway. The
numbers shall be located where the main driveway to the building intersects the
nearest public or private street.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-57 CONTRASTING COLORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to remove or deface
a street address which is displayed in accordance with § 18-56. It shall also
be unlawful to allow an incorrect street address to remain on a building.
   (B)   Identifying numbers displayed must be properly and perpetually
maintained.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
§ 18-58 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any violations of this article shall be reported when a finding of
non-compliance is made and shall be noted in the course of normal fire
inspections.
   (B)   Any violation hereof shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of
$50. Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within 72
hours. Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
(Ord. 93-4-1, passed 4-13-93; Am. Ord. 93-5-1, passed 5-11-93)
APPENDIX: MAXIMUM PENALTY SCHEDULE
Maximum Penalty Schedule
Code Section                                                Maximum   Ord. No.
                                                            Penalty
                                                            Not less
§ 18-2 Obstruction of drainage ditches; specifications for than $50  92-1-14,
culverts                                                    and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $200
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-15,
§ 18-3 Obstructing streets and sidewalks generally         and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $200
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-16,
§ 18-11 Excavation permit                                  and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $500
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-17,
§ 18-13 Permit to lay pipes                                and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $500
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-18,
§ 18-15 Restoration of damaged streets or sidewalks        and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $500
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-19,
§ 18-17 Refusal to disperse                                and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $500
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-20,
§ 18-33 Permit                                             and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $500
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-21,
§ 18-35 Carrying weapons                                   and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $500
                                                            Not less
                                                            than $50  92-1-22,
§ 18-36 Vicious animals (Amended to exclude police dogs)   and not   passed 1-
                                                            greater   14-92
                                                            than $200
Note to Table: These penalties may be amended from time to time.
 
CHAPTER 19: TAXICABS
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
19-1.   Definitions
   
19-2.   General rules of operation
   
19-3.   Compliance with state and city laws
   
19-4.   Operational base required
   
19-5.   Reports to city
   
19-6.   Operation along bus routes
   
19-7.   Ridesharing without permission
   
19-8.   Rates and charges
Article II: Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
   
19-26.   Certificate required
   
19-27.   Application
   
19-28.   Issuance
   
19-29.   Fee
   
19-30.   Financial responsibility
   
19-31.   Expiration and renewal
   
19-32.   Assignment or transfer
   
19-33.   Change of ownership
   
19-34.   Replacement of equipment
   
19-35.   Surrender
   
19-36.   Memorandum certificates
   
19-37.   Suspension or revocation
Article III: Drivers
Division 1: Generally
   
19-51.   Personal appearance
   
19-52.   Deception by driver; conduct as to passengers
   
19-53.   Lost articles
   
19-54.   Cruising prohibited
Division 2: Permit
   
19-66.   Permit required
   
19-67.   Application
   
19-68.   Issuance
   
19-69.   Revocation or suspension
Article IV: Vehicles
   
19-101.   Owner or operator to inspect or maintain vehicle
   
19-102.   State license
   
19-103.   General specifications
   
19-104.   State and city inspections
   
19-105.   Removal of unsafe vehicles from service
   
19-106.   Overloading vehicle
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 19-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE. A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
Board licensing the operation of a taxicab or taxicabs.
   CRUISING. The movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets in
search of, or soliciting, prospective passengers for hire, except that
unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a telephone call for taxicab service
from an intending passenger, and taxicabs returning by the most direct route,
after having discharged a passenger or passengers, to the garage where the
taxicab is housed or to its depot or terminal nearest to the place of discharge
of the passenger or passengers, shall not be considered CRUISING.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives a taxicab.
   INSPECTOR. The member of the Police Department designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   MANIFEST. A daily record, prepared by the driver, of all trips made by the
taxicab which he or she operates, showing time and place of origin and
destination of each trip and the amount of fare.
   MEMORANDUM CERTIFICATE. The card issued by the inspector to a taxicab owner
for display within a taxicab indicating that the taxicab has been granted a
certificate of public convenience and necessity.
   OWNER. Any person to whom a certificate for public convenience and necessity
for the operation of a taxicab or tabs has been issued.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle seating six or fewer per driver operating upon
any street, on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers
indiscriminately for hire between the points along the streets or highways as
may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being, transported and shall
not include common carriers, as defined in G.S. § 62-3.
(`86 Code, § 19-1)
§ 19-2 GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION.
   (A)   Every taxicab shall be operated with due regard to the safety and
comfort and convenience of the passengers and for the safe and careful
transportation of property and for the safety of the general public.
   (B)   No taxicab shall be operated at a rate of speed greater than that
established by state laws, or by ordinances of the city, or without proper
regard for the conditions then existing, or in a manner or condition as to
endanger or to be likely to endanger the safety of passengers, pedestrians,
vehicles or the person and property of others.
(`86 Code, § 19-2)
§ 19-3 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND CITY LAWS.
   Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with the laws of the state and
the ordinances of the city.
(`86 Code, § 19-3)
§ 19-4 OPERATIONAL BASE REQUIRED.
   No taxicab shall operate in the city unless it has an operational base on
private property.
(`86 Code, § 19-4)
§ 19-5 REPORTS TO CITY.
   (A)   Every owner and/or operator shall file with the inspector his or her
name, business address, home address, business and home telephone numbers, and
a list showing the serial numbers and make of all taxicabs owned and operated
by him or her and the names of all drivers, their license numbers and
addresses, and shall, within 48 hours after any change in connection therewith,
report the change to the inspector.
   (B)   In case more than one owner operates under the same name, the operator
shall make all reports required by this chapter in behalf of all owners
operating under his or her name.
(`86 Code, § 19-5)
§ 19-6 OPERATION ALONG BUS ROUTES.
   (A)   No owner, operator or driver of a taxicab shall cause or permit the
taxicab to be operated along or over established bus routes for the purpose of
picking up passengers who are waiting for buses.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the
response to a call for a taxicab.
(`86 Code, § 19-6)
§ 19-7 RIDESHARING WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not permit
any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab if the original passenger
objects thereto, but no driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any person
upon request unless previously engaged or unable to or forbidden by the
provisions of this chapter to do so.
(`86 Code, § 19-7)
§ 19-8 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Every taxicab operated within the city within a distance of one mile
of the city shall have at all times permanently displayed so as to be easily
visible to the passengers therein the rates and/or fares charged for the use of
the taxicab.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any passenger to refuse to pay the lawful
fare for taxicab service.
(`86 Code, § 19-8) (Am. Ord. 02-9-1; passed 9-10-02)
Penalty, see § 1-99
ARTICLE II: CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY
§ 19-26 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any taxicab in the city without first having
obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the Board
authorizing the operation.
(`86 Code, § 19-26)
§ 19-27 APPLICATION.
   (A)   All persons applying for a certificate shall file with the Board a
sworn application therewith, in triplicate, on the following form, provided by
the Board:
TO THE MAYOR AND HONORABLE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF OXFORD:
The undersigned hereby makes application for a certificate for the operation of
                taxicabs under and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
19 of the Code of Ordinances of Oxford, North Carolina, and presents to the
Honorable Board the following information:
1. That the Applicant is familiar with the Ordinances of the City of Oxford
relating to liability insurance, driver regulations, regulation of rates and
other matters pertaining to the operation of                taxicabs.
2. That the Individual, Corporate or Trade name and business address of the
Applicant is:
                                                                           
   (Name)
                      
   (Address)
3. That Applicant is:
A.                   An individual and sole owner of the taxicab business to be
operated under the above name.
B.                    A Corporation chartered under the laws of North Carolina
in the year            and Officers of Corporation are: (Give names and
business addresses)
                                                                                                                                  
C.                    A Partnership (attach hereto copy of agreement of
partnership), and names and business addresses of the partners are as follows:
(List names and business address)
                                                                                                                     
4. That Applicant operates in the following cities: (List)
                                                                                                                                         
5. That Applicant is requesting certificate to operate                (number
of taxicabs).
6. That in support of this application, there is attached hereto and made a
part hereof the following. Exhibits:
                                                                                                                                                   
Exhibit A, a full statement of facts (not arguments or conclusions) which, if
supported by substantial testimony at the hearing, will support a finding of
public convenience and necessity for this operation.
Exhibit B, a complete list of Applicant's motor equipment, showing year, make,
model and carrying capacity of each unit.
Exhibit C, financial statement showing assets, liabilities, and net worth of
Applicant.
Exhibit D, statement showing Applicant has made complete arrangements for off-
street parking of all said motor vehicles.
Exhibit F, statement of experience of Applicant in conducting taxicab business.
   
(Signed) (Name of Applicant)
Subscribed to and transcribed before me this the      day of
                       ,                .
                                                                           
   (Signed) (Notary Public in and for County of    
My Commission Expires:
                                                                                                              
   (B)   The applicant shall also furnish any additional information that the
Board may require.
(`86 Code, § 19-27) (Am. Ord. 02-09-01, passed 9-10-02)
§ 19-28 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   No certificate shall be granted until the Board, after a hearing,
declares by resolution that the public convenience and necessity require the
proposed taxicab service.
   (B)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require
for the operation of a taxicab for which application for a certificate is made,
the Board shall consider and investigate:
      (1)   Whether the demands of the public require additional taxicab
service;
      (2)   The adequacy of existing mass transportation and taxicab service;
      (3)   The financial responsibility and experience of the applicant;
      (4)   The ability of the applicant to earn a fair return on the capital
invested;
      (5)   The number, kind and type of vehicles and the color scheme to be
used;
      (6)   The effect which additional taxicab service may have upon traffic
congestions and parking;
      (7)   Whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater
hazard to the public; and
      (8)   Other relevant facts as the Board may deem advisable or necessary.
   (C)   After declaring that the public convenience and necessity require the
proposed taxicab service, the Board shall grant the certificate subject to the
conditions as the Board may deem that public convenience and necessity require
and provided that no certificate shall be granted if:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a felony against the state or
conviction of any offense against another state which would have been a felony
if committed in the state;
      (2)   The applicant has violated any federal or state law relating to the
use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate
drugs;
      (3)   The applicant is addicted to or a habitual user of alcoholic
beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
      (4)   The applicant has violated any federal or state law relating to
prostitution;
      (5)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States;
      (6)   The applicant is a habitual violator of traffic laws or ordinances;
      (7)   The applicant has not complied with the provisions of this chapter;
or
      (8)   The vehicle for which application for a certificate has been made
does not comply with this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 19-28)
§ 19-29 FEE.
   The owner of a taxicab for which is granted a certificate shall pay to the
city the fee established by resolution. The fee shall be in addition to all
other license fees.
(`86 Code, § 19-29)
§ 19-30 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   No taxicab shall be operated and no certificate shall be granted until the
owner or operator presents evidence of compliance with the provisions of G.S. §
20-280.
(`86 Code, § 19-30)
§ 19-31 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   All certificates shall expire on June 30 of each year. Prior to the
termination of each fiscal year and on application, the Board may renew any
certificate, or cause a new certificate to be issued for the ensuing year, in
the absence of any contrary evidence and finding of the Board regarding the
continued necessity for the taxicab service.
(`86 Code, § 19-31)
§ 19-32 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER.
   No certificate shall be assigned or transferred, except upon written
application to the Board setting forth the purpose, terms and conditions of the
assignment or transfer. The Board shall, after investigation, approve or
disapprove.
(`86 Code, § 19-32)
§ 19-33 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.
   Change of ownership of, or title to, a taxicab shall automatically revoke
any certificate previously granted for the operation of the taxicabs or
taxicab. The purchaser of any taxicab shall not operate the vehicle as a
taxicab until he or she has applied for, and been granted, new certificates in
the manner provided in § 19-28. A change of ownership is deemed to have taken
place in addition to other methods usually employed if the owner of any taxicab
leases the same to any person under any lease or other arrangement whereby the
person shall have the right upon the payment of an amount of money or other
consideration to acquire title at any future date to the taxicab or any other
thing of value.
(`86 Code, § 19-33)
§ 19-34 REPLACEMENT OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If an owner sells or transfers title to a taxicab for which a
certificate has been granted and the vehicle is retired from use as a taxicab,
and within 30 days after the sale or transfer, the owner purchases a
replacement taxicab, the Board shall upon written application made within 30
days of the purchase, issue a new certificate for the operation of the
replacement vehicle provided the owner has complied with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Board shall grant a certificate for a taxicab obtained to replace
a destroyed taxicab if:
      (1)   A certificate had previously been issued for the destroyed taxicab;
      (2)   Written application is made to the Board within 30 days after the
destruction;
      (3)   Satisfactory evidence is presented to the Board of the destruction;
and
      (4)   The applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 19-34)
§ 19-35 SURRENDER.
   (A)   Certificates which shall have been suspended or revoked by the Board
shall be returned to the city and the operation of any taxicab authorized
covered by the certificate shall cease.
   (B)   Any owner who shall permanently retire any taxicab or taxicabs from
taxicab service and not replace same within 30 days thereof, shall immediately
surrender the certificate granted for the taxicab to the Board and may not
secure additional certificates for operation of taxicabs without having first
made application therefor in the manner provided in this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 19-35)
§ 19-36 MEMORANDUM CERTIFICATES.
   For each taxicab for which a certificate has been granted, a memorandum
certificate shall be issued in the form as the Board may prescribe. The
memorandum certificate shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place
in the taxicab for which it was issued.
(`86 Code, § 19-36)
§ 19-37 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   A certificate may be suspended or revoked by the Board:
      (1)   If the holder of the certificate has been convicted of a felony
against the state or conviction of any offense against another state which
would have been a felony if committed in the state;
      (2)   If the holder of the certificate has violated any federal or state
law relating to the use, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic
or barbiturate drugs;
      (3)   If the holder of the certificate is addicted to or habitual user of
alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
      (4)   If the holder of the certificate has violated any federal or state
law relating to prostitution;
      (5)   If the holder of the certificate is not a citizen of the United
States;
      (6)   If the holder of the certificate is a habitual violator of traffic
laws or ordinances;
      (7)   If the holder of the certificate fails to operate the taxicab in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (8)   If the holder of the certificate ceases to operate any taxicab for
a period of 30 consecutive days without permission from the Board; or
      (9)   For any other reason that the Board determines warrants suspension
or revocation.
   (B) No certificate shall be revoked unless and until 48 hours notice of the
hearing has been given to the holder of the certificate and the hearing is
held.
(`86 Code, § 19-37)
ARTICLE III: DRIVERS
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 19-51 PERSONAL APPEARANCE.
   All drivers of taxicabs shall be cleanly and neatly dressed and shall, at
all times, wear a distinctive cap while operating a taxicab, which shall be
designated by the owner or operator.
(`86 Code, § 19-51)
§ 19-52 DECEPTION BY DRIVER; CONDUCT AS TO PASSENGERS.
   (A)   No taxicab driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger or
prospective passenger as to his or her destination or rate of fare to be
charged, nor shall he or she convey or cause to be conveyed any passenger to a
place other than directed, nor shall he or she take a longer route to the
destination directed by the passenger than necessary unless requested to do so
by the passenger.
   (B)   All taxicab drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful
requests of passengers as to speed and routes to be taken.
(`86 Code, § 19-52)
§ 19-53 LOST ARTICLES.
   Every driver shall thoroughly search his or her taxicab at the termination
of each trip for lost articles which may be left in the cab by passengers, and
any article found shall be immediately returned to its rightful owner, if
known; otherwise, it shall be deposited with the owner or operator of cabs and
shall be surrendered within 24 hours to the inspector.
(`86 Code, § 19-53)
§ 19-54 CRUISING PROHIBITED.
   No taxicab driver shall cruise in search of passengers at any time. Whenever
a taxicab is unoccupied, the driver shall proceed at once, by the most direct
route, to his or her terminal or depot.
(`86 Code, § 19-54)
DIVISION 2: PERMIT
§ 19-66 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire from place to
place within the corporate limits of the city or within one mile thereof
without first having obtained a taxicab driver's permit from the city.
(`86 Code, § 19-66)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 19-67 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for taxicab drivers' permits shall be made upon blanks
furnished by the city for the purposes and shall state, among other things, the
name, address, physical condition, physical description, former employers,
present or prospective employer, court record and state chauffeur's license
number.
   (B)   A photograph of the applicant shall be attached to and a part of the
application.
   (C)   The applicant shall impress his or her fingerprints on the back of the
application.
(`86 Code, § 19-67)
§ 19-68 ISSUANCE.
   The inspector shall investigate the facts stated in the application for a
taxicab driver's permit and shall issue the permit unless he or she finds that
the applicant:
   (A)   Has been convicted of a felony against the state or conviction of any
offense against another state which would have been a felony if committed in
the state;
   (B)   Has violated any federal or state law relating to the use, possession
or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
   (C)   Is addicted to or habitual user of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or
barbiturate drugs;
   (D)   Has violated any federal or state law relating to prostitution;
   (E)   Is not a citizen of the United States;
   (F)   Is a habitual violator of traffic laws or ordinances;
   (G)   Is not of good moral character;
   (H)   Is not of sound physique and mind;
   (I)   Has infirmities which might render him or her unfit for the safe
operation of a taxicab; or
   (J)   Is not eligible by reason of other provisions of this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 19-68)
§ 19-69 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   The inspector shall revoke or suspend a taxicab driver's permit if the
person holding a permit:
   (A)   Has been convicted of a felony against the state or conviction of any
offense against another state which would have been a felony if committed in
the state;
   (B)   Has violated any federal or state law relating to the use, possession
or sale of alcoholic beverages, narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
   (C)   Is addicted to or habitual user of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or
barbiturate drugs;
   (D)   Has violated any federal or state law relating to prostitution;
   (E)   Is not a citizen of the United States;
   (F)   Is habitual violator of traffic laws or ordinances;
   (G)   Is not of good moral character;
   (H)   Is not of sound physique and mind;
   (I)   Has infirmities which might render him or her unfit for the safe
operation of a taxicab; or
   (J)   Has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 19-69)
ARTICLE IV: VEHICLES
§ 19-101 OWNER OR OPERATOR TO INSPECT OR MAINTAIN VEHICLE.
   (A)   Every taxicab owner or operator shall make an inspection, at least
once each week, of all taxicabs owned and/or operated by him or her, and shall
keep all taxicabs in proper repair and sanitary condition at all times.
   (B)   Any taxicab found by the owner and/or operator to be unsafe or
unsanitary shall have the repairs and alterations made as may be necessary and
the owner or operator shall not operate or permit to be operated any taxicab
that is unsafe or unsanitary.
(`86 Code, § 19-101)
§ 19-102 STATE LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a taxicab until the vehicle has
been registered in accordance with requirements in the state and all proper
licenses have been obtained for same.
(`86 Code, § 19-102)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 19-103 GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab unless it conforms with the
provisions of this chapter or unless the vehicle shall have previously been
granted a license to operate as a taxicab in this city, in which case
conformance with division (B) below shall not be required.
   (B)   All taxicab bodies shall have two seats and the doors shall be so
constructed that they may be opened from the inside and outside and shall be
constructed with a double or safety lock. Floor mats shall be provided of
rubber or other nonabsorbent and washable material and shall be removable. The
windshield and all windows shall be of non-shatterable or safety glass.
(`86 Code, § 19-103)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 19-104 STATE AND CITY INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All taxicabs shall display the inspection sticker required by G.S. §
20-183.2.
   (B)   No person owning, operating or controlling any motor vehicle operated
as a taxicab within the city shall cause or suffer the same to be operated as a
taxicab unless he or she shall first submit the vehicle for inspection to the
inspector and shall have obtained therefrom a certificate to the effect that
the taxicab conforms to the requirements of the statutes of the state and to
the requirements of all ordinances of the city.
   (C)   The inspector of taxicabs shall examine the taxicab, particularly on
the following points:
      (1)   Foot-brakes and hand or parking brakes;
      (2)   Front and rear bumpers;
      (3)   Spare tire properly inflated;
      (4)   Heater sufficient to heat the interior of the cab;
      (5)   Speedometer in good order;
      (6)   Rear view mirror for driver;
      (7)   Dual windshield wiper; and
      (8)   Lights, as approved by the state, and a passenger compartment light
with accessible switch.
   (D)   The inspector or his or her agent may, after displaying proper
identification, inspect any taxicab being operated under the provisions of this
chapter.
(`86 Code, § 19-104)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 19-105 REMOVAL OF UNSAFE VEHICLES FROM SERVICE.
   Any taxicab which is found after inspection to be unsafe or in any way
unsuitable, or to be operated in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, may be immediately ordered out of service by the inspector. Before
being placed back in service, it shall be reinspected and approved.
(`86 Code, § 19-105)
§ 19-106 OVERLOADING VEHICLE.
   No driver shall permit more passengers to be carried in a taxicab at any one
time than the seating capacity of the taxicab, including driver. Children in
arms shall not be considered passengers for the purpose of this section.
(`86 Code, § 19-106)
Penalty, see § 1-99
CHAPTER 20: TRAFFIC
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
20-1.   Definitions
   
20-2.   Obedience
   
20-3.   Application of chapter to drivers of government vehicles
   
20-4.   Authority of police to direct traffic
   
20-5.   Application of chapter to persons propelling pushcarts or riding
bicycles or animals
   
20-6.   Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles
   
20-7.   Chapter does not interfere with rights of owner of property used for
vehicular traffic
   
20-8.   Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
   
20-9.   Number of passengers in front seat restricted
   
20-10.   Passengers to remain inside vehicle
   
20-11.   Entering or riding vehicle without consent of owner or driver
   
20-12.   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles
   
20-13.   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
20-14.   Riding bicycle on sidewalk or walkway
   
20-15.   Riders of motorcycles and bicycles to have hands on handlebars
   
20-16.   Skateboards, scooters, rollerblades, and skates
   
20-17.   Golf cart use on roads within city
Article II: Traffic-Control Signs, Signals and Devices
   
20-31.   Obedience
   
20-32.   Necessity of signs
   
20-33.   Ratification of existing devices
   
20-34.   Pedestrian “walk” and “don't walk” signals
   
20-35.   Moving or damaging devices
   
20-36.   Designation of traffic zones, through streets and the like; and
installation of devices
Article III: Vehicle Operation
Division 1: Generally
   
20-51.   Driving in school zones
   
20-52.   One-way streets
   
20-53.   Driving in quiet zones
   
20-55.   Driving through funeral procession
   
20-56.   Limitations on turning around
   
20-57.   Limitations on backing
   
20-58.   Moving parked vehicle
   
20-59.   Truck routes
   
20-60.   Stopping in streets generally
Division 2: Speed
   
20-81.   Generally
   
20-82.   Exceptions
Article IV: Stopping, Standing and Parking
Division 1: Generally
   
20-126.   Designation of parking spaces; use required
   
20-127.   Reports and notices of violations
   
20-128.   Method of parking generally
   
20-129.   Parking over 48 hours
   
20-130.   Impoundment of vehicles
   
20-131.   Overtime parking
   
20-132.   Prohibited in specified places
   
20-133.   Prohibited for certain purposes
   
20-134.   Stopping with left side of vehicle to curb
   
20-135.   Standing not to interfere with other vehicles
   
20-136.   Parking in prohibited zones generally
   
20-137.   Parking in limited parking zone
   
20-138.   Designation of parking for persons with disabilities
   
20-139.   Parking in bus stops or taxicab stands
   
20-140.   Blocking entrances, exits and the like in parking areas
   
20-141.   Backing to curb
   
20-142.   Moving vehicle of another into prohibited parking area
   
20-143.   Lights on parked vehicles
   
20-144.   Loading and unloading trucks
   
20-145.   Parking of commercial, industrial and construction trucks and
vehicles within residential areas
   
20-146.   Parking fines
Article V: Abandoned Motor Vehicles
   
20-201.   Definitions
   
20-202.   Abandonment prohibited; duty of owner to remove
   
20-203.   Removal and disposal by city
   
20-204.   Indemnification against loss
   
20-205.   Hearing procedure
   
20-206.   Intentional or negligent damage to vehicle
   
20-207.   General provisions
   
20-208.   Enforcement official
   
20-209.   Appeal
 
   
20-999.   Penalty
   
Appendix: Table 20-A: Restricted Parking Spaces
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 20-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A vehicle of the Fire Department, police
vehicle or an ambulance designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
   BLOCK. A portion of any street located between two street intersections.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory prescribed as such by ordinance of the
Board of Commissioners.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks at
intersections, or any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. The operator of a vehicle, as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(25). The
terms DRIVER and OPERATOR and their cognates are synonymous.
   FINE. The monetary penalty imposed for violations of this article as set
forth in §
20-146 hereof.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curblines
or, if none, then the lateral edge of the roadway lines of two or more highways
which join one another at any angle whether or not one such highway crosses
another.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways of 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway shall be regarded
as a separate intersection. In the even that such intersecting highway also
includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two
roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
   MOPED. A type of passenger vehicle as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(27)d1.
   MOTORCYCLE. A type of passenger vehicle as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(27).
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self--propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled be a self-propelled vehicle.
This shall not include mopeds as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(27)d1.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE.  A sign, signal, marking or device not
inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the Board or
official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNAL.  Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
   PENALTY. The civil monetary penalty issued pursuant to §
20-999 for multiple violations and repeat offenders as set forth herein.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.  Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular.
   PUBLIC CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train for
transporting for fare.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a
business district when the frontage on the highway for a distance of 300 feet
or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use
for dwelling purposes.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such ROADWAY separately but not to all such ROADWAYS collectively.
   ROLLER BLADE or INLINE SKATE.  A type of roller skate having more than two
wheels, aligned in a single row rather than two rows.
   ROLLER SKATE.  Each of a pair of boots or metal or metal frames attached to
shoes, with four or more small wheels, for gliding across a hard surface.
   SAFETY ZONE. Traffic island or other space officially set aside within a
highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly marked or
indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart
as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SCOOTER (MOTORIZED). A light two- wheeled open motor vehicle on which the
driver sits over an enclosed engine with legs together and feet resting on a
floorboard.
   SCOOTER (NON-MOTORIZED). A vehicle typically ridden for recreation,
consisting of a footboard mounted on  two wheels and a long steering handle,
propelled by resting one foot on the footboard and pushing the other against
the ground.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SKATEBOARD.  A short narrow board with two small wheels fixed to the bottom
of either end, on which (as a recreation or sport) a person can ride in a
standing or crouching position, propelling themselves by occasionally pushing
one foot against the ground.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STOP. When required, complete cessation of movement.
   STOP OR STOPPING WHEN PROHIBITED. Any stopping of a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. A HIGHWAY as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(13). The terms
HIGHWAY and STREET and their cognates are synonymous.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes
of travel.
   TRAFFIC SIGNS.
      (1)   An authorized sign or marker which is assumed to be permanently or
temporarily placed or installed at certain places and which purport to give
notice of direction or to convey a prohibition or warning.
      (2)   The presence of the signs, though not compulsory, is generally
dictated by necessity or common sense, with a view to furtherance of public
safety.
   TRUCK. Any vehicle which exceeds 19 feet in length.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided that for the purposes
of this chapter BICYCLES shall be deemed vehicles and every rider of a BICYCLE
upon a highway  shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable
to the driver of a VEHICLE except those which by their nature can have no
application. This term shall not include a device which is designed for and
intended to be used as a means of transportation for a person with a mobility
impairment, or who uses the device for mobility enhancement, is suitable for
use both inside and outside a building, including on sidewalks, and is limited
by design to 15 miles per hour when the device is being operated by a person
with a mobility impairment, or who uses the device for mobility enhancement.
(`86 Code, § 20-1) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-4.01
§ 20-2 OBEDIENCE.
   It shall be an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required, in this chapter. Any violation hereof shall be
subject to a fine or civil penalty as set forth herein.
(`86 Code, § 20-2) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-3 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of the United States Government, the state,
county or city, and it shall be unlawful for the driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by
state or federal law.
(`86 Code, § 20-3) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-168
§ 20-4 AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 20-4) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-5 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING
BICYCLES OR ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter which, by their very nature, can have no
application.
(`86 Code, § 20-5) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-171
§ 20-6 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, except that
a driver when operating the vehicle in any emergency, otherwise directed by a
police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; and
      (3)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement, or turning,
in specked directions so long as he does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard of the safety of
others.
(`86 Code, § 20-6) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-7 CHAPTER DOES NOT INTERFERE WITH RIGHTS OF OWNER OF PROPERTY USED FOR
VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel, by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting the use nor from
requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified in
this chapter or otherwise regulating the use as may seem best to the owner.
(`86 Code, § 20-7) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-170
§ 20-8 RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.
   (A)   No person shall ride any portion of a vehicle not designed or intended
for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged
in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies
in spaces intended for merchandise.
   (B)   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle when upon a street, shall not
carry any person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of any vehicle, nor shall
any person so ride upon any vehicle.
(`86 Code, § 20-8) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-9 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS IN FRONT SEAT RESTRICTED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or public vehicular
area which is so loaded or crowded with passengers or property, or both, as to
obstruct the operator's view of the highway or public vehicular area, including
intersections, or so as to impair or restrict otherwise the proper operation of
the vehicle.
(`86 Code, § 20-9) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Operation of overloaded or overcrowded vehicle, see G.S. § 20-140.2
§ 20-10 PASSENGERS TO REMAIN INSIDE VEHICLE.
   No person shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude beyond the
limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding, except to give the signals
as are required by this chapter, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle
whatsoever.
(`86 Code, § 20-10) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-11 ENTERING OR RIDING VEHICLE WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER OR DRIVER.
   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any vehicle without the consent of
the owner or driver.
(`86 Code, § 20-11) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-12 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(`86 Code, § 20-12) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-13 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, non-motorized or motorized
scooter, sled, roller skates, rollerblades, or any toy vehicle shall not attach
the same or himself or herself to any public conveyance or moving vehicle upon
any roadway.
(`86 Code, § 20-13) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-14 RIDING BICYCLE ON SIDEWALK OR WALKWAY.
   No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within the
downtown business district.
(`86 Code, § 20-14) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-15 RIDERS OF MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES TO HAVE HANDS ON HANDLEBARS.
   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having
his or her hands upon the handlebars.
(`86 Code, § 20-15) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle racing, see G.S. § 20-171.2
§ 20-16 SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, ROLLERBLADES, AND SKATES.
   (A)   Skateboards, scooters, rollerblades and skates shall not be operated
on sidewalks in the downtown business district, except on the city owned
Skateboard Park. A map of the downtown business district is incorporated by
reference and is on file in the office of the City Clerk. See
Chapter 15, Article IV for regulations pertaining to skateboard parks.
   (B)   When using skateboards, scooters, rollerblades or skates on sidewalks
outside of the downtown business district, pedestrians have the right- of-way,
and those operating skateboards, scooters, rollerblades or skates must yield to
pedestrians.
(Ord. 02-2-1, passed 2-13-01; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-17 GOLF CART USE ON ROADS WITHIN CITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to regulate the use of
golf carts on roads within the city; to promote the health, safety and welfare
of persons operating cart(s) within the city; and to protect the safety of
their passengers and other users of roads within the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings.
      GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of
exceeding speeds of 20 m.p.h. (G.S. § 20-4.01 (12a)).
      DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license issued by the State of North Carolina,
or any other state, to operate a motor vehicle on the roadways of North
Carolina.
      FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart in
an amount not less than that required by North Carolina law for motor vehicles
operated on public highways in the State of North Carolina.
      OPERATOR. Only persons over 16 years of age and holding a current, valid
driver's license may operate a golf cart on roads.
   (C)   Rules and regulations for golf cart use on roads within the city.
      (1)   Golf carts shall not be operated on or alongside any public road or
street with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or greater.
      (2)   Golf carts may cross a road with a posted speed limit of 35 miles
per hour or greater but only as provided for herein. Once this segment of road
has been transversed, the golf cart is still required to travel only on or
along a roadway with a speed limit of 35 m.p.h. or less. Golf carts must cross
in a manner that is the most direct route in order to decrease crossing
distance, i.e. no riding along a road or crossing at an angle. Under no
circumstance is a golf cart allowed to cross a controlled access highway (i.e.
interstate).
   (D)   Registration, inspection and fee prior to usage.
      (1)   All golf carts must be registered with the city by completion and
submission of an application approved by the city. The applicant must provide a
copy of a current, valid driver's license issued by the State of North Carolina
or other state. Before driving on public roads, the operator of a golf cart
must have a valid issued registration.
      (2)   Each owner must have proof of ownership, and liability insurance,
and a completed waiver of liability, releasing the city from liability that may
arise as a result of operation of a golf cart inside the city limits. These
documents must be in the golf cart at all times while in operation on public
roads.
      (3)   All golf carts must meet the requirements or minimum standards of
safety equipment as set forth above in this section.
      (4)   All golf cart operators must present a valid driver’s license while
operating a golf cart on a public road.
      (5)   The registration sticker shall be valid for no more than one year
and must be visible on the golf cart.
      (6)   Lost or stolen permits/stickers are the sole responsibility of the
owner and must be replaced before the golf cart is operated on a public road.
      (7)   Each golf cart permitted and registered under the provisions of
this section shall pay a $50 per year registration fee.
(Ord. 18-03-12, passed 3-13-18)
ARTICLE II: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
§ 20-31 OBEDIENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or use a vehicle upon
the streets of the city contrary to any signs, signals or other traffic-control
devices that are placed upon the streets for the purpose of directing traffic,
except upon direction of a police officer, and except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
(`86 Code, § 20-31) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-32 NECESSITY OF SIGNS.
   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
signs are required, the section shall be effective without signs being placed
to give notice thereof.
(`86 Code, § 20-32) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-33 RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES.
   All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected
in the city prior to the adoption of this code and in use for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and
declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided the traffic-control
devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law.
The City Manager shall keep a list or index of all signs, signals, devices and
markings established by ordinance.
(`86 Code, § 20-33) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-34 PEDESTRIAN "WALK" AND "DON'T WALK" SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "walk" or
"don't walk" are in place, the signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Don't walk.  No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his or
her crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone,
while the "don't walk" signal is showing.
(`86 Code, § 20-34) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-35 MOVING OR DAMAGING DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to move, deface or otherwise damage any
sign, signal or other traffic-control device placed upon the streets of the
city.
(`86 Code, § 20-35) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-36 DESIGNATION OF TRAFFIC ZONES, THROUGH STREETS AND THE LIKE; AND
INSTALLATION OF DEVICES.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall have the power to designate, lay off and
indicate, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners, by appropriate signs
and markings:
      (1)   Loading zones;
      (2)   Safety zones;
      (3)   School zones;
      (4)   Hospital zones;
      (5)   Quiet zones;
      (6)   Other traffic zones;
      (7)   Speed limits;
      (8)   Truck routes;
      (9)   Through streets;
      (10)   Stop streets and intersections;
      (11)   Yield right-of-way intersections;
      (12)   One-way streets;
      (13)   Streets to be laned for traffic;
      (14)   Bus stops; and
      (15)   Taxicab stands.
   (B)   The Engineer shall also have the power to designate and indicate, with
the approval of the Board of Commissioners, intersections at which traffic
shall be controlled by traffic signals, intersections at which left turns and/
or right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited, and intersections at which
markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to
be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at the intersections.
   (C)   Whenever any designation is made in accord with this section, the City
Engineer shall install the signs, markings, lines, signals and other traffic-
control devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate the designation and to
put drivers of vehicles on notice of the restriction, limitation or prohibition
resulting from the designation.
(`86 Code, § 20-36) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
ARTICLE III: VEHICLE OPERATION
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 20-51 DRIVING IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street or part thereof
as a school zone, drivers of vehicles using the street shall exercise the
greatest care for the protection of children.
(`86 Code, § 20-51) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-52 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   In all cases where the city has designated any street for one-way traffic
and erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for
any person to willfully drive or operate any vehicle on the street, except in
the direction indicated by the signs.
(`86 Code, § 20-52) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate one-way streets and the like, see G.S. § 20-169
   Obedience to one-way street signs erected by state, see G.S. § 20-165.1
§ 20-53 DRIVING IN QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed designating a
quiet zone, no person operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the
horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency.
(`86 Code, § 20-53) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-54 BLOCKING INTERSECTIONS OR CROSSWALKS.
   No driver of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
(`86 Code, § 20-55) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9- 9-14)
§ 20-55 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols, ambulances, and other emergency vehicles
responding to calls.
(`86 Code, § 20-56) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-56 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   No driver shall make a semicircular turn or U-turn at the intersection of
Spring Street and Main Street, nor shall a driver make a U-turn or semi-circle
turn to reverse direction or to park on the opposite side of the street within
the business district.
(`86 Code, § 20-57) (Ord. 86-7-1, passed 7-8-86; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-
14)
§ 20-57 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection, or over a
crosswalk, nor shall he or she back it otherwise unless the movement can be
made in safety, and unless ample warning has been given by hand and horn or
other signals.
(`86 Code, § 20-58) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-58 MOVING PARKED VEHICLE.
   When a parked vehicle is moved from its parking space, the driver shall move
the vehicle in the direction in which the vehicle is headed or, if it is parked
at an angle with the curb, the driver shall back out on that angle until he or
she has cleared other parked vehicles and shall then proceed in the direction
in which the vehicle is most nearly headed.
(`86 Code, § 20-59) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-59 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   All trucks and tractor-trailer trucks having a capacity of two tons or
more entering the city and destined to a point outside the city and not taking
on or discharging any goods, wares or merchandise within the city limits, shall
travel exclusively on the truck routes established by the city and over the
part of the routes as shall constitute the shortest and most direct route
between the point of entrance into and the point of departure from the city.
   (B)   All trucks and tractor-trailer trucks having a capacity of two or more
tons are hereby prohibited from parking and traveling in all residential zoning
districts and on all city-owned and city-maintained streets or parts of streets
when necessary to load or unload commodities at a destination upon such
streets.
   (C)   The Street Superintendent is hereby directed to post and maintain at
all points where truck routes enter the city, and junction points and turns
where necessary, and at all approaches to the streets or parts of streets on
which trucks are prohibited, appropriate signs directing truck traffic in
accordance with this section.
(`86 Code, § 20-60) (Am. Ord. 02-06-01, passed 6-11-02; Am. Ord. 14-09-01,
passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-60 STOPPING IN STREETS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking
as prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary:
      (1)   By the approach of fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles;
      (2)   By the approach of a funeral or other procession which is given the
right-of-way;
      (3)   By the stopping of a public conveyance;
      (4)   By the lowering of railway gates;
      (5)   By the giving of traffic signals;
      (6)   By the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian; or
      (7)   By some emergency.
   (B)   In any case covered by the exceptions in division (A) above, the
vehicle shall stop so as not to obstruct any crosswalk, pedestrian aisle,
safety zone, crossing or street intersection, if such can be avoided.
(`86 Code, § 20-61) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
DIVISION 2: SPEED
§ 20-81 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of the following speeds:
      (1)   Twenty miles per hour in any business district other than Martin
Luther King, Jr, Avenue, which is 25 miles per hour;
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour on city-owned streets in any residential
district unless otherwise posted. Thirty-five miles per hour on state-owned
streets in any residential district, unless otherwise posted;
      (3)   Forty-five miles per hour in places other than those named in
divisions (A)(1) and (2) above for:
         (a)   All vehicles other than passenger cars, regular passenger
vehicles, pick-up trucks of less than one-ton capacity and school buses loaded
with children; and
         (b)   All vehicles, of whatever kind, which are engaged in towing,
drawing, or pushing another vehicle; provided this paragraph shall not apply to
vehicles engaged in towing, drawing or pushing trailers with a gross weight of
not more than 3,000 pounds.
      (4)   Fifty-five miles per hour in places other than those named in
divisions (A)(1) and (2) above, for passenger cars, regular passenger carrying
vehicles, and pick-up trucks of less than one-ton capacity.
   (B)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the foregoing
limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reasons of weather or street conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the street or highway, and to avoid causing
injury to any person or property either on or off the street or highway, in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(`86 Code, § 20-81) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9- 9-14; Am. Ord. 16-06-02,
passed 6-14-16; Am. Ord. 16-09-01, passed 9-13-16)
Statutory reference:
   Speed restrictions, see G.S. § 20-141
§ 20-82 EXCEPTIONS.
   The speed limitations set forth in this division shall not apply to vehicles
when operated with due regard for safety under the direction of the police in
the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or of persons charged with or
suspected of any violation, nor to Fire Department or fire patrol vehicles when
traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor to public or private ambulances and
rescue squad emergency service vehicles when traveling in emergencies, nor to
vehicles operated by county fire marshals and civil preparedness coordinators
when traveling in the performances of their duties, nor to vehicles operated by
the duly authorized officers, agents and employees of the state utilities
commission when traveling in performance of their duties in regulating and
checking the traffic and speed of buses, trucks, motor vehicles and motor
vehicle carriers subject to the regulations and jurisdiction of the State
Utilities Commission. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of
any vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of
others.
(`86 Code, § 20-82) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-145
ARTICLE IV: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 20-126 DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES; USE REQUIRED.
   The Chief of Police shall designate individual parking spaces in the parking
zones as adopted by the Board of Commissioners through an ordinance. The
parking spaces shall be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the
curbing or surface of the street and/or city owned/operated off street parking
lot. At each space so marked off it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a
way that the vehicle is not entirely within the limits of the space so
designated.
(`86 Code, § 20-126) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-127 REPORTS AND NOTICES OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of police officers and/or person(s) designated by
the Chief of Police to report:
      (1)   The state license number of each vehicle that is in violation of
any of the provisions of this section;
      (2)   The time during which the vehicle violation occurred; and
      (3)   Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
   (B)   The police officer and/or person(s) designated by the Chief of Police
shall also attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator of the
vehicle that the same has been parked in violation of a provision of this
section and the fine or penalty for said violation.
   (C)   In addition to the fines, penalties and other sanctions set forth, in
this chapter, any violation of this article shall also subject the offender to
those civil penalties enumerated in §
20-131(D)(4), if applicable. Said civil penalty shall be issued by police
officers and/or person(s) designated by the Chief of Police. (Note: unpaid
penalties may be subject to debt setoff or garnishment of wages pursuant to
North Carolina Law.)
(`86 Code, § 20-127) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-128 METHOD OF PARKING GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, all vehicles shall park
parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.
   (B)   On streets or parts of streets designated and marked as zones for
angle parking, automobiles and other vehicles shall be parked at an angle to
the curb as indicated by the markings.
   (C)   On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking
spaces for vehicles, the same shall be parked between the lines and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park outside the lines.
(`86 Code, § 20-128) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-129 PARKING OVER 48 HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, park or store any
vehicle on a public street or alley within the city, including city owned/
operated off street parking lots, continuously for more than 48 hours.
(`86 Code, § 20-129) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-130 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   If any vehicle shall be parked or stored on a public street, alley, or city
owned/operated off street parking lot within the city continuously for more
than 48 hours, or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article, the
Police Department shall place a notice on the vehicle stating that unless the
vehicle is removed within a period of 48 hours from the time the of the notice,
the vehicle will be removed under the direction of the Police Department and
stored in a suitable place. In addition to any penalty that may be imposed for
the violation, the owner shall be required to pay the wrecker or towing costs
and the storage costs.
(`86 Code, § 20-130) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-131 OVERTIME PARKING.
   (A)   If any vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the
time period provided for the space, the vehicle shall be considered parked
overtime. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle registered in his or her name, or under his or her control, to be
parked overtime or beyond the lawful periods of time, as provided by this
article. Reference Table 20-A for restricted parking spaces.
   (B)   In the Downtown Business District, on-street, two-hour parking spaces
shall be indicated by white parking space stripes as further referenced in
Table 20-A. In addition, the off-street public parking lot bordered by Gilliam
and Littlejohn Streets and the off-street, public parking lot bordered by Bank
and Wall Street offer both full day and two-hour parking spaces. Both public
parking lots shall be posted with signage indicating that white striped parking
space designate two-hour parking and that yellow striped parking spaces
designate all day parking.
   (C)   Unless specifically provided otherwise, time restrictions on parking
shall be in effect between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. each day,
except Sundays, January 1, Memorial Day, July 4, the first Monday in September,
the day designated and set aside as Thanksgiving in November, December 25 and
any other day designated by the City Manager.
   (D)   The monitoring of parking in the city is to be made by marking tires
with chalk every two hours or by time recording digital devices, with the first
two hours to be free and a fine to be imposed after expiration of the first two
hours. The amounts of the fines shall be as follows:
      (1)   Penalties for overtime parking shall be assessed on a daily basis,
Monday through Friday.
      (2)   The fine shall be $10 for the first offense and for each subsequent
offense except as enumerated in divisions (3) and (4).
      (3)   Fines shall be paid within 30 days from the date of issuance. Fines
not paid within 30 days of issuance shall be doubled.
      (4)   Offenders who receive a minimum of four penalties for overtime
parking within any 30 day period shall be subject to an additional $50 repeat
offender penalty which shall be issued within 30 days of notification of the
fourth penalty within a 30 day period.
      (5)   If any offender fails to pay any fines or civil penalty set forth
in this section 30 days of being cited, the city may seek to collect the fine
or penalty by any lawful means, including, but not limited to, a civil action
and/or submission of the same to the North Carolina Debt Setoff Program. In the
event of a civil action, the city may seek payment of court costs and
reasonable attorneys fees.
   (E)   The Police Department shall place a notice on the vehicle notifying
the owner or operator of the vehicle that the vehicle has been parked in
violation of the provisions of this section. The owner or operator may, within
48 hours of the time when the notice was attached to the vehicle, pay the fine
designated in division (D) above in full satisfaction of the violation.
(`86 Code, § 20-131) (Ord. 80-2-1, passed 2-12-80; Am. Ord. 88-6-2, passed 6-
21-88; Am. Ord. 89-2-1, passed 2-14-89; Am. Ord. 96-2-2, passed 2-13-96; Am.
Ord. 14-09-1, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-132 PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On any sidewalk;
   (B)   Within an intersection;
   (C)   On a crosswalk;
   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
   (E)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when the
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (F)   On either side of any street approaching a grade crossing within 50
feet of the closest rail; (where existing permanent structures are located
along the street and closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted in front of
the structures unless otherwise prohibited, if the parking does not interfere
with the view in either direction of an approaching locomotive or train.)
   (G)   Within 50 feet in either direction from any bridge or other elevated
structure or any underpass structure;
   (H)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance of a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium or any public building;
   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the
edge or curb of a street; and
   (J)   In a loading zone designated by a sign or signs indicating such area
to be a loading zone, except for the express purpose of loading and unloading
only of such vehicle.
(`86 Code, § 20-132) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-133 PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Storing the vehicle by a garage, dealer or other person when the
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the vehicle;
   (D)   Storing any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been
disconnected;
   (E)   Transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another; or
   (F)   Advertising.
(`86 Code, § 20-133) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-134 STOPPING WITH LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLE TO CURB.
   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business
district, except that, on one-way streets, vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.
(`86 Code, § 20-134) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-135 STANDING NOT TO INTERFERE WITH OTHER VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with
the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.
(`86 Code, § 20-135) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-136 PARKING IN PROHIBITED ZONES GENERALLY.
   When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, or the
curbing has been painted yellow or red in lieu of the signs, no person shall
park a vehicle at any time in any zone designated as a no-parking zone. In the
event that parking is prohibited in a zone only between certain hours, this
section shall apply only between the hours, as indicated on the signs erected
in the zone.
(`86 Code, § 20-136) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-137 PARKING IN LIMITED PARKING ZONE.
   Whenever a limited parking zone is designated, no person shall park any
vehicle in the zone, except in accord with the signs and markings erected
therein. Reference Table 20-A: Restricted Parking Spaces.
(Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-138 DESIGNATION OF PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle in a space
designated with a sign displaying "Reserved Parking" for handicapped persons in
conformance with G.S. § 20-37.6(d),when the vehicle does not display the
distinguishing license plate or placard as required by state statute.
(`86 Code, § 20-137) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-139 PARKING IN BUS STOPS OR TAXICAB STANDS.
   Whenever any bus stop or taxicab stand is designated and marked, no
automobile or other vehicle shall be parked therein, except those for which the
space or stand has been designated.
(`86 Code, § 20-138) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-140 BLOCKING ENTRANCES, EXITS AND THE LIKE IN PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   In any area set aside for the use of the public for parking vehicles,
it shall be unlawful for any person to park or otherwise leave a vehicle
stationary in the position as to interfere with the free entry into the parking
area or withdrawal therefrom.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, having entered an area with a
vehicle, to park the vehicle in a manner and in a position with reference to
any other vehicle already parked therein as to interfere with the free movement
of the other vehicle.
(`86 Code, § 20-139) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-141 BACKING TO CURB.
   In no case shall the driver or person in charge of any vehicle permit the
same to remain backed to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading.
(`86 Code, § 20-140) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-142 MOVING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER INTO PROHIBITED PARKING AREA.
   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by the person into any prohibited
parking area or sufficiently away from a curb to make the distance unlawful.
(`86 Code, § 20-141) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-143 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   The displaying of lights upon a vehicle, when lawfully parked at night upon
the street of the city, shall not be required when there is sufficient light to
reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet upon the street.
(`86 Code, § 20-142) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to so provide, see G.S. § 20-134(a)
§ 20-144 LOADING AND UNLOADING TRUCKS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TRAILER.  A flat, open body and enclosed or semi-enclosed body.
      TRUCK. Any vehicle which exceeds 19 feet in length.
   (B)   When not loading or unloading, a person shall not park a truck,
tractor or trailer on a city street unless permission is obtained from the
Chief of Police or his or her duly appointed representative.
   (C)   No trucks over two tons will be permitted to park on the city-owned
parking lot abutting Little John Street. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit loading and unloading beside or in the rear of buildings abutting
Little John Street lots.
(`86 Code, § 20-143) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-145 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND CONSTRUCTION TRUCKS AND VEHICLES
WITHIN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   (A)   Definition.  A COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION TRUCK OR VEHICLE
as used herein is any self-propelled motor vehicle having a gross weight of
greater than 12,000 pounds or having three or more axles.
      (1)   For purposes of clarification, but without limitation, this
definition includes dump trucks, tractor-trailers, tractors, tanker trucks,
buses, large panel vans and construction equipment.
      (2)   Vehicles which are not included in this definition, but without
limitation, are pick-up trucks, vans, sport-utility vehicles, small panel
trucks, boats and recreational vehicles.
   (B)   Operating, parking, maintaining, repairing certain vehicles in
residential areas. It shall be unlawful to operate, park, maintain or repair a
commercial, industrial or construction truck or vehicle within a residential
section or upon a city-owned and city-maintained street except for the sole
purpose of loading or unloading commodities at a destination upon such streets.
   (C)   Violations.
      (1)   Violation of this section shall result in the assessment of a $50
civil penalty.
      (2)   The Police Department shall place a notice on the vehicle notifying
the owner or operator of the vehicle that the vehicle has been parked in
violation of the provisions of this section.
      (3)   The owner or operator may, within 48 hours of the time when the
notice was attached to the vehicle, pay the penalty designated in this section
in full satisfaction of the violation.
      (4)   If any offender fails to pay the civil penalty set forth in this
section within 30 days after being cited, the city may seek to collect it by
any lawful means including the filing of a civil action and/or submission of
the same to the North Carolina Debt Setoff Program. In the event of the filing
of a civil action, the city may seek payment of court costs and attorneys fees.
   (D)   Storage of parts. It shall also be unlawful in a residential area to
store automotive parts, truck parts or tires on any property in open spaces
which are visible to neighbors or from a public street.
   (E)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Exempt from this provisions of this section are all city-owned
maintenance vehicles and any commercial, industrial or construction truck or
vehicle, without its trailer, owned by a resident of the city prior to January
1, 2001 provided the vehicle is:
         (a)   Listed for taxes with the city and the taxes are not delinquent;
         (b)   Registered with the city on or before July 1, 2001; and
      (2)   Registration of exempt vehicles shall be according to the address
of the owner and is non-transferrable. Only one vehicle per address shall be
exempt.
      (3)   All vehicles meeting this criteria must have a current registration
with the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles.
      (4)   Exempt vehicles, except for city-owned vehicles, may only travel on
the most direct route from the address of registration to the nearest truck
route which are not designated as city-maintained streets and are defined
above.
      (5)   Exempt vehicles may park on a city-owned street only for the
purpose of loading or unloading commodities at a destination upon such street.
(Ord. 02-06-02, passed 6-11-02; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-146 PARKING FINES.
   (A)   Unless specifically set forth in any provision in this Chapter 20,
Article IV, the penalties for violations shall be as set forth in the following
penalty schedule.
 
MAXIMUM PENALTY SCHEDULE
Double Parking or Standing                            $10.00
Improper Parking                                      $10.00
Restricted or Limited Zones (other than 2-hr Parking) $10.00
Handicapped Parking                                   $100.00
Parking in a Fire Lane or in front of a Fire Hydrant  $50.00
Overtime Parking, 2 Hour Zone                         See §
                                                      20-131 of this Chapter
 
   (B)   Unless specifically set forth in any provision in this
Chapter 20, Article IV, the fine will double if not paid within 30 days of the
issue date of the citation.
   (C)   A copy of the penalty schedule, which may be amended from time to
time, shall be incorporated into the City of Oxford fiscal year budget ending
June 30.
(Ord. 03-12-1, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 05-10-01, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord. 14-
09-01, passed 9-9-14)
ARTICLE V: ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 20-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Has been left unattended upon a street or highway, in violation of
statute, law or ordinance regulating or prohibiting parking, for a period of 48
hours;
      (2)   Is left unaccompanied on property owned or operated by the city for
a period of longer than 48 hours;
      (3)   Is left unaccompanied on any street or highway; or
      (4)   Is left on private property, without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than 48 hours.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle that does not display a current license
plate (if required) and:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and worth less than $100.
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96)
   MOTOR VEHICLES.  All machines designed or intended to travel over land or
water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
(`86 Code, § 20-201) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned vehicles and related definitions, see G.S.§ 20-137.7
§ 20-202 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; DUTY OF OWNER TO REMOVE.
   If a motor vehicle is abandoned on a public street or highway, it shall be
the duty and responsibility of the owner of the motor vehicle to cause the
removal thereof immediately and to pay all costs incident to the removal. No
person or business shall allow an abandoned or junked motor vehicle to remain
on premises owned or occupied by them after notice to have the vehicle removed.
(`86 Code, § 20-202) (Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-
9-14)
§ 20-203 REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL BY CITY.
   (A)   Any junked motor vehicle found to be in violation of this chapter may
be removed to a storage garage or area, but no such vehicles shall be removed
from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee or
occupant of the premises unless the Board of Commissioners or a duly authorized
city official or employee finds in writing that the aesthetic benefits of
removing the vehicle out weighs the burdens imposed on the private property
owner.
   (B)   Such findings shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of
the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or
enhancing the community, neighborhood or area appearance.
   (C)   The following, among other relevant factors may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism or economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; or
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
(`86 Code, § 20-203) (Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-
9-14)
§ 20-204 INDEMNIFICATION AGAINST LOSS.
   The city may require any person requesting the removal of any junked or
abandoned motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against
loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal and/or storage
thereof. When an abandoned or junked motor vehicle is removed the city shall
give notice to the owner as required by G.S. § 20-219.11(a) and (b).
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-205 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Regardless of whether the city does its own removal and disposal of
motor vehicles or contracts with another person to do so, the city shall
provide a prior hearing procedure for the owner. For purposes of this
subsection, the definitions in G.S. § 20-219.9 apply.
   (B)   If the city operates in such a way that the person who tows the
vehicle is responsible for all towing fees, all provisions of G.S. §§ 20-219.9
through 219.14 shall apply.
   (C)   If the city operates in such a way that it is responsible for
collecting towing fees, it shall:
      (1)   Provide by contract or ordinance for a schedule of reasonable fees;
      (2)   Provide for a procedure for prompt and fair hearing to contest the
towing; said hearing shall be conducted by the City Manager within 48 hours of
the towing;
      (3)   Provide for an appeal to district court from that hearing which
shall be within ten days of the decision of the City Manager;
      (4)   Authorize the release of the vehicle at any time after towing by
posing of a bond and paying of the fees due; and
      (5)   Provide a sale procedure similar to that provided in G.S. §§ 44A-4,
44A-5 and 44A-6 except that no hearing in addition to the probable cause
hearing is required. If no one purchases the vehicle at the sale and if the
value of the vehicle is less than the amount of the lien, the city may destroy
it.
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
Statutory reference:
   Statutory liens and charges and possessory liens on personal property, see
G.S. §§ 44A-1 et seq.
   Towing procedures, notice and hearings, see G.S. §§ 20-219.1 et seq.
§ 20-206 INTENTIONAL OR NEGLIGENT DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   Any person who removes a vehicle pursuant to this section shall not be held
liable for damages for the removal of the vehicle to the owner, lien holder or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle removed;
however, any person who intentionally or negligently inflicts injury upon any
person in the removal of such vehicle, may be held liable for damages as
provided by law.
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Sections
20-201 through
20-209 do not apply to the removal or disposition of any motor vehicle that is
used on a regular basis or business of personal use. The city and its duly
authorized officials or employees are hereby authorized to move and dispose of
junked motor vehicles subject to this chapter and in accordance with the
procedures prescribed herein. The authority granted by these sections shall be
supplemental to any other authority conferred upon the city. Nothing herein
shall be construed to authorize the city to require the removal or disposal of
a motor vehicle kept or stored at a bonafide automobile graveyard or junkyard
as defined in G.S. § 136-143.
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-208 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The City Zoning Administrator and/or Finance Officer are hereby authorized
and empowered by the Board of Commissioners to enforce the provisions of this
chapter according to the terms hereof.
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-209 APPEAL.
   Any person found in violation of this chapter shall have the right to appeal
the decision to the City Manager who shall have the final decision on the
matter.
(Ord. 96-8-1, passed 8-23-96; Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14)
§ 20-999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided, or
failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall be guilty of an
infraction and subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $50 except as otherwise
provided for herein.
   (B)   If any offender fails to pay the civil penalty set forth in any
section or division of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided, or
fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the same, within 30 days after being
cited for a violation, the city may seek to collect said penalty and an
additional civil penalty of $50 in a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (C)   The city may seek to enforce the provisions of this chapter through
any lawful or equitable action.
   (D)   Violations of the provisions of §
20-17 shall be deemed an infraction in accordance with G.S. Ch. 20, the maximum
penalty for which shall be $75 plus applicable court cost.
(G.S. § 14-4(a)) (Am. Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 18-03-12, passed
3-13-18)
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-75
APPENDIX: TABLE 20-A: RESTRICTED PARKING SPACES
TWO-HOUR ON-STREET PARKING LOCATIONS BETWEEN THE HOURS OF
9:00 A.M. AND 5:00 P.M.
MONDAY - FRIDAY
COLLEGE STREET - both sides
from McClanahan Street to Hillsboro Street
MAIN STREET - both sides
From Williamsboro Street to Spring Street
From Hillsboro to Spring Street, excluding fifteen (15) spaces in front of the
U.S. Post Office
WILLIAMSBORO STREET - both sides
From Belle Street/Lanier Street to College Street, excluding three (3) spaces
in front of the Granville County Administrative Building
HILLSBORO STREET - both sides
From College Street to Orange Street except for two (2) spaces on the south
side at the intersection of Hillsboro and Wall Streets
SPRING STREET- both sides
From Main Street to Linden Avenue
WALL STREET - both sides
From Spring Street to Hunt Street except for one (1) space at 208 Wall Street
HUNT STREET - both sides
From Wall Street to Linden Avenue
COURT STREET (one-way street)
From the corner of Main Street to the right hand turn - Five (5) spaces
LITTLEJOHN STREET
From Main Street to the Littlejohn Street Parking Lot on the north side
From Main Street to Gilliam Street on the south side
LANIER STREET - on West Side
From parking lot in front of 107 Lanier street to McClanahan Street
NEW COLLEGE STREET - East Side
From Williamsboro Street to McClanahan Street
15-MINUTE PARKING SPACES
MAIN STREET
Fifteen (15) spaces in front of US Post Office
HILLSBORO STREET
Two (2) spaces on the south side at the intersection of Hillsboro and Wall
Streets
WILLIAMSBORO STREET
Three (3) spaces in front of the Sheriff/County Offices
15-MINUTE LOADING/UNLOADING TOW-AWAY ZONE
BETWEEN THE HOURS OF 9:00 A.M. AND 5:00 P.M.
MONDAY - FRIDAY
COURT STREET
One (1) space at the corner of Court and Main Streets
 
(Ord. 14-09-01, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 16-04-01, passed 4-12-16)
CHAPTER 21: WATER, SEWERS AND SEWER DISPOSAL
Section
Article I: General Provisions
   
21-1.   Definitions
   
21-2.   Ordinances not affected by code
   
21-3.   Chapter part of contracts
   
21-4.   Where mains will be laid without assessments
   
21-5.   Laterals to be laid only to inside of curbs
   
21-6.   Water and sewer extension policy
   
21-7.   Rates and charges; penalties and enforcement
   
21-8.   Metering of water
   
21-9.   Connections and meters to remain property of city
   
21-10.   Maintenance of meters
   
21-11.   Cross connections of water supply
   
21-12.   Water emergencies; conservation policy
   
21-13.   Wastewater treatment works user charges adopted
   
21-14.   Bulk sales of water
   
21-15.   Filling swimming pools
Article II: Connections
   
21-31.   Water connection permit
   
21-32.   When connections to be made
   
21-33.   Connections to be made by city
   
21-34.   Applications
   
21-35.   Costs for taps
   
21-36.   Separate connections required
   
21-37.   Maintenance
   
21-38.   Connections from outside city
   
21-39.   Tampering with water system
   
21-40.   Protection of water system
   
21-41.   Privies
   
21-42.   Water and sewer line fees for lots not conforming to assessment policy
   
21-43.   Tap line fees for water and sewer lines outside corporate limits
   
21-44.   Application of inside and outside water and sewer rates
Article III: Extensions by Petition
Division 1: Generally
   
21-76.   Water mains
Division 2: Sewers
   
21-91.   Petition of property owners
Article IV: Sewer Use Ordinance
   
21-116.   Incorporated by reference
Article V: Enforcement Response Plan Ordinance
   
21-146.   Incorporated by reference
      
Appendix A: Water and sewer tap rates
      
Appendix B: Maximum penalty schedule
Article VI: Stormwater Management
   
21-176.   Incorporated by reference
Article VII: Fats, Oil and Grease Ordinance
   
21-206.   Incorporated by reference
Article VIII: Fats, Oil and Grease Emergency Response Plan (ERP) Ordinance
   
21-236.   Incorporated by reference
Article IX: Backflow and Cross-Connection Prevention
   
21-251.   Purpose
   
21-252.   Responsibility; city
   
21-253.   Responsibility; customer
   
21-254.   Definitions
   
21-255.   Right of entry; authorization
   
21-256.   Law; unprotected cross-connection prohibited
   
21-257.   Installation and testing of backflow prevention assembly
   
21-258.   Degree of hazards
   
21-259.   Notices
   
21-260.   Violations
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 21-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   IMPROVED STREET. Any street having a wearing surface of concrete, asphalt,
brick, stone block, tar treatment or similar hard material.
   LATERAL. A pipe connecting a sanitary sewer or water main with the line of
adjacent property or extending from the main to the inside of the curb.
   MACADAM STREET. Any street with crushed stone surface, either water, asphalt
or tar bound.
   SEWER. A sanitary sewer.
   UNIMPROVED STREET. Any street having a dirt surface.
(`86 Code, § 21-1)
§ 21-2 ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall affect
certain ordinances, which are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code.
(`86 Code, § 21-2)
§ 21-3 CHAPTER PART OF CONTRACTS.
   All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms
and conditions whereby the city furnishes sewer or water services to any person
or whereby the city makes any sewer or water connection or performs any work of
any kind in connection with the furnishing of sewer or water service.
(`86 Code, § 21-3)
§ 21-4 WHERE MAINS WILL BE LAID WITHOUT ASSESSMENTS.
   Water mains shall not be laid in any street of the city without assessment
therefor, except in those streets where the city may order increased size water
mains for additional water distribution or fire protection.
(`86 Code, § 21-4)
§ 21-5 LATERALS TO BE LAID ONLY TO INSIDE OF CURBS.
   Water or sewer laterals laid as a part of any sewer or water main
improvement shall be laid only to the inside of the curb unless in the
resolution ordering the improvement the city specifically directs otherwise.
(`86 Code, § 21-5)
§ 21-6 WATER AND SEWER EXTENSION POLICY.
   The city hereby adopts, incorporates by reference and makes a part hereof, a
“Policy for extension of water and sewer line extensions to residential,
commercial, and industrial developments, including a utility plan approval
process, assessment, city participation, funding requirements and the types of
extension projects.”
(Ord. 99-12-3, passed 12-14-99; Res. passed 8-14-01)
§ 21-7 RATES AND CHARGES; PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The charges which shall be paid for water and/or sewer service,
including the penalty for late payment of bills, and the interest thereon,
shall be as established by resolution.
   (B)   Water and/or sewer bills shall be due on the first day of each month.
   (C)   (1)   All new customers and new accounts will be subject to a
utilities deposit in an amount established by resolution.
      (2)   If the account is at least one year old, and the service has not
been disconnected for non-payment in the past year, the deposit will be
credited to the account.
      (3)   (a)   If an account does not have a deposit in place and service is
discontinued for nonpayment, a deposit, in an amount established by resolution,
shall be placed with the city.
         (b)   This deposit can be credited as stated in division (C)(2) above.
      (4)   The crediting of the deposits will be done in the month following
the close of each quarter: April, July, October, January.
      (5)   The deposits, when refunded, will be credited to the water bills.
   (D)   When the first meter read date is ten days or less from the cut on
date, a water bill will not be sent for the first billing period, but the
consumption will be added to the next bill.
   (E)   Penalties and reconnect fees for late payment of water and sewer
accounts shall be the following for residential consumers:
      (1)   Residential customers only shall be billed between the fourteenth
and eighteenth of the month.
      (2)   Bills for usage are due by the tenth of the following month.
(Customers have between 22 and 26 days to pay depending upon the date when the
bill is mailed.)
      (3)   Accounts not paid by the twelfth of the month for service billed
the previous month will be assessed a penalty of $10 late fee or 1½% interest,
whichever is greater, for late payment. (This allows two-days' grace period for
those payments paid on the tenth.)
      (4)   Bills and penalty not paid by the twenty-first day will be on the
cut-off list and shall be disconnected on the twenty-second unless this date
falls on a Friday or Monday. Then in that case, they will be cut-off on the
next working day which would normally be Tuesday unless this day is a holiday,
then cut-off would be the next working day following the holiday.
      (5)   A fee of $25 is to be charged for water and sewer service that
appears on the cut-off list because of non-payment. All past due amounts
including late penalty and reconnect list fee must be paid. Also a deposit must
be made if no deposit is on record.
      (6)   The meter shall be rechecked within five days after the disconnect
and if water has been used, the meter is to be locked and the customer is
charged an additional $10 lock fee.
   (F)   Penalties and reconnect fees for late payment of water and sewer
accounts for non-residential consumers shall be the same as residential
consumers except a deposit equal to last month's water bill and sewer statement
must be made unless they have a deposit on record with the city.
   (G)   If water is turned on illegally by a customer after being turned off
for non-payment, the city shall padlock the water meter. When the padlock is
cut off by the customer, the city shall remove the water meter. There is a $75
fee for removal of a water meter due to non-payment of water.
   (H)   Any person who shall turn on the water from the city water mains into
a meter or private connection, which connection has been cut off by the city
for the nonpayment
of water bill, without authority of the City Clerk or other city official,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(`86 Code, § 21-41)
   (I)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as be as is set out in Appendix B, which
is attached hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule,
which may be amended from time to time, shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk.
(`86 Code, § 21-7) (Ord. 85-6-1, passed 6-11-85; Am. Ord. 87-3-1, passed 3-10-
87; Am. Ord. 88-4-2, passed 4-12-88; Am. Ord. 98-12-1, passed 12-8-98; Am. Ord.
00-11-1; passed 11-14-00)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to fix and enforce rates, see G.S. § 160A-314
§ 21-8 METERING OF WATER.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to
any water line for the use of water without placing on the line a standard
water meter under the supervision of the city.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to water lines to be used for
unmetered water service authorized by the Board.
   (B)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Board, water shall be furnished to
consumers at metered rates only.
(`86 Code, § 21-8)
   (C)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in Appendix B, which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which
may be amended from time to time, shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 21-9 CONNECTIONS AND METERS TO REMAIN PROPERTY OF CITY.
   All meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used by the
city in installing water or sewer connections shall be and remain the property
of the city.
(`86 Code, § 21-9)
§ 21-10 MAINTENANCE OF METERS.
   (A)   All meters, except such as are required to be furnished by particular
users of water, shall be kept in good repair and working order by the city and
at the expense of the city.
   (B)   Meters furnished by particular users of water shall be kept in good
repair and working order by the city, but the expense thereof shall be borne by
the users.
(`86 Code, § 21-10)
§ 21-11 CROSS CONNECTIONS OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   No part of the city's water system shall be connected to any source of
water supply other than the city's.
(`86 Code, § 21-11)
   (B)   (1)   No facility may connect to the city's water distribution system
prior to the approval from the Public Works Department. The installation of an
approved backflow preventer valve assembly may be required. These devices will
be of the manufacture and models approved by the State of North Carolina
Underwriters' Laboratories and the Southern California Foundation for Cross
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works is responsible for implementing all
public notification requirements mandated by the state, including “boil water
notices.” Even though the Director of Public Works has sole administrative
responsibility for carrying out all of these sate required provisions, the
Director of Public Works also will work closely with the following:
         (a)   The City Manager;
         (b)   Mayor;
         (c)   Board of Commissioners; and
         (d)   Water and Sewer Supervisor.
      (3)   The Director of Public Works, depending upon the severity of the
situation, will also be in contact with one or more of the following as
required:
         (a)   Hospitals;
         (b)   Local fire departments;
         (c)   Major commercial/industrial users;
         (d)   Schools;
         (e)   Newspapers;
         (f)   Local radio and television stations.
      (4)   Please note that although the Director of Public Works is
responsible for contacting the organizations mentioned earlier and is
responsible for seeing that notices are posted as required, the notices
themselves may be issued on a joint basis with the City Manager and elected
city officials.
(Ord. 00-9-5, passed 9-12-00)
   (C)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in Appendix B, which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which
may be amended from time to time, shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 21-12 WATER EMERGENCIES; CONSERVATION POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor may declare a water emergency. Any person within the
city limits or within one mile of the city, who uses water excessively from a
city water main during an emergency shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any water used for washing cars, watering lawns or gardens shall be
deemed excessive use of water.
(`86 Code, § 21-12)
   (B)   (1)   A water conservation policy, creating a 5% credit on each water
customer's bill for residential customers who install low-flowing plumbing
fixtures throughout their homes, is hereby adopted.
      (2)   In order to receive this credit, a city employee will inspect the
dwelling for compliance.
(Ord. 99-12-4, passed 12-14-99)
§ 21-13 WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS USER CHARGES ADOPTED.
   The city's wastewater treatment works user charges, as set out in adopted
ordinances, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth herein
and the charges shall be applicable to all users who contribute wastewater to
the city's wastewater treatment works.
(`86 Code, § 21-13) (Ord. 87-12-2, passed 12-21-87)
§ 21-14 BULK SALES OF WATER.
   (A)   Bulk sales of water shall be allowed by permit only except as to
Granville County Rural Fire Departments. The permit must be obtained from the
City of Oxford Finance Department and shall be issued at a cost of $5 per
permit. The permit shall be for a period of one year from date of issuance and
must be presented at the time of purchase.
   (B)   Bulk sales of water shall be conducted at the fire hydrant located on
East McClanahan Street across from the Oxford Fire Station. Bulk water shall be
sold at the current outside rate. All sales shall be in 1,000-gallon
increments. The meter size factor will not apply to bulk water sales Prior to
purchasing water, the permittee shall register at the Oxford Fire Department.
The Oxford Fire Department shall be responsible for recording all bulk sales
purchases and reporting said sales to the City of Oxford Finance Department for
appropriate billing to the permittee.
   (C)   Granville County Fire Departments are not required to obtain a permit.
Said departments are required to use the fill point on East McClananhan Street
as set forth above except in emergency situations, in which case any hydrant in
the Oxford system may be used.
   (D)   Violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty in
the amount of $50 and a revocation and/or non-issuance of a permit. Failure to
timely pay any amounts due for the purchase of water shall result in a civil
assessment of an amount equal to one-half of the amount owed or $25, whichever
is greater. Failure to timely pay any amounts due shall also result in
revocation and/or non-issuance of a permit.
   (E)   The City of Oxford is exempt from this section.
(Ord. 2-10-02, passed 10-8-02)
§ 21-15 FILLING SWIMMING POOLS.
   Using water connected to the city’s water utility for the purpose of filling
swimming pools within the city limits is allowed according to the following
requirements and the city’s current pool filling policy:
   (A)   (1)   Residents may fill their pools without the assistance of city
personnel and upon doing so according to the pool filling policy, will receive
an exemption on sewer charges associated with the pool filling, once per year.
      (2)   The customer must contact the Water/Finance Department prior to
filling the pool in order to receive the exemption.
      (3)   The customer is charged the current water rate.
   (B)   Residents may receive assistance from city personnel for filling their
swimming pool according to the following guidelines:
      (1)   The customer completes a Pool Filling Request at the Water/Finance
Department and pays at the time of the request the current pool filling fee as
adopted in the annual fiscal year budget for the city.
      (2)   Water for filling pool is obtained from a fire hydrant by the Water
& Sewer Department according to established policies for bulk water sales.
      (3)   The customer is charged the current bulk water rate.
(Ord. 14-04-01, passed 4-8-14)
ARTICLE II: CONNECTIONS
§ 21-31 WATER CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tap on to or make any
connection to any water line or to any main belonging to the city without first
securing a written permit.
(`86 Code, § 21-31)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as is set out in Appendix B, which is
attached hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule, which
may be amended from time to time, shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 21-32 WHEN CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE.
   Within 30 days after a water main in any street is completed and ready for
use, the owner of every abutting lot whereon water is supplied for any human
use shall cause the lot to be connected with the water main. Within 30 days
after a sewer main in a city street is completed and ready for use, the owner
of every abutting lot having improvements thereon shall cause all water
closets, bathtubs, lavatories, sinks and drains, except stormwater drains, upon
the lot to be connected with the sewer main.
(`86 Code, § 21-32) (Ord. 87-12-1, passed 12-21-87)
§ 21-33 CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY CITY.
   The construction of laterals for the connection of sewer or water pipes on
any lot with sewer or water pipes in any street and the necessary excavation
therefor shall be done by the city or inspected and approved by the city.
(`86 Code, § 21-33)
§ 21-34 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   No connection shall be made to any sewer or water main nor to any
sewer or water lateral, except after the written application therefor has been
approved by the city.
   (B)   (1)   Every application for a sewer or water connection shall give the
following information:
         (a)   The name of the owner of the lot;
         (b)   The name of the street on which the lot is situated;
         (c)   The number of the house, if there is one on the lot, or, if not,
a description of the location of the lot;
         (d)   The number and kind of connections desired; and
         (e)   The character of surface of the abutting street.
      (2)   Every application shall be signed by the person making the
application, shall be accompanied by the proper fee for making the connection
applied for, and shall be filed with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Every application for a water or sewer connection shall be approved by
the city unless the connection applied for is of a size or is so located that
it cannot be made without impairing the city's ordinary sewer and water
services.
(`86 Code, § 21-34)
§ 21-35 COSTS FOR TAPS.
   (A)   Water and sewer tap or connection fees shall be assessed according to
Appendix A attached hereto and made a part hereof.
   (B)   All water meter taps over 1½ inches and sewer taps over 4 inches will
be installed at city cost, plus 10% for the first $1,000 and 15% for the
expenses above $1,000. Except when a person who does not own the land applies
for the connection, that person shall pay the estimated cost in cash at the
time of making the application.
   (C)   The tap fees will be updated from time to time and are also found on
file in the office of the City Engineer.
   (D)   The Water and Sewer Superintendent will calculate the exact cost of
the water and sewer tap installation and notify the Finance Department of any
additional billing. The Finance Department will add any additional charges to
the first bill.
(`86 Code § 21-35) (Am. Ord. 01-3-2, passed 3-13-01)
§ 21-36 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every house or building abutting any water main and requiring a water
connection shall be separately and independently connected, except in those
cases where laterals have already been laid in macadam or improved streets from
the main, provision being made for the house or building, in which case the
connection may be made to an existing lateral.
   (B)   (1)   If the house or building is on a macadam or improved street
where laterals have not been laid, the connection may be made to any convenient
lateral.
      (2)   When two or more houses or units are connected with the same water
lateral, a separate meter shall be provided for each house or unit.
(`86 Code, § 21-36)
§ 21-37 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   (1)   For the purposes of this section, the word CONNECTION shall be
construed to be that portion of water or sewer pipe between main and property
line.
      (2)   The city is responsible for water service to the meter. This city
is responsible for sewer service to the clean out, which is normally located at
the property line.
      (3)   Water connections shall be kept in repair by the city and at the
expense of the city.
      (4)   Necessary renewals of water connections shall be made by the city,
but at the expense of the property served.
   (B)   Every leak or break in a sewer connection shall be promptly repaired,
and every obstruction therein shall be promptly removed by the owner or
occupant of the property served by the connection.
(`86 Code, § 21-37)
§ 21-38 CONNECTIONS FROM OUTSIDE CITY.
   No connection of any water or sewer line or system outside the city shall be
made to any part of the city's water or sewer system without special permission
from the Board and on the terms as the Board shall prescribe.
(`86 Code, § 21-38)
§ 21-39 TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, obstruct, damage,
change, alter or otherwise interfere or tamper with in any manner, any water
pipe or water main or hydrant or water tank or any other thing being a part of
the waterworks system.
(`86 Code, § 21-39)
   (B)   Punishment for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
1-99, except that the penalty shall be as be as is set out in Appendix B, which
is attached hereto and made a part hereof. A copy of the penalty schedule,
which may be amended from time to time, shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk.
§ 21-40 PROTECTION OF WATER SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw trash, rubbish, sticks, stones
or any other substance into the storage tank or reservoir or other parts of the
water system and it shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any
trash, rubbish or any other substance on the grounds surrounding the buildings
of any part of and pertaining to the city water system and known as the pumping
station lot. (`86 Code, § 21-40)
Penalty, see § 1-99
§ 21-41 PRIVIES.
   (A)   Upon installing bathroom facilities and connecting them to a sewer
line, the owner of the property upon which the installation and connection
occurs shall render unfit any privy located upon the property by removing any
fixtures located in the privy and filling in the excavation over which the
privy is located.
   (B)   The owner of the land upon which the privy is located may use the
building for some purpose other than a privy after the above restrictions have
been complied with.
(`86 Code, § 21-42)
§ 21-42 WATER AND SEWER LINE FEES FOR LOTS NOT CONFORMING TO ASSESSMENT POLICY.
   Any lot inside the corporate limits that is accessible to water and sewer
lines but does not front a publicly dedicated street will be charged a fee
equal to lots of same size assessed on said project and that the property owner
shall pay the fee when the line is tapped or the city will take lien and deed
of trust on the property.
(Ord. 98-7-1, passed 7-14-98)
§ 21-43 TAP LINE FEES FOR WATER AND SEWER LINES OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Any lot outside the corporate limits shall pay a fee to tap water and sewer
lines extended by the city on a linear front foot charge as they would have if
they were inside the corporate limits and being assessed. All fees shall be
paid when the taps are requested or a lien shall be placed against the property
and financed at the prime rate not to exceed 8% per annum for a period of five
years.
(Ord. 98-7-2, passed 7-14-98)
§ 21-44 APPLICATION OF INSIDE AND OUTSIDE WATER AND SEWER RATES.
   All buildings served by the city water and/or sewer services that are
located outside the city corporate tax jurisdiction should have the outside
water and/or sewer rates applied. Those buildings served inside the city
corporate tax jurisdiction should have the inside water and/or sewer rates
applied.
(Ord. 99-12-2, passed 12-14-99)
ARTICLE III: EXTENSIONS BY PETITION
DIVISION 1: GENERALLY
§ 21-76 WATER MAINS.
   The citizens of the city may obtain water main extensions in the same manner
as sewer mains provided in Division 2 of this article, except that:
   (A)   Water mains shall be sized according to the decisions of the Water
Superintendent with the concurrence of the City Manager;
   (B)   Cost of valves, connecting mains and accessories shall be included in
the total cost for assessment purposes;
   (C)   (1)   The cost of fire hydrants as needed on the lines shall be
included in the total cost of the lines for assessment purposes.
      (2)   The Water Superintendent, with the concurrence of the City Manager,
shall decide upon the location and number of fire hydrants needed.
(`86 Code, § 21-76)
DIVISION 2: SEWERS
§ 21-91 PETITION OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   (1)   All parties on a street or similar passageway desiring an
extension of sewer system must present a signed petition form to the City
Board.
      (2)   To be approved by the Board, the persons who sign the petition must
constitute a majority both in number and property footage abutting on the
proposed sewer extension.
      (3)   Property owners will be assessed for extending the sewer system by
the policy currently in effect at the time of the petition.
   (B)   Forms for petitions will be furnished by the City Clerk's office.
(`86 Code, § 21-91)
ARTICLE IV: SEWER USE ORDINANCE
§ 21-116 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Sewer Use Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, is
incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if appearing in total. An
updated copy of this ordinance is on file with the City Clerk and City
Engineer.
(Ord. 94-8-01, passed 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 98-10-01, passed 10-13-98; Am. Ord. 01-
05-03, passed 5-8-01; Am. Ord. 02-11-01, passed 11-12-02; Am. Ord. 03-08-01,
passed 8-12-03; Am. Ord. 04-08-01, passed 8-10-04; Am. Ord. 05-04-02, passed 4-
12-05; Am. Ord. 07-06-03, passed 6-12-07; Am. Ord. 10-12-02, passed 10-09-12)
ARTICLE V: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN ORDINANCE
§ 21-146 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Enforcement Response Plan Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to
time, is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if appearing in
total.
(Ord. 94-8-2, passed 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 02-11-01, passed 11-12-02)
ARTICLE VI: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 21-176 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Stormwater Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, is
incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if appearing in total. An
updated copy of this ordinance is on file with the City Clerk and City
Engineer.
(Ord. 04-09-01, passed 9-28-04; Am. Ord. 04-09-01, passed 4-11-17)
ARTICLE VII: FATS, OIL AND GREASE ORDINANCE
§ 21-206 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Fats, Oil and Grease Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time,
is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as if appearing in total.
An updated copy of this ordinance is on file with the City Clerk and City
Engineer.
(Ord. 15-11-01, passed 11-10-15)
ARTICLE VIII: FATS, OIL AND GREASE ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN (ERP) ORDINANCE
§ 21-236 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Fats, Oil and Grease Emergency Response Plan (ERP) Ordinance, as it may
be amended from time to time, is incorporated by reference and made a part
hereof as if appearing in total. An updated copy of this ordinance is on file
with the City Clerk and City Engineer.
(Ord. 15-11-02, passed 11-10-15)
ARTICLE IX: BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION PREVENTION
§ 21-251 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this cross-connection control article is:
   (A)   This article will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act (PL
93-523), the North Carolina State Administrative Code (15A NCAC 08C), and the
North Carolina State Building Code (Volume II) as they pertain to cross
connections with the public water supply.
   (B)   To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the
possibility of contamination or pollution, due to back-siphonage or
backpressure, by isolation within the consumer's private water system such
contaminants or pollutants, that could introduce backflow into the public water
system.
   (C)   To define the authority of the city as the water purveyor entitled to
eliminating all cross-connections, new or existing, within its public water
system.
   (D)   To provide a continuing inspection program of cross-connections, this
may be installed in the future.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-252 RESPONSIBILITY; CITY.
   (A)   The Public Works Department will be primarily responsible for
preventing any contamination or pollution of the public water system. This
responsibility begins at the point of origin of the public water supply and
includes all of the public water distribution systems, and ends at the service
connection under the Safe Drinking Water Act. The Public Works Department shall
exercise vigilance to ensure that the consumer/customer has taken the proper
steps to protect the public potable water system.
   (B)   When it has been determined that a backflow protection assembly is
required for the prevention of contamination of the public water system, the
Public Works Department shall notify the owner, in writing, of any such
building or premises, to correct within a time set by this article, any
plumbing installed or existing that is in violation of this article.
   (C)   After surveying the private water system, the Public Works Department
will select an approved backflow prevention assembly required for containment
control to be installed at the service entrance.
   (D)   Prior to the installation of any backflow prevention assembly, the
owner of the private water system must be notified that the installation of a
backflow prevention assembly may create a closed system, and as a result,
thermal expansion may occur. Under such circumstance, the customer must
understand and assume all liability and responsibilities for that phenomenon.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-253 RESPONSIBILITY; CUSTOMER.
   (A)   The customer has the responsibility of preventing contaminants and
pollutants from entering the customer's private water system or the public
water system operated by the city. The customer, at his or her own expense,
shall install, operate, and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies
specified within this article.
   (B)   If a tenant customer does not maintain the private water system and
has no authority to bring the system into compliance with the provisions of
this article the city may assert any available action against the tenant to
assure the private water system is brought into compliance with this article.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-254 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. An unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water from any
source to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of
the receptacle. An approved air gap separation shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap separation be less
than one inch. An approved, air gap separation is an effective method to
prevent backflow and shall be considered as a backflow prevention assembly.
   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER. A device used to prevent back-siphonage, which
is designed so as not to be subject to static line pressure.
   BACKFLOW. Any reverse flow of water, gas or any other liquid substance or
combination into the public water system from any source due to an unprotected
cross-connection.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ADMINISTRATOR. An employee of the city designated by the
Director to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY APPROVED. An assembly that has been
investigated and approved by the Water Resources and has been approved to meet
the design and performance standards of the American Society of Sanitary
Engineers (ASSE), the American Water Works Assoc. (AWWA), or the Foundation for
Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California.
   BACKPRESSURE. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system
caused by pumps, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure above the
supply pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause a reversal of
the normal direction of flow.
   BACK SIPHONAGE. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the pipeline
due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line with the
backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   CERTIFIED TESTER. Any person who has proven his/her competency to test,
repair and overhaul backflow prevention assemblies. This person must hold a
certificate of completion from a certified training program in the testing and
repair of backflow prevention assemblies and cross connection control.
   CONSUMER/CUSTOMER. Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water
from the City of Oxford public water system.
   CONTAINMENT. The prevention of backflow from a private water system by an
approved, properly functioning backflow prevention assembly, which is
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which
creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or the spread
of disease.
   CROSS CONNECTION. Any actual or potential connection or piping arrangement
between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or
system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable
system any used water, industrial fluids, gas or substance which could be
harmful or hazardous to the potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off
valves located at each end of the device and suitable connections for testing
the water tightness of each check valve.
   DUAL CHECK VALVE. A device composed of two single, independently acting,
approved check valves. This is classified as a device and cannot be in-line
tested.
   HAZARD-DEGREE. The evaluation of a hazard within a private water system as
moderate or high.
   HAZARD-HIGH. An actual or potential threat of contamination to the public
water system or to a customer's potable water system that could cause serious
illness or death.
   HAZARD-IMMINENT. An actual threat of contamination to the public water
system that could cause serious illness or death.
   HAZARD-MODERATE. An actual or potential threat of damage to the physical
components comprising the public water system or a customer's potable water
system, or of pollution to the public water system, or to a customer's potable
water system.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such water for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water from any source, which has been approved for human
consumption by the appropriate agency of the State of North Carolina, City of
Oxford and/or local health agencies.
   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly suitable for continuous pressure, to be
used to protect against backsiphonage.
   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's premise,
whether supplied by public potable water or auxiliary water supply. The system
or systems may be either a potable water system or an industrial piping system.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. The potable water system owned and operated by the City
of Oxford. This system includes all distribution mains, lines, pipes,
connections, storage tanks, and other facilities conveying potable water from
the water treatment plants to the service connections of each customer.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE ASSEMBLY. An approved, properly functioning assembly
containing two, independently acting check valves with a hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The
assembly must include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off
valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect
against a high hazard.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service connection from the public
potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's
water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water
system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of
delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
   WATER PURVEYOR. Owner or operator of a public potable water system providing
an approved water supply to the public.
   WATER SUPPLY-AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the customer's
premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. The
auxiliary water may include water from another purveyor's public potable water
supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, etc., and
used or objectionable.
   WATER SUPPLY-UNAPPROVED. Any water supply, which has not been approved for
human consumption by the North Carolina Department of Human Resources.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-255 RIGHT-OF-ENTRY; AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   Any authorized representative from the city shall have the right to
enter any building, structure or premises during normal business hours to
perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this article and within accordance to
[Appendix D104.2.1] of the North Carolina State Plumbing Code. Those duties may
include sampling and testing of water or inspection and observation of all
piping systems connected to the public water supply. Refusal to allow these
representatives to enter for these purposes will result in the disconnection of
water service.
   (B)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the water purveyor any
pertinent information regarding the water supply system on such property where
cross-connection and backflow are deemed possible. [N.C State Plumbing Code
Appendix D104.2.3]
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-256 LAW; UNPROTECTED CROSS- CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No water service connection to any private water system shall be
installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as
required by this article and other applicable laws. Service of water to any
premises shall be discontinued by the city if a backflow assembly, required by
this article, is not installed, tested, and maintained or if a backflow
assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection
exists on the premises. Service will be restored after all such conditions or
defects are corrected.
   (B)   No customer shall allow an unprotected cross-connection to be made or
to remain involving the customer's private water system.
   (C)   No connection shall be made to an unapproved auxiliary water supply
unless the public water supply is protected against backflow by an approved
backflow assembly, appropriate to the degree of hazard.
   (D)   No customer shall fail to maintain in good operating condition any
backflow prevention assembly, which is part of the customer's private water
system and is required by this article.
   (E)   No customer shall fail to submit to the city any record, which is
required by this article.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-257 INSTALLATION AND TESTING OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to require that all water flowing from
the public water system, must flow through an approved backflow prevention
assembly and that each backflow prevention assembly be properly located,
installed, maintained and tested so that the backflow prevention assembly is
effective in protecting the public water system from any possible contamination
or pollution.
   (B)   The installation or replacement of a backflow prevention assembly for
domestic water use shall only be performed by a licensed plumber or utility
contractor. The installation or repair of a backflow prevention assembly on a
dedicated fire sprinkler service shall be performed by a licensed fire
sprinkler contractor or utility contractor. All backflow prevention assemblies
may be tested by a certified backflow technician authorized by the City of
Oxford. Repairs to a backflow prevention assembly on a dedicated fire sprinkler
system may only be performed by a fire sprinkler contractor.
   (C)   All new construction plans and specifications which will directly
affect the city water system, and/or required by the North Carolina Building
Code, the North Carolina Division of Health Services (NCDEHNR), and city or
county planning and zoning offices, shall be made available to the City of
Oxford Public Works Department for review, approval and to determine the degree
of hazard.
   (D)   All existing facilities zoned commercial or industrial and have
existing water services with the Regional Water Resources and requesting
certificate of occupancy from the city or county planning and zoning offices,
shall be inspected for compliance of backflow and cross-connection control
prevention. Any facility not having backflow protection or changing the degree
of hazard shall be brought into compliance before the Public Works Department
may release certificate of occupancy.
   (E)   All backflow prevention assemblies must be installed and maintained on
the customer's premises as part of the customer's private water system at or
near the service connection and before the service line is connected to any
other pipes except as authorized by the water purveyor.
   (F)   If it has been determined that a backflow prevention assembly cannot
be installed at the meter service, due to zoning or DOT rights-of-way, an
approved backflow assembly must be installed on any branch of plumbing
installed between the service meter and the service backflow assembly.
   (G)   Any branch of plumbing installed on the private water system that may
be of a greater hazard than the supply line, (example: chemical induced
irrigation or fire systems, pump systems, etc.) shall be protected with a
reduced pressure zone assembly.
   (H)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the backflow and cross-connection manual furnished by the City of Oxford
and/or the manufacturer's instructions, whichever is most restrictive.
   (I)   All double check valve assemblies, two-inch or larger, must be
installed in a watertight drainable pit wherever below ground installation is
necessary in accordance with detailed specifications provided in the backflow
and cross-connection control manual. If drain cannot be provided, the assembly
must be installed above ground.
   (J)   Double check valve assemblies may be installed in a vertical position
with prior approval from the Public Works Department provided the flow of water
is in an upward direction.
   (K)   Reduce pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a horizontal
position and in a location in which no portion of the assembly can become
submerged in any substance under any circumstances (pit installations are
prohibited).
   (L)   Each backflow prevention assembly that is required must function
properly at the time of installment. Each customer will be required to test,
maintain and repair each assembly required which is a part of the customer's
private water system. A certified backflow prevention technician may only
conduct such test. Testing shall be done immediately following installation of
any backflow prevention assembly and on an annual or semi-annual basis
depending on the degree of hazard.
   (M)   If repair is found necessary on an assembly, it must be re-tested
following any repair. A complete duplicate copy of any testing and/or repair
shall be sent to the City of Oxford within 30 days of completion of test or
repair. Each customer must maintain a complete copy of any test or repair for
no less than five years. All test and repair records must be maintained on
forms approved by the Public Works Department of the City of Oxford.
   (N)   All rubber components must be replaced every five years or as often as
needed.
   (O)   Any customer installing a reduced pressure zone (RPZ) or double check
valve assembly (DCVA) must provide the following information to the Public
Works Department within ten days after installation:
      (1)   Service address where the assembly is located;
      (2)   Owner;
      (3)   Description of assembly's location;
      (4)   Date of installation;
      (5)   Type of assembly;
      (6)   Manufacturer;
      (7)   Model Number;
      (8)   Serial Number; and
      (9)   Test results/reports.
   (P)   The Public Works Department must approve each backflow assembly
required by this article. A list of approved assemblies can be obtained through
the Backflow Administrator; any unapproved backflow assembly must be replaced,
within a time set by the Administrator, with an approved backflow assembly.
 
Health Hazard     60 Days
Non-health Hazard 90 Days
 
   (Q)   If it has been determined that a customer must install a backflow
prevention assembly, the Public Works Department will provide the customer with
a letter of notification and list of approved backflow assemblies. The
following time periods shall be set forth for the installation of the specified
assemblies.
   (R)   If an imminent hazard or unreasonable threat of contamination or
pollution to the public water system is detected, the Public Works Department
may require the installation of the required backflow assembly immediately or
within a shorter time period than specified in subsection (O) of this section.
   (S)   If a customer does not wish for water service to be interrupted when a
backflow assembly is tested, repaired, or replaced, a parallel installation
must be made using an approved assembly of the same degree of hazard. The
parallel line may be of the same size or smaller.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-258 DEGREE OF HAZARDS.
   (A)   Determining the degree of hazard.
      (1)   No service shall be completed until the Public Works Department has
been provided information or has surveyed the private water system to determine
the degree of hazard and make a determination of a backflow prevention assembly
to be installed to protect the public water supply.
      (2)   Any customer making any modification to the private system's
configuration or use of, which may change the degree of hazard, shall notify
the Public Works Department before any modification is made. If the Public
Works Department determines that such modification requires a different
backflow prevention assembly that assembly must be installed before the
modification is made.
      (3)   The following types of facilities or services have been identified
by the City of Oxford Regional Water Resources Department as having a potential
for backflow or nonpotable water into the public water supply system.
Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly will be required on all
such services according to the degree of hazard present. Other types of
facilities or services not listed below may also be required to install
approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined necessary by the Backflow
Administrator. As a minimum requirement, all commercial services will be
required to install a double check valve assembly unless otherwise listed
below:
 
DCVA Double check valve assembly
RP   Reduced pressure principle assembly
DCDA Double check detector assembly
RPDA Reduced pressure detector assembly
AG   Air gap
PVB  Pressure vacuum breaker
RPZ  Reduced pressure zones
 
         (a)   Aircraft and missile plants: RP.
         (b)   Automotive service station, dealerships, etc.:
            1.   No health hazard: DCVA.
            2.   Health hazard: RP.
         (c)   Automotive plants: RP.
         (d)   Auxiliary water systems:
            1.   Approved public/private water supply: DCVA.
            2.   Unapproved public/private water supply: AG.
            3.   Used water and industrial fluids: RP.
         (e)   Bakeries:
            1.   No health hazard: DCVA.
            2.   Health hazard: RPZ.
         (f)   Beauty shops/barber shops:
            1.   No health hazard: DCVA.
            2.   Health hazard: RP.
         (g)   Beverage bottling plants: RP.
         (h)   Breweries: RP.
         (i)   Buildings: Hotels, apartment houses, public and private
buildings, or other structures having unprotected cross connections.
            1.   (Under five stories) No Health hazard: DCVA.
            2.   (Under five stories) Health hazard: RP.
            3.   (Over five stories) All: RP.
         (j)   Canneries, packing houses, and rendering plants: RP.
         (k)   Chemical plants: Manufacturing, processing, compounding or
treatment: RP degree of hazard, due to confidential activities, a reduced
pressure zone assembly will be required.
   (B)   Low hazard.
      (1)   All single-family residential homes will be considered a low hazard
and shall have a minimum of a dual check valve device installed at the meter
service.
      (2)   If no other backflow prevention assembly is specified a double
check valve assembly must be installed on all private property.
   (C)   Imminent. 
      (1)   If it has been determined a customer's private water system has an
imminent hazard; such customer must install a backflow prevention assembly
specified by the Public Works Department and this article. This assembly must
be installed within 24 hours of notification from the Administrator. If the
customer fails to install the specified assembly within the allowed time limit,
water service to the customer's private water system will be terminated and may
be subject to specified civil penalties. In the event the Public Works
Departments unable to notify the customer in 24 hours of determining an
imminent hazard exists, the Administrator may terminate water service until the
specified assembly is installed. These actions may be carried out under the
Safe Drinking Water Act (Title XIV Section 1431) and the N.C. State Plumbing
Code (Appendix D104.2.6).
      (2)   Only a backflow prevention assembly offering a greater degree of
protection may be installed in place of a specified assembly required by this
article.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-259 NOTICES.
   Notice of contamination or pollution.
   (A)   In the event the customer's private water system becomes contaminated
or polluted the customer shall notify the Public Works Department immediately.
   (B)   In the event a customer has reason to believe that a backflow incident
has occurred between the customer's private water system and the public water
system the customer must notify the Water Resources Department immediately in
order that appropriate measures may be taken to isolate and remove the
contamination of pollution.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
§ 21-260 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notification of violation.
      (1)   A written notice must be presented to any customer/person who has
been found to be in violation of any part of this article.
      (2)   Such notice must explain the violation and give the time period
within which the violation must be corrected. The time period set to correct a
violation shall not exceed 30 days after receiving notice unless otherwise
specified by the time period chart subsection 17-106(8). If the violation has
been determined by the Administrator to be an imminent hazard the customer
shall be required to correct the violation immediately.
      (3)   In the event a customer is found in violation of this article and
fails to correct the violation in a timely manner or to pay any civil penalty
or expense assessed under this section, water service will be terminated.
   (B)   The violation of any section of this article may be punished by a
civil penalty listed as follows:
      (1)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private water system,
which has an imminent hazard: $1,000 per day not to exceed $10,000.
      (2)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private water system,
which is of a moderate or high hazard: $500.
      (3)   Submitting false records or failure to submit records, which are
required by this article: $500.
      (4)   Failure to test or maintain backflow prevention assemblies as
required: $100 per day.
   (C)   Reduction of penalty.
      (1)   The Administrator may reduce or dismiss any civil penalty imposed
under this section if the Administrator has determined that the person charged
with the violation has no past history of violation in a timely manner as set
by the Administrator.
      (2)   No civil penalty shall be reduced if it has been determined the
violation was intentional.
      (3)   Any person violating any part of this ordinance must reimburse the
City of Oxford for any expenses in repairing damage to the public water system
caused by any violation and any expenses incurred for investigating a
violation.
(Ord. 18-08-16, passed 8-14-18)
APPENDIX A: WATER AND SEWER TAP RATES
Water and Sewer Tap Rates
Water Tap Rates    Sewer Tap Rates
Size Rate Ord. No. Size Rate Ord. No.
Water and Sewer Tap Rates
Water Tap Rates                         Sewer Tap Rates
Size          Rate        Ord. No.      Size          Rate        Ord. No.
2-inch tap:               98-6-3,                                 01-3-2,
Disc Meter    $900        passed 6-9-98 4-inch tap    $500        passed 3-13-
                                                                  01
2-inch tap:               98-6-3,       Larger than   Cost plus a 01-3-2,
Turbo 2 Meter $950        passed 6-9-98 4-inch tap    %*          passed 3-13-
                                                                  01
2-inch tap:                             Tapping
Compound      $1,750      98-6-3,       outfall sewer $400        93-6-2,
Meter                     passed 6-9-98 line in lieu              passed 6-8-93
                                        of assessment
3/4-inch                  01-3-2,
meter         $550        passed 3-13-                           
                          01
                          01-3-2,
1-inch meter  $625        passed 3-13-                           
                          01
1½- inch                 01-3-2,
meter         $725        passed 3-13-                           
                          01
              Cost plus a 01-3-2,
2-inch meter  %*          passed 3-13-                           
                          01
Larger than   Cost plus a 01-3-2,
2-inch meter  %*          passed 3-13-                           
                          01
* Note to Table: All water meter taps over 1½ inches and sewer taps over 4
inches will be installed at city cost plus 10% for the first $1,000 and 15% for
any expenses over $1,000
 
APPENDIX B: MAXIMUM PENALTY SCHEDULE
Maximum Penalty Schedule*
Code Section Maximum Penalty Ord. No.
Maximum Penalty Schedule*
Code Section                              Maximum Penalty   Ord. No.
                                          Not less than $50 92-1-23, passed 1-
§ 21-8 Metering of water                 and not greater   14-92
                                          than $500
                                          Not less than $50 92-1-24, passed 1-
§ 21-11 Cross connections of water supplyand not greater   14-92
                                          than $500
§ 21-31 Water connection permit (illegal Not less than $50 92-1-25, passed 1-
tap)**                                    and not greater   14-92
                                          than $500
                                          Not less than $50 92-1-26, passed 1-
§ 21-39 Tampering with water system      and not greater   14-92
                                          than $500
§ 21-41 Cutting on water after           Not less than $50 92-1-27, passed 1-
discontinuance                            and not greater   14-92
                                          than $150
*Note to Table: These penalties may be amended from time to time.
**Note to Table: Each day of continuance is a separate offense.
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   ANNEXATIONS
   
II.   DEMOLITIONS
   
III.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
   
IV.   CAPITAL PROJECTS
   
V.   PARKING REGULATION REQUESTS
   
VI.   MURALS WITHIN CITY LIMITS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
89-1-1   1-11-89     Extending the corporate city limits; King's Inn Motel,
                     N.C. #96 South
90-4-1   4-26-90     Extending the corporate city limits; Meadowbrook
                     Subdivision Phase I
90-8-1   8-14-90     Extending the corporate city limits; Williamsboro Street
                     and portions of Maluli Drive and Denard Street
91-12-1  12-10-91    Extending the corporate city limits; Roxboro Road, 158
                     West
93-2-1   2-9-93      Extending the corporate city limits; Maluli Drive and
                     Greenbrier Circle
96-7-1   7-9-96      Extending the corporate city limits; North College Street
                     extension
97-11-1  11-11-97    Extending the corporate city limits; Meadowbrook
                     Subdivision, Phase II
98-1-1   1-13-98     Extending the corporate city limits; Green Acres
                     Subdivision, Section 5
99-2-1   2-9-99      Extending the corporate city limits; Green Acres
                     Subdivision, Section 3
99-3-1   3-16-99     Extending the corporate city limits; Waste Industries,
                     N.C. 96 South
02-06-03 6-11-02     Annexing certain tracts of land encompassing 560.22 acres
                     situated in Salem Township, Granville Co.
02-12-01 12-10-02    Extending the corporate city limits; Green Acres Extended
                     Subdivision, Phase 6
02-12-02 12-10-02    Extending the corporate city limits; portion of Industry
                     Drive
03-09-01 9-9-03      Extending the corporate city limits; portions of Brentwood
                     Estates (Hillardale Drive)
04-03-01 3-09-04     Extending the corporate city limits; Alan Vester
                     Mitsubishi Daewoo and Best Western Inn & Suites.
04-11-01 11-01-04    Extending the corporate city limits; DDC Oxford Apartment.
05-01-01 1-11-05     Extending the corporate city limits; City of Oxford
                     Wastewater Treatment Plant.
05-12-01 12-5-05     Extending the corporate city limits; Lexington Park
                     Subdivision Lot Numbers 52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 58 and 59
06-01-02 1-10-06     Extending the corporate city limits; portions of W.
                     Quailridge Road
06-06-01 6-5-06      Extending the corporate limits; Rollingwood Subdivision,
                     Phase 3
07-05-02 5-8-07      Extending the corporate limits; William T. Overton (40 +/
                     - acres - Lewis Street/Highway 15S)
                     Extending the corporate limits; Land situated on the north
07-06-01 6-12-07     and south side of the outer loop (U.S. # 158) - Easton
                     Farms, LLC
                     Extending the corporate limits; NC State Employees Credit
08-01-01 1-8-08      Union - 16.8558 acres located on Highway 158 adjacent to
                     the Granville County Shrine Club
                     Extending the corporate limits; 3 parcels of land situated
08-11-01 11-18-08    along Industry Drive between Raleigh Street and Henderson
                     Street owned by the Central Children’s Home
                     Extending the corporate limits; 117 and 119 West
09-07-01 7-14-09     Quailridge Road, Lots 1 and 2 Block A of Quailridge
                     Estate, Section No. 2, Oxford Township, Granville County
09-08-01 8-11-09     Extending the corporate limits: 1018 Lewis Street, 0.6100
                     acres located in Fishing Creek Township, Granville County
                     Extending the corporate limits: 2 lots or parcels of land
09-09-01 9-8-09      recorded in Deed Book 181, page 469, and Deed Book 198,
                     Page 304, Granville County Registry
09-12-01 12-8-09     Extending the corporate limits; Plat Book 138, page 49,
                     Granville County Registry
                     Extending the corporate limits: All of Lot 2A, containing
01-02-10 1-12-10     0.4448 acres, Plat Book 25, page 191, Granville County
                     Registry
01-03-10 1-12-10     Extending the corporate limits; All of Lot 16, Brentwood
                     Estates, Plat Book 11, page 191, Granville County Registry
                     Extending the corporate limits: Lots 1-6, known as
03-01-10 3-9-10      Woodview, located on Meadow Heights, containing 4.2113
                     acres
03-02-10 3-9-10      Extending the corporate limits; all of Lots 1-13 of Green
                     Acres Section 8, known as Shadow Lane
10-09-01 9-14-10     Extending the corporate limits: as requested by Danube
                     Partners 141 LLC
11-03-01 3-8-11      Extending the corporate limits; properties located on
                     College Street and the outer loop
11-03-02 3-8-11      Extending the corporate limits; properties located on W.
                     Industry Drive and Pine Tree Road
13-09-01 9-10-13     Extending the corporate limits: 6.40 acres, Oxford
                     Preparatory High School, 6041 Landis Road
                     Extending the corporate limits: 2.455 acres (Lots A, B and
14-01-01 1-14-14     C) at US 158 Business and Critcher Road (SR 1666) in Salem
                     and Oxford Townships
14-05-01 5-13-14     Extending the corporate limits: 1.31 acres, 1008 Lewis
                     Street
                     Extending the corporate limits: 10.61 acres, Old Southside
14-08-01 8-12-14     Wastewater Treatment Plant, located on the Outer Loop,
                     S.R. 1195, near N.C. 96 South
15-05-01 5-12-15     Extending the corporate limits: 9.0 acres, East Industry
                     Drive
15-09-01 9-8-15      Extending the corporate limits: 1.0 acre, Oxford
                     Preparatory High School, 6041 Landis Road
15-10-01 10-13-15    Extending the corporate limits: 7.417 acres; I-85 (B&B
                     Properties)
16-08-01 8-9-16      Extending the corporate limits: 10.03 acres, East Industry
                     Drive
                     Extending the corporate limits: 37.703 acres, lands of
18-1-01  11-13-18    Mark A. Ellington, and wife, Susan P. Ellington, and lands
                     of Betty Oakley Branch
                     Annexing 76.87 acres located off of the Outer Loop and
22-03-5B 3-15-22     Landis Road Oxford, North Carolina, 27565 County of
                     Granville for CAB Granville, LLC, 427 Shady Lane
                     Wilkesboro, NC 28697
                    
 
TABLE II: DEMOLITIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
89-1-2   1-10-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 344 Henderson Street
89-1-3   1-10-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 208 Black Street
89-1-4   1-10-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 212 Wilmington Avenue
89-1-5   1-10-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 209B Rectory Street
89-1-6   1-10-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 507B Granville Street
89-2-2   2-14-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 119 Maple Street
89-4-3   4-11-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 115 Granville Street
89-9-1   9-12-89     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 213 New College Street
90-2-1   2-13-90     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 205 Orange Street
90-4-2   4-26-90     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 309 Granville Street
90-4-3   4-26-90     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 610 Granville Street
90-11-3  11-13-90    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 1102 Raleigh Road
90-11-4  11-13-90    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 204 Alexander Avenue
90-12-2  12-11-90    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 121 Granville Street
91-5-2   5-14-91     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 614 Cherry Street
                     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
92-6-3   6-9-92      property; corner of Goshen Street, West College Street and
                     Watkins Street
92-6-4   6-9-92      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 1102 Raleigh Street
92-6-5   6-9-92      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 812 Goshen Street
93-1-1   1-12-93     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 213 Clement Avenue
93-1-2   1-12-93     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 205 Granville Street
94-9-1   9-13-94     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 305 W. Front Street
94-9-2   9-13-94     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 118B Antioch Road
97-6-2   6-10-97     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 411 Taylor Street
97-7-1   7-8-97      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 209 Rectory Street
97-12-1  12-9-97     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 120 Granville Street
                     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
97-12-2  12-9-97     property; the end of Gregory Place, rear of house facing
                     Bullock Street
98-1-2   1-13-98     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 506 Fifth Street
98-1-3   1-13-98     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 203 College Street
99-3-2   3-16-99     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 208 Alexander Avenue
99-12-1  12-14-99    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 115 Green Street
00-10-1  10-10-00    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 200 First Street
04-09-01 9-14-04     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 504 Taylor Street
04-09-02 9-14-04     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 205 Alexander Avenue
05-05-01 5-10-05     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 109 Peace Street
05-08-01 8-9-05      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 600 Raleigh Street
05-08-02 8-9-05      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 120 Franklin Street
05-12-01 12-13-05    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 342 Henderson Street
06-04-01 4-11-06     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 308 Piedmont Avenue
06-10-02 10-10-06    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 206 West McClanahan Street
06-11-01 11-14-06    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 218 Broad Street
06-11-02 11-14-06    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 106 Summit Avenue
07-01-01 1-9-07      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 208 Spring Street
07-02-01 2-13-07     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 113 Maple Drive
07-04-01 4-10-07     208 Spring Street rescinded
07-05-01 5-8-07      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 120 Clement Avenue
07-07-01 7-10-07     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 110 Warren Avenue
07-10-01 10-09-07    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 217 Alexander Avenue
07-10-02 10-9-07     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 215 Alexander Avenue
08-04-02 4-8-08      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 212 Broad Street
08-09-01 9-9-08      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 107 Railroad Avenue
08-10-03 10-15-08    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 202 Railroad Avenue
08-10-04 10-15-08    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 210 Orange Street
08-10-05 10-15-08    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 209A Wilmington Avenue
08-12-01 12-09-08    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 310 McClanahan Street
09-02-01 2-10-09     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 232 Lanier Street
09-09-02 9-8-09      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 214 Granville Street
09-11-01 11-10-09    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 512 Hillsboro Street
03-10-01 3-9-10      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 401 Taylor Street
05-11-01 5-10-11     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 103 Green Street
11-11-01 11-7-11     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 115 Maple Street
12-02-01 2-14-12     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 613 Broad Street
08-12-01 8-14-12     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property; 223 W. College Street
13-05-01 5-14-13     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 606 Raleigh Street
13-09-02 9-10-13     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 417 Sycamore Street
14-07-01 7-8-14      Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 311 Piedmont Avenue
16-02-01 2-9-16      Directing the Housing Control Officer to demolish certain
                     property: Spring Street across from Deluxe Barber Shop
16-05-02 5-10-16     Directing the Housing Control Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 207A Granville Street
16-07-01 7-12-16     Directing the Housing Control Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 207 Clement Avenue
16-07-02 7-12-16     Directing the Housing Control Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 312 Sycamore Street
16-10-01 10-11-16    Directing the Housing Control Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 111 Hunt Street
17-03-01 3-14-17     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 113 First Street
17-03-02 3-14-17     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 214 Clement Street
17-06-15 6-13-17     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 207 New College Street
17-09-08 9-12-17     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 312 Penn Avenue
17-09-09 9-12-17     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 215 Rectory Street
17-09-10 9-12-17     Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 102 King Street
17-11-07 11-14-17    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 114 Peace Street
17-11-08 11-14-17    Directing the Housing Code Officer to demolish certain
                     property: 311 Granville Street
                    
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
01-3-1   3-13-01     Franchise agreement with Time Warner for cable television
07-03-01 4-10-07     Franchise agreement with Waste Industries for the
                     collection and disposal of solid waste
11-04-01 4-11-11     Franchise agreement with Waste Industries, Inc., for solid
                     waste collection and disposal systems and facilities
                     Franchise agreement with Public Service Company of North
10-12-01 10-9-12     Carolina for the operation and maintenance of a gas
                     utility system
15-01-01 1-13-15     Franchise agreement with Waste Industries, Inc., for solid
                     waste collection and disposal systems and facilities
 
TABLE IV: CAPITAL PROJECTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed Description
01-5-2        7-10-01     Construction of a wastewater transmission line
01-5-2        7-10-01     Amendment; construction of a wastewater transmission
                          line
                          Wastewater treatment plant upgrade and extension of
05-04-02      4-12-05     24-inch effluent outfall line at the wastewater
                          treatment plant
08-01-02      1-8-08      CDBG Project Ordinance, Garden Park Villas, #07-C-
                          1681
                          Resolution project budget and funding source
Res. 08-07-01 7-16-08     identified for NC Rural Center Grant for sewer lines
                          in the Franklin Street and Orange Street area
                          Resolution adopting a Capital Project Ordinance for
Res. 09-02-02 2-10-09     the proposed sewer system rehabilitations and
                          affirming rates exceed 1.5 MHI
13-08-01      8-13-13     Construction of 1 MG equalization basin at the WWTP
                          Construction of a BMP to replace extended detention
13-08-02      8-13-13     facility with stormwater wetland plus culvert and
                          stream improvements
14-08-02      8-12-14     Construction of 1 MG equalization tank at the WWTP
                          (amended Ord. 13-08-01)
16-08-02      8-9-16      Capital project authorized: new elevated water
                          storage tank, SCADA and altitude valves
17-04-07      4-11-17     Capital project authorized: 2017 USDA-RD Water and
                          Sewer Main Improvements
                          Resolution awarding construction bid to Phoenix
Res.          12-12-17    Fabricators & Erectors, LLC, for construction of a
                          750,000 gallon elevated tank and approximately 4,000
                          feet of 12 inch water main
                         
 
TABLE V: PARKING REGULATION REQUESTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
89-12-1  12-12-89    Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Granville
                     S&L, Williamsboro Street
90-5-3   5-8-90      Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Old
                     Warehouse Square
90-11-2  11-13-90    Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Hillside
                     Drive (OHA)
91-7-1   7-9-91      Parking regulation on privately-owned property; 201
                     Hillsboro Street (Every L. Detail)
91-7-2   7-9-91      Parking regulation on privately-owned property; 101 Lewis
                     St. (Bett's Funeral Home)
91-7-3   7-9-91      Parking regulation on privately-owned property; 323
                     Hillsboro (Peacock Lounge)
91-8-1   8-13-91     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; McDonald's
                     (115 Granville Corners)
91-8-2   8-13-91     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Hillsboro
                     St. (3 Spaces)
93-6-4   6-22-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Pointer
                     Repr/Auto Repairs
93-6-5   6-22-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; East
                     Carolina Tire Service
93-6-6   6-22-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Friendly
                     Village Shopping Center
93-6-7   6-22-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Walker
                     Auto Stores (Hillsboro)
93-6-8   6-22-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; G. Co. Sr.
                     Center/Mental Health
93-8-1   8-10-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Finch's
                     Car Wash (Lewis Street)
93-8-2   8-10-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Hillsboro,
                     Speedy's Auto Service
93-9-2   9-14-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; 201
                     Hillsboro St., Every Little Detail
93-9-3   9-14-93     Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Old
                     Warehouse Square
95-8-3   8-8-95      Parking regulation on privately-owned property; Oak Plaza
                     Shopping Center
                    
 
TABLE VI: MURALS WITHIN CITY LIMITS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
22-11-15 11-15-22    An ordinance to allow murals within Oxford’s city limits
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1986 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G. S. Cite Code Section
G. S. Cite          Code Section
Art. V, § 2        Charter,
                    Sec. 19
Ch. 7A, Art. 41     14-14
7A-272              Charter,
                    Sec. 29–32
                    13-99;
14-4                14-12;
                    20-999
14-4(a)             1-99;
                    20-999
14-4(c)             1-99
14-54(c)            14-13
14-127              14-3
14-132              14-3
14-144              14-3
14-154              14-3
14-160              14-3
14-200              14-6
14-234(a)(1)        2-461
14-234(a)(2)        2-461
14-234(a)(3)        2-461
14-234(b)           2-461
14-234(b1)          2-461
14-234(d1)          2-461
14-234.1            2-461
14-269              14-13
14-280              14-1
14-286              8-1
14-402 et seq.      17-11
14-409 et seq.      17-11
14-410 et seq.      8-61
14-413              8-50
14-414              8-61
14-415.23           14-13
15A-402             17-6
17C-10              17-27
17F-11              17-11
Ch. 18B             3-3
18B-100             3-1
18B-102(a)          3-1
18B-200             3-3
18B-301(c)          3-1
18B-301(f)(1)c      3-1
18B-904(h)          3-3
18B-1001(1)         3-3
18B-1001(3)         3-3
18B-1001(5)         3-3
18B-1001(10)        3-3
18B-1010            3-3
18B-1100(5)         3-3
Ch. 19              14-15
19-1 through 19-8.3 14-15
19-2.1 et seq.      14-15
Ch. 20              20-999
20-4.01             18-54;
                    20-1
20-4.01(12b)        20-17
20-4.01(13)         20-1
20-4.01(25)         20-1
20-4.01(27)         20-1
20-4.01(27)d1       20-1
20-4.01(49)         9-1
20-37.6(d)          20-138
20-97               Ch. 13
20-97 et seq.       Ch. 13, Appendix A
20-134(a)           20-143
20-137.7            20-201
20-140.2            20-9
20-141              20-81
20-145              20-82
20-165.1            20-52
20-168              20-3
20-169              20-52
20-170              20-7
20-171              20-5
20-171.2            20-15
20-183.2            19-104
20-219.1 et seq.    20-205
20-219.9            20-205
20-219.9–20-219.1420-205
20-219.11(a)        20-204
20-219.11(b)        20-204
20-280              19-30
25-3-506            2-226
44A-1 et seq.       20-205
44A-4               20-205
44A-5               20-205
44A-6               20-205
62-3                19-1
63-1                Charter,
                    Sec. 33
63-4                Charter,
                    Sec. 34
                    Charter,
63-5                Sec. 35; Charter,
                    Sec. 37
                    Charter,
63-6                Sec. 35; Charter,
                    Sec. 36
                    Charter,
63-8                Sec. 36; Charter,
                    Sec. 38
63-49               Charter,
                    Sec. 37
63-53               Charter,
                    Sec. 40
63-56               Charter,
                    Sec. 40
Ch. 90, Art. 5      14-12
95-173 et seq.      8-51
99E-21 - 99E-25     15-56
99E-23(b)(2)        15-59
99E-24              15-60
                    Charter,
Ch. 105             Sec. 19;
                    Ch. 13
105-1 et seq.       Charter,
                    Sec. 19
105-33 et seq.      Ch. 13
105-103             13-31
105-105             13-35
105-109(d)          13-43
105-113.70          Ch. 13, Appendix A
105-113.77          Ch. 13, Appendix A
105-113.79          Ch. 13, Appendix A
105-235             13-31
105-242             13-43
105-251             13-38
105-350             13-28
105-366(d)          13-40
105-368             13-43
105-374–105-376   5-89
113-57              8-49
115C-525(b)         8-42
121-5               13-42
130A-185            4-8
133-32(a)           2-461
133-32(d)           2-461
136-143             20-207
143-129(a)          2-181
143-129(f)          2-181
143-129(g)          2-181
143-318.12          2-21
143-345.2           14-6
153A-35             2-461
153A-43             2-461
153A-44             2-461
153A-340(g)         2-461
153A-345(e1)        2-461
159-25              2-137
159-43 et seq.      Charter,
                    Sec. 20
160-141 et seq.     2-428
160-277.1           Charter,
                    Sec. 42
160-293.1           Charter,
                    Sec. 43
160-451             2-427
                    Charter,
160A-1 et seq.      Sec. 3; Charter,
                    Sec. 10; Charter,
                    Sec. 15
160A-11             Charter,
                    Sec. 1
160A-21             Charter,
                    Sec. 2
160A-22             Charter,
                    Sec. 2
160A-44             Charter, Art. XIII
160A-58.1(b)        5-118
160A-61             2-51; Charter,
                    Sec. 14
                    Charter,
160A-64             Sec. 8; Charter,
                    Sec. 11
160A-66             Charter,
                    Sec. 4
160A-67             Charter,
                    Sec. 7
160A-68             Charter,
                    Sec. 14
160A-69             Charter,
                    Sec. 7
160A-69 et seq.     2-101
                    Charter,
160A-70             Sec. 7; Charter,
                    Sec. 13
160A-71             Charter,
                    Sec. 12
160A-75             2-461,
                    20-999
160A-76             5-61,
                    18-1
160A-102            Charter,
                    Sec. 17
160A-147            Charter,
                    Sec. 16
160A-147 et seq.    Charter,
                    Sec. 16
160A-148            Charter,
                    Sec. 17
160A-155            Charter,
                    Sec. 18
                    2-76;
160A-168            2-77;
                    2-81
160A-171            2-117; Charter,
                    Sec. 17
160A-175            1-99;
                    8-54
160A-175(d)         13-43
160A-175(g)         13-99
160A-184            14-9
160A-189            14-1
160A-190            14-1
                    9-1–
160A-192            9-4;
                    9-16–
                    9-27
160A-193            10-26
160A-194            Ch. 13
160A-205.4          3-3
160A-205.4 et seq.  3-3
                    Charter,
160A-206 et seq.    Sec. 19,
                    Ch. 13
160A-207            13-43
160A-216 et seq.    Charter,
                    Sec. 22
160A-217            Charter,
                    Sec. 43
160A-240.1          Charter,
                    Sec. 21
160A-266(c)         2-137;
                    2-182
160A-281 et seq.    17-3
160A-282            17-26
160A-282(b)         17-32
160A-285            17-3
160A-286            17-6; Charter,
                    Sec. 26
                    8-1;
                    8-2;
                    8-21–
                    8-23;
160A-291            8-36–
                    8-56;
                    8-61–
                    8-63;
                    8-76;
                    8-81
160A-292            8-21
                    8-1;
                    8-2;
                    8-21–
                    8-23;
160A-293            8-36–
                    8-56;
                    8-61–
                    8-63;
                    8-76;
                    8-81
160A-314            21-7
160A-341–160A-348 6-1–
                    6-14
160A-360 et seq.    Ch. 16
160A-360(b)         2-447
160A-361            2-446
160A-362            2-446
160A-376            5-118
160A-381(d)         2-461
160A-388            2-461
160A-388(b)         5-156
160A-388(e1)        2-461
160A-400.27         5-154
160A-424 et seq.    5-84
160A-441 et seq.    5-62
160A-451            2-426
160A-452            2-429
160A-453            2-431;
                    2-432
160A-455            2-433
166A-7              7-2
188-1001            3-2
                    
 
REFERENCES TO 1986 CODE
1986 Code 2002 Code
1986 Code 2002 Code
2-1       2-1
2-21      2-21
2-22      2-22
2-23      2-23
2-24      2-24
2-25      2-25
2-26      2-26
2-28      2-28
2-29      2-29
2-30      2-30
2-31      2-31
2-32      2-32
2-33      2-33
2-34      2-34
2-51      2-51
2-52      2-52
2-53      2-53
2-76      2-76
2-77      2-77
2-78      2-78
2-79      2-79
2-80      2-80
2-81      2-81
2-82      2-82
2-83      2-83
2-84      2-84
2-101     2-101
2-116     2-116
2-117     2-117
2-136     2-136
2-137     2-137
2-138     2-138
2-151     2-151
2-152     2-152
2-171     2-171
2-172     2-172
2-226     2-226
2-426     2-426
2-427     2-427
2-428     2-428
2-429     2-429
2-430     2-430
2-431     2-431
2-432     2-432
2-433     2-433
3-1       3-1
4-1       4-1
4-2       4-2
4-3       4-3
4-4       4-4
4-5       4-5
4-6       4-5
4-7       4-7
4-8       4-8
4-9       4-9
4-10      4-10
4-11      4-11
4-12      4-12
4-13      4-13
4-14      4-14
4-15      4-15
4-16      4-16
4-17      4-17
4-18      4-18
4-19      4-19
4-20      4-20
4-21      4-21
4-22      4-22
4-23      4-23
5-61      5-61
5-62      5-62
5-81      5-81
5-82      5-82
5-83      5-83
5-84      5-84
5-85      5-85
5-86      5-86
5-87      5-87
5-88      5-88
5-89      5-89
5-90      5-90
5-91      5-91
5-92      5-92
6-1       6-1
6-2       6-2
6-3       6-3
6-4       6-4
6-5       6-5
6-6       6-6
6-7       6-7
6-8       6-8
6-9       6-9
6-10      6-10
6-11      6-11
6-12      6-12
6-13      6-13
7-1       7-1
7-2       7-2
7-16      7-16
7-17      7-16
7-18      7-18
7-19      7-19
7-20      7-20
7-21      7-21
7-22      7-22
8-1       8-1
8-2       8-2
8-21      8-21
8-22      8-22
8-23      8-23
8-61      8-61
8-62      8-62
8-65      8-63
9-1       9-1
9-2       9-2
9-3       9-3
9-4       9-4
9-16      9-16
9-17      9-17
9-18      9-18
9-19      9-19
9-20      9-20
9-21      9-21
9-22      9-22
9-23      9-23
9-24      9-24
9-25      9-25
9-26      9-26
9-27      9-27
10-1      10-1
10-2      10-2
10-3      10-3
10-4      10-4
10-5      10-5
10-26     10-26
10-27     10-27
10-28     10-28
10-29     10-29
10-30     10-30
10-31     10-31
10-51     10-51
10-52     10-52
10-53     10-53
10-54     10-53
10-71     10-71
10-72     10-72
10-73     10-73
12-1      12-1
12-2      12-2
12-3      12-3
12-4      12-4
12-5      12-5
12-6      12-6
12-7      12-7
12-8      12-9
12-9      12-10
12-10     12-11
12-13     12-12
12-14     12-13
12-15     12-14
12-26     12-26
12-27     12-27
12-29     12-28
12-30     12-29
12-31     12-30
12-33     12-31
12-34     12-32
12-35     12-33
12-46     12-46
12-47     12-47
12-48     12-48
12-49     12-49
12-50     12-50
12-51     12-51
12-52     12-52
12-71     12-71
13-1      3-1
14-1      14-1
14-2      14-2
14-3      14-3
14-4      14-4
14-5      14-5
14-6      14-6
14-7      14-7
14-8      14-8
14-9      14-9
14-10     14-10
15-11     5-1
15-2      15-2
15-4      15-4
15-26     15-26
15-27     15-27
15-28     15-28
15-29     15-29
15-30     15-30
15-31     5-31
17-1      17-1
17-2      17-2
17-3      17-3
17-4      17-4
17-5      17-5
17-6      17-6
17-7      17-7
17-8      17-8
17-9      17-9
17-10     17-10
17-26     17-26
17-27     17-27
17-28     17-28
17-29     17-29
17-30     17-30
17-31     17-31
17-32     17-32
18-1      18-1
18-2      18-2
18-3      18-3
18-4      18-4
18-5      18-5
18-6      18-6
18-7      18-7
18-8      18-8
18-9      18-9
18-10     18-10
18-11     18-11
18-12     18-12
18-13     18-13
18-14     18-14
18-15     18-15
18-16     18-16
18-17     18-17
18-31     18-31
18-32     18-32
18-33     18-33
18-34     18-34
18-35     18-35
18-36     18-36
18-37     18-37
18-38     18-38
19-1      19-1
19-2      19-2
19-3      19-3
19-4      19-4
19-5      19-5
19-6      19-6
19-7      19-7
19-8      19-8
19-26     19-26
9-27      19-27
19-28     19-28
19-29     19-29
19-30     19-30
19-31     19-31
19-32     19-32
19-33     19-33
19-34     19-34
19-35     19-35
19-36     19-36
19-37     19-37
19-51     19-51
19-52     19-52
19-53     19-53
19-54     19-54
19-66     19-66
19-67     19-67
19-68     19-68
19-69     19-69
19-101    19-101
19-102    19-102
19-103    19-103
19-104    19-104
19-105    19-105
19-106    19-106
20-1      20-1
20-2      20-2
20-3      20-3
20-4      20-4
20-5      20-5
20-6      20-6
20-7      20-7
20-8      20-8
20-9      20-9
20-10     20-10
20-11     20-11
20-12     20-12
20-13     20-13
20-14     20-14
20-15     20-15
20-31     20-31
20-32     20-32
20-33     20-33
20-34     20-34
20-35     20-35
20-36     20-36
20-51     20-51
20-52     20-52
20-53     20-53
20-55     20-54
20-56     20-55
20-57     20-56
20-58     20-57
20-59     20-58
20-60     20-59
20-61     20-60
20-81     20-81
20-82     20-82
20-126    20-126
20-127    20-127
20-128    20-128
20-129    20-129
20-130    20-130
20-131    20-131
20-132    20-132
20-133    20-133
20-134    20-134
20-135    20-135
20-136    20-136
20-137    20-138
20-138    20-139
20-139    20-140
20-140    20-141
20-141    20-142
20-142    20-143
20-143    20-144
20-201    20-201
20-202    20-202
20-203    20-203
21-1      21-1
21-2      21-2
21-3      21-3
21-4      21-4
21-5      21-5
21-7      21-7
21-8      21-8
21-9      21-9
21-10     21-10
21-11     21-11
21-12     21-12
21-13     21-13
21-31     21-31
21-32     21-32
21-33     21-33
21-34     21-34
21-35     21-35
21-36     21-36
21-37     21-37
21-38     21-38
21-39     21-39
21-40     21-40
21-41     21-7
21-42     21-41
21-76     21-76
21-91     21-91
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
–      8-14-01     21-6
08-07-01 7-16-08     TSO IV
09-02-02 2-10-09     TSO IV
–      12-12-17    TSO IV
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
–      7-8-86      2-446–
                     2-456
–      10-1-72     5-140
–      1-10-95     5-140
–      7-14-98     5-140
67-11-01 - -         Ch. 16
76-9-1   9-14-76     12-2, 12-4
77-2-1   2-8-77      Charter,
                     Sec. 17
78-10-1  10-10-78    12-5,
                     15-4
79-2-1   2-13-79     12-27; 12-49; 12-50
80-2-1   2-12-80     20-131
80-6-1   6-10-80     6-4,
                     17-10
                     2-116;
80-12-1  12-9-80     2-117;
                     2-136;
                     2-138
81-11-1  12-10-81    13-1
82-4-1   4-13-82     Ch. 11
82-9-1   9-14-82     15-2
83-1-1   1-11-83     2-426–
                     2-433
83-6-1   6-21-83     9-3
83-9-1   9-13-83     18-38
83-10-1  10-11-83    2-137
84-7-1   7-10-84     17-26–
                     17-32
85-6-1   6-11-85     21-7
86-7-1   7-8-86      20-56
86-8-4   8-12-86     Ch. 16
87-3-1   3-10-87     21-7
87-10-1  10-13-87    12-6
87-12-1  12-21-87    21-32
87-12-2  12-21-87    21-13
88-3-3   3-8-88      12-4
88-3-4   3-8-88      3-1
88-4-2   4-12-88     21-7
88-4-3   4-12-88     12-71
88-6-2   6-21-88     20-131
88-12-1  12-29-88    8-81
89-1-1   1-11-89     TSO I
89-1-2   1-10-89     TSO II
89-1-3   1-10-89     TSO II
89-1-4   1-10-89     TSO II
89-1-5   1-10-89     TSO II
89-1-6   1-10-89     TSO II
89-2-1   2-14-89     20-131
89-2-2   2-14-89     TSO II 
89-3-1   3-28-89     13-1
89-4-3   4-11-89     TSO II
89-9-1   9-12-89     TSO II
89-12-1  12-12-89    TSO V
90-2-1   2-13-90     TSO II
90-4-1   4-26-90     TSO I
90-4-2   4-26-90     TSO II
90-4-3   4-26-90     TSO II
90-5-3   5-8-90      TSO V
90-6-1   6-12-90     14-12
90-8-1   8-14-90     TSO I
90-11-2  11-13-90    TSO V
90-11-3  11-13-90    TSO II
90-11-4  11-13-90    TSO II
90-12-1  12-11-90    14-11
90-12-2  12-11-90    TSO II
91-5-1   5-14-91     12-53
91-5-2   5-14-91     TSO II
91-7-1   7-9-91      TSO V
91-7-2   7-9-91      TSO V
91-7-3   7-9-91      TSO V
91-8-1   8-13-91     TSO V
91-8-2   8-13-91     TSO V
91-12-1  12-10-91    TSO I
92-1-1   1-14-92     6-7
92-1-2   1-14-92     7-1
92-1-3   1-14-92     9-1
92-1-4   1-14-92     9-3
92-1-5   1-14-92     10-5
92-1-6   1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch 12
92-1-7   1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch 12
92-1-8   1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch 12
92-1-10  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 14
92-1-11  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 14
92-1-12  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 14
92-1-13  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 14
92-1-14  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-15  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-16  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-17  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-18  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-19  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-20  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-21  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-22  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 18
92-1-23  1-14-92     App. B,
                     Ch. 21
92-1-24  1-14-92     App. B,
                     Ch. 21
92-1-25  1-14-92     App. B,
                     Ch. 21
92-1-26  1-14-92     App. B,
                     Ch. 21
92-1-27  1-14-92     App. B,
                     Ch. 21
92-1-28  1-14-92     App.,
                     Ch. 14
92-2-1   2-11-92     Ch. 11
92-6-3   6-2-92      TSO II
92-6-4   6-9-92      TSO II
92-6-5   6-9-92      TSO II
92-6-6   6-9-92      2-476
93-1-1   1-12-93     TSO II
93-1-2   1-12-93     TSO II
93-2-1   2-9-93      TSO I
93-4-1   4-13-93     18-51–
                     18-58
93-5-1   5-11-93     18-51–
                     18-58
93-6-2   6-8-93      App. A,
                     Ch. 21
93-6-4   6-22-93     TSO V
93-6-5   6-22-93     TSO V
93-6-6   6-22-93     TSO V
93-6-7   6-22-93     TSO V
93-6-8   6-22-93     TSO V
93-8-1   8-10-93     TSO V
93-8-2   8-10-93     TSO V
93-9-2   9-14-93     TSO V
93-9-3   9-14-93     TSO V
94-1-1   1-11-94     9-60
94-8-01  8-9-94      21-116
94-8-2   8-9-94      21-146
94-9-1   9-13-94     TSO II
94-9-2   9-13-94     TSO II
94-10-1  10-11-94    2-427,
                     2-448
94-10-2  10-11-94    18-2
95-8-1   8-8-95      20-17
95-8-2   8-8-95      8-36–
                     8-56
95-8-3   8-8-95      TSO V
96-2-1   2-13-96     6-14
96-2-2   2-13-96     20-131
96-5-1   5-14-96     2-463
96-6-3   6-11-96     8-81
96-7-1   7-9-96      TSO I
                     20-201,
96-8-1   8-23-96     20-203–
                     20-209
97-6-2   6-10-97     TSO II
97-7-1   7-8-97      TSO II
97-10-1  10-14-97    14-14
97-11-1  11-11-97    TSO I
97-12-1  12-9-97     TSO II
97-12-2  12-9-97     TSO II
98-1-1   1-13-98     TSO I
98-1-2   1-13-98     TSO II
98-1-3   1-13-98     TSO II
98-2-1   2-10-98     2-181
98-2-2   2-10-98     2-182
98-5-1   5-12-98     Ch. 11
98-6-3   6-9-98      App. A,
                     Ch. 21
98-7-1   7-14-98     21-42
98-7-2   7-14-98     21-43
98-10-01 10-13-98    21-116
98-12-1  12-8-98     21-7
99-1-2   1-12-99     5-126
99-2-1   2-9-99      TSO I
99-3-1   3-16-99     TSO I
99-3-2   3-16-99     TSO II
99-3-4   3-16-99     5-117
99-5-2   5-11-99     15-45–
                     15-47
99-12-1  12-14-99    TSO II
99-12-2  12-14-99    21-44
99-12-3  12-14-99    21-6
99-12-4  12-14-99    21-12
00-2-1   2-8-00      5-119
00-4-1   4-11-00     17-11
00-4-2   4-11-00     2-23
00-6-1   6-6-00      8-76
00-9-1   9-12-00     Ch. 11
00-9-5   9-12-00     21-11
00-10-1  10-10-00    TSO II
00-11-1  11-14-00    21-7
01-3-1   3-13-01     TSO III
01-3-2   3-13-01     21-35; App. A,
                     Ch. 21
01-5-2   7-10-01     TSO IV
01-05-03 5-8-01      21-116
01-8-3   8-14-01     9-25,
                     9-26
01-09-01 9-18-01     4-1–
                     4-23
02-2-1   2-13-01     20-16
02-03-01 3-12-02     2-23
02-06-01 6-11-02     20-59
02-06-02 6-11-02     20-145
02-06-03 6-11-02     TSO I
02-9-1   9-10-02     19-8
02-09-01 9-10-02     19-27
02-09-02 9-10-02     8-76
02-10-02 10-8-02     21-14
02-11-01 11-12-02    21-116;
                     21-146
02-12-01 12-10-02    TSO I
02-12-02 12-10-02    TSO I
03-02-02 2-11-03     12-6
03-06-01 6-10-03     10-72
03-06-02 6-10-03     2-447
03-07-01 7-8-03      10-81
03-08-01 8-12-03     21-116
03-09-01 9-9-03      TSO I
03-10-01 10-14-03    15-56–
                     15-61
03-12-1  12-09-03    20-146
04-03-01 03-09-04    TSO I
04-08-01 08-10-04    21-116
04-09-01 9-14-04     21-176
04-09-02 9-14-04     TSO II
04-11-01 11-01-04    TSO I
05-01-01 01-11-05    TSO I
                     12-6,
                     12-30,
05-04-01 04-12-05    12-31,
                     12-34,
                     12-46
05-04-02 04-12-05    21-116;
                     TSO IV
05-04-03 04-12-05    10-72.1
05-05-01 5-10-05     TSO II
05-08-01 08-09-05    TSO II
05-08-02 08-09-05    TSO II
05-10-01 10-11-05    20-146
05-12-01 12-5-05     TSO I
05-12-01 12-13-05    TSO II
05-12-02 12-13-05    2-23
06-01-02 1-10-06     TSO I
06-04-01 4-11-06     TSO II
06-06-01 6-5-06      TSO I
–      7-11-06     5-140
06-08-01 8-8-06      12-54
06-10-02 10-10-06    TSO II
06-11-01 11-14-06    TSO II
06-11-02 11-14-06    TSO II
07-01-01 1-9-07      TSO II
07-02-01 2-13-07     TSO II
07-03-01 4-10-07     TSO III
07-04-01 4-10-07     TSO II
07-04-03 4-10-07     5-101
07-05-01 5-8-07      TSO II
07-05-02 5-8-07      TSO I
07-06-01 6-12-07     TSO I
07-06-02 6-12-07     5-150 –
                     5-157
07-06-03 6-12-07     21-116
07-07-01 7-10-01     TSO II
07-10-01 10-9-07     TSO II
07-10-02 10-9-07     TSO II
07-10-03 10-9-07     10-81
07-12-03 12-11-07    2-23
08-01-01 1-8-08      TSO I
08-01-02 1-8-08      TSO IV
08-02-01 2-12-08     4-21,
                     4-23
08-02-02 2-12-08     2-466 –
                     2-468
08-04-01 4-8-08      18-2
08-04-02 4-8-08      TSO II
08-07-01 7-8-08      13-1
08-09-01 9-9-08      TSO II
08-10-03 10-15-08    TSO II
08-10-04 10-15-08    TSO II
08-10-05 10-15-08    TSO II
08-11-01 11-18-08    TSO I
08-12-01 12-9-08     TSO II
09-02-01 2-10-09     TSO II
                     13-26 -
09-03-02 3-10-09     13-44;
                     13-99;
                     Ch. 13, App. A
09-03-03 3-10-09     12-27
-        3-10-09     5-140
09-06-02 6-9-09      Ch. 13, App. A
09-07-01 7-14-09     TSO I
09-08-01 8-11-09     TSO I
09-09-01 9-8-09      TSO I
09-09-02 9-8-09      14-15
09-09-02 9-8-09      TSO II
09-11-01 11-10-09    TSO II
09-12-01 12-8-09     TSO I
01-01-10 1-12-10     2-27
01-02-10 1-12-10     TSO I
01-03-10 1-12-10     TSO I
02-01-10 2-9-10      Ch. 13, App. A
03-01-10 3-9-10      TSO I
03-02-10 3-9-10      TSO I
03-10-01 3-9-10      TSO II
09-02-10 9-14-10     8-82
10-09-01 9-14-10     TSO I
11-02-01 2-8-11      2-461
11-04-01 4-11-11     TSO III
11-03-01 3-8-11      TSO I
11-03-02 3-8-11      TSO I
05-11-01 5-10-11     TSO II
11-06-01 6-1-11      Ch. 13, App. A
06-11-01 6-14-11     2-22
06-11-02 6-14-11     2-23
06-11-03 6-14-11     2-26
06-11-04 6-14-11     18-3,
                     18-18
                     9-3,
                     9-4,
                     9-16 –
07-11-01 7-12-11     9-18,
                     9-20,
                     9-22 –
                     9-28,
                     9-40
11-11-01 11-07-11    TSO II
12-11-01 12-13-11    14-13
01-12-01 1-10-12     2-26
12-02-01 2-14-12     TSO II
12-02-02 2-14-12     2-448
12-02-03 2-14-12     Ch. 13, App. A
12-07-01 7-10-12     9-26
08-12-01 8-14-12     TSO II
10-12-01 10-9-12     TSO III
10-12-02 10-9-12     21-116
13-05-01 5-14-13     TSO II
13-06-02 6-11-13     Ch. 13, App. A
13-08-02 8-13-13     TSO IV
13-09-01 9-10-13     TSO I
13-09-02 9-10-13     TSO II
13-09-03 9-10-13     17-11
14-01-01 1-14-14     TSO I
                     15-27,
14-01-02 1-14-14     15-28,
                     15-31
14-04-01 4-8-14      21-15
14-05-01 5-13-14     TSO I
14-07-01 7-8-14      TSO II
14-08-01 8-12-14     TSO I
14-08-02 8-12-14     TSO IV
                     20-1 -
                     20-16,
                     20-31 -
                     20-36,
                     20-51 -
                     20-60,
14-09-01 9-9-14      20-81,
                     20-82,
                     20-126 -
                     20-146,
                     20-201 -
                     20-209,
                     20-999,
                     Ch. 20, App.
14-10-01 10-14-14    15-27
15-01-01 1-13-15     TSO III
15-01-02 1-13-15     10-5
15-05-01 5-12-15     TSO I
15-09-01 9-8-15      TSO I
15-10-01 10-13-15    TSO I
                     12-1 -
                     12-14,
15-10-02 10-13-15    12-26 -
                     12-34,
                     12-46 -
                     12-54
15-11-01 11-10-15    21-206
15-11-02 11-10-15    21-236
16-02-01 2-9-16      TSO II
16-04-01 4-12-16     Ch. 20, App.
16-05-01 5-10-16     2-429,
                     2-431
16-05-02 5-10-16     TSO II
16-06-02 6-14-16     20-81
16-07-01 7-12-16     TSO II
16-07-02 7-12-16     TSO II
16-08-01 8-9-16      TSO I
16-08-02 8-9-16      TSO IV
16-09-01 9-13-16     20-81
16-10-01 10-11-16    TSO II
                     13-26 -
                     13-29,
                     13-31,
17-02-01 2-14-17     13-32,
                     13-34,
                     13-35,
                     Ch. 13, App. A
17-03-01 3-14-17     TSO II
17-03-02 3-14-17     TSO II
04-09-01 4-11-17     21-176
17-04-07 4-11-17     TSO IV
17-06-15 6-13-17     TSO II
                     13-48 -
17-08-09 8-8-17      13-67,
                     13-99
17-09-08 9-12-17     TSO II
17-09-09 9-12-17     TSO II
17-09-10 9-12-17     TSO II
17-11-07 11-14-17    TSO II
17-11-08 11-14-17    TSO II
17-11-10 11-14-17    3-2
18-03-12 3-13-18     20-17,
                     20-999
18-08-16 8-14-18     21-251 -
                     21-260
18-1-01  11-13-18    TSO I
- -      - -22       3-3
22-03-5B 3-15-22     TSO I
22-11-15 11-15-22    TSO VI
                    
 
