PASQUOTANK COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Supplement 2025 S-3 contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. passed 6-16-2025
State legislation current through North Carolina Legislative Service
2025 Regular Session, Pamphlet No. 2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Certain ordinances and resolutions not affected by code
   
10.20   Supplementation of code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for Pasquotank County, North
Carolina, shall be designated as the “Code of Pasquotank County, North
Carolina,” and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of the County of
Pasquotank, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Pasquotank County, North Carolina.
      DAY. A calendar day.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
the persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the county unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any pathway, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the
county and shall mean the entire width of the right of way or area between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the county shall be by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the county for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable
time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall
be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the
act or the giving of the notice. The time within which an act is to be done, as
herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Saturday, Sunday or state holiday it shall be
excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new code by the county.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section
               of the Code of Ordinances, Pasquotank County, North Carolina, is
hereby amended as follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full
as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Pasquotank County, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the
case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and all amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
§ 10.19 CERTAIN ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following
ordinances or resolutions, which are not included herein:
      (1)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county
or any evidence of the county’s indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or resolution or ordinance or
resolution providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget, or
prescribing salaries for county officers and employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance or resolution granting any franchise, permit or other
right;
      (4)   Any ordinance or resolution approving, authorizing or otherwise
relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument;
      (5)   Any ordinance or resolution authorizing or otherwise relating to
any public improvement project or work;
      (6)   Any ordinance or resolution zoning or rezoning specific property or
amending the zoning map;
      (7)   Any temporary or special ordinance or resolution or ordinance or
resolution of limited interest or transitory nature;
   (B)   And all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
herein.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to omit ordinances of the types enumerated above from the code,
see G.S. § 153A-49
§ 10.20 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Board of County
Commissioners. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances passed by the Board of County Commissioners
during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the
code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared
that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date
of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement [such as,
American Legal Publishing Corporation]) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes
in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it
is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the
codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivision;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles of sections and
other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in
such catchlines, headings and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this subchapter,” “this division,” and the like, as the case
may be, or to “sections      to      “ (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but, in no case,
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Statutory reference:
Authority to maintain code by replacement pages, see G.S. § 153A-49
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of the
provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(G.S. § 14-4(a))
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
31.   BOARDS
      
32.   COUNTY POLICIES
      
33.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Short title
   
30.02   Purpose
   
30.03   Definitions
   
30.04   Preservation of authority
Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Management Agency
   
30.15   Organization and appointments
   
30.16   Duties and responsibilities of the Coordinator
   
30.17   Emergency management plans
   
30.18   No governmental or private liability
   
30.19   Planning related to special facilities
State of Emergency
   
30.30   Delegation of authority to declare a state of emergency
   
30.31   Declaration imposing prohibitions and restrictions
   
30.32   Evacuation
   
30.33   Curfew
   
30.34   Restriction of access to areas
   
30.35   Restrictions on alcoholic beverages
   
30.36   Restrictions on dangerous weapons and substances
   
30.37   Other restrictions
   
30.38   Removal of prohibitions and restrictions
   
30.39   Superseding and amending declarations
   
30.40   Territorial applicability
 
   
30.98   Violations
   
30.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Emergency Management Ordinance for
Pasquotank County, Camden County, and the City of Elizabeth City. This chapter
is adopted under the provisions set forth above and in accordance with North
Carolina Emergency Management Act of 1977.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to establish an emergency management
agency to ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all resources of
Pasquotank County, Camden County, and the City of Elizabeth City in the event
of an emergency or disaster.
   (B)   The Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Management Agency shall be the
coordinating agency for all activity in connection with Emergency Management.
It will be the instrument in which the Pasquotank and Camden County Board of
Commissioners and the City of Elizabeth City, within their jurisdictional
boundaries, may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities
vested in them during disaster emergencies.
   (C)   The Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Management Agency shall be the
coordinating agency for activities and programs relating to emergency and
disaster prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery among
agencies and officials of Pasquotank County, Camden County, the City of
Elizabeth City, and similar agencies and officials of other counties, the state
and federal agencies; and with other private and quasi-official organizations
responding to assist within our jurisdictional boundaries.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COORDINATOR refers to the Coordinator of Pasquotank-Camden Emergency
Management, the individual with direct responsibility for the development,
organization, administration, and operation of the Pasquotank-Camden Emergency
Management Agency as provided by this chapter.
   DISASTER represents the degree and severity of an emergency's impact as
declared by the Governor.
   EMERGENCY is an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-
made accidental, military, paramilitary, weather-related, or riot-related
cause.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT includes those measures taken by the populace and
governments of federal, state, and local levels to minimize the adverse effect
of any type of emergency, which includes the never-ending preparedness cycle of
planning, prevention, mitigating, warning, movement, shelter, emergency
assistance, and recovery.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY refers to the Pasquotank-Camden Emergency
Management office, the local government agency charged with coordination of all
emergency activities for its jurisdiction.
   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN refers to the document, developed by Pasquotank-
Camden Emergency Management that assigns responsibilities to organizations and
individuals for carrying out specific actions in an emergency/disaster that
exceeds the capability or routine responsibility of any one agency and
establishes lines of authority and organizational relationships.
   MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS are defined to include but not be limited to
agreements related to the furnishing or exchange of such supplies, equipment,
facilities, personnel, and services as may be needed with provisions for the
reimbursement of costs and expenses for equipment, supplies, personnel and
similar items upon such terms and conditions as may be necessary.
   VOLUNTEER shall mean personnel and agencies contributing a service,
equipment, or facilities to the emergency management agency without
remuneration.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.04  PRESERVATION OF AUTHORITY.
   This chapter does not:
   (A)   Relieve any county or city department or agency of the
responsibilities or authority given to it by state law or by local chapter, nor
will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief
in disaster situations.
   (B)   Abridge or modify the authority of emergency medical services
personnel, law enforcement, firefighters, or other relevant public officers and
agencies from exercising their authority to protect the public health and
safety, as that authority is established by state and local law.
   (C)   Abridge or modify the authority of the governor or their delegates to
implement emergency measures during declared states of disaster or emergency.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
PASQUOTANK-CAMDEN EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
§ 30.15 ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENTS.
   The Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Management Agency shall consist of the
following:
   (A)   An agency of Emergency Management within the executive department of
Pasquotank County, with contracted services to Camden County and the City of
Elizabeth City, under the direction of the County Manager, through the Board of
Commissioners and the City Mayor, as authorized by G.S. § 166A19.15(2).
   (B)   A Coordinator of the emergency management agency will be appointed by
the Pasquotank County Manager. The Coordinator will be a person well-versed and
trained in emergency management processes and procedures involving the
activities of various agencies that serve to protect public health, safety, and
welfare in the event of an emergency.
   (C)   The Coordinator shall designate and appoint an Assistant Emergency
Management Coordinator to assume the duties of the Coordinator in the event of
their absence or inability to act. The Coordinator and all other employees
shall meet all requirements of state law to serve in emergency management.
   (D)   The employees and resources of all county and city departments,
boards, institutions, and councils will participate in the emergency management
activities. Duties assigned to the county and city departments shall be the
same or similar to the normal duties of the department, where possible.
   (E)   Volunteer personnel and agencies offering service to, and accepted by
the county and city.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.16 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator shall be responsible for the organization,
administration, and operation of the Emergency Management Agency. The
Coordinator shall coordinate the activities, services, and programs for
emergency management and disaster response and recovery within Pasquotank
County, Camden County, and the City of Elizabeth City and shall maintain
liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of nearby
political subdivisions to ensure the most effective operation and
implementation of the emergency management plans.
   (B)   The Coordinators duties shall include, but not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Manage a comprehensive emergency management program for Pasquotank
County, Camden County, and the City of Elizabeth City pursuant to G.S. Chapter
166A, including, but not limited to elements addressing prevention, protection,
mitigation, response, and recovery from emergencies.
      (2)   Compel and coordinate the activity of all other public and private
agencies engaged in any emergency management activities within Pasquotank
County, Camden County, and the City of Elizabeth City.
      (3)   Through public informational programs, educating the populace as to
actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property
in case of enemy attack, terrorism, or disaster, either impending or present.
      (4)   Manage exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the emergency
management forces and familiarize residents, businesses, educational
institutions, and partner agencies with emergency management regulations,
procedures and operations.
      (5)   Monitor and advise the Pasquotank and Camden County Commissioners,
Pasquotank and Camden County Managers, and City of Elizabeth City Manager and
Council of any and all threats, emergencies or disasters that pose a risk to
the lives and safety of the residents of Pasquotank County, Camden County, and
the City of Elizabeth City and propose solutions for their decision on how best
to protect people and property from imminent danger or from further damage.
      (6)   Procure supplies and equipment, institute training programs, public
preparedness information and education programs, manage and coordinate disaster
drills and exercises in accordance with county-wide emergency plans.
      (7)   Manage the Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Operations Center as the
central coordinating entity during emergencies or disasters.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.17 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   A countywide, all-hazard, emergency operations plan shall be adopted
and maintained by the Board of Commissioners of Pasquotank County and Camden
County and City Council of the City of Elizabeth City. In the preparation of
this plan, the services, equipment, facilities, and personnel of all existing
departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When the plan
is approved, each department or agency shall perform those functions assigned
to it by the plan and shall maintain a current state of readiness at all times.
The emergency operations plan shall have the full effect of local law whenever
an emergency or disaster occurs.
   (B)   Supporting plans shall be maintained by the Emergency Management
Agency to ensure coordinated activities in the prevention, protection,
mitigation, responses, and recovery from emergencies phases. In the preparation
of these plans, the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all
existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When
the plans are published, each department or agency shall perform those
functions assigned to it by the plans.
   (C) The Emergency Management Agency shall describe in emergency plans those
positions for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the
responsible person within the cognizant department or agency shall designate
and file with the Emergency Management Agency a current list of three persons
to be successors to each key position. The list shall be in order of succession
and shall designate persons most capable of carrying out all duties and
functions assigned to the position.
   (D)   Each department or agency designated in emergency plans shall be
responsible for carrying out all designated duties and functions designated by
the plan. Duties will include organization and training of assigned employees
and volunteers. Each department shall formulate procedures to implement the
plan for the organization.
   (E)   When a skill required for response or recovery from a declared
emergency function is not available within local government, the Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be authorized to seek assistance beyond local
government resources.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.18 NO GOVERNMENTAL OR PRIVATE LIABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter is an exercise by Pasquotank County, Camden County, and
the City of Elizabeth City of its governmental functions for the protection for
the public peace, health, and safety, and neither agents nor representatives of
same, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
or trustee, or any of the agents thereof in good faith carrying out, complying
with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage or
injury sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity.
Specifically, governmental immunity is not waived by Pasquotank County, Camden
County and/or the City of Elizabeth City.
   (B)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants Pasquotank County, Camden County,
and/or the City of Elizabeth City the right to inspect, designate and use the
whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of
sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice disaster situation
shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any persons on or
about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission; or for loss of, or damage to, the property of any person.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.19 PLANNING RELATED TO SPECIAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Special facilities are those institutions or organizations whose
populations are dependent upon the institution for transportation or care.
   (B)   Special facilities are required to have a plan in place to be self-
sufficient in an emergency that would require the evacuation of their facility
due to a natural or technological disaster.
   (C)   These institutions include, but are not limited to, assisted living
facilities, hospitals, schools (public and private), day-care centers, elderly
centers, or other similar organizations.
   (D)   The institutions shall submit copies of their disaster plan to the
Emergency Management Agency for review on an annual basis as defined by
Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Management.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
STATE OF EMERGENCY
§ 30.30 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY TO DECLARE A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In the event of an existing or imminent emergency endangering the
lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within Pasquotank County,
Camden County or the City of Elizabeth City, or any part thereof, or
threatening damages to or destruction of property, the Chairperson(s) of the
Board of Commissioners and the City Mayor are hereby authorized and empowered
under G.S. § 166A-19.31 to issue a public declaration of the existence of such
a state of emergency and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and
property of people within the city and counties, to place in effect any or all
of the restrictions and prohibitions hereinafter authorized. The Chairperson(s)
and Mayor shall fully utilize all available emergency service and management
agencies and shall consult with appropriate subject matter experts in deciding
to issue a declaration and in determining the appropriate restrictions and
prohibitions to impose during the term of any such declaration.
   (B)   In case of the absence or disability of the Chairperson(s) or Mayor,
the Vice-Chairperson(s) of the Board of Commissioners, or Mayor Pro Tempore of
Elizabeth City shall have and exercise all of the powers herein given the
Chairperson(s).
   (C)   In case of the absence or disability of the Vice-Chairperson of the
Board of Commissioners or Mayor Pro Tempore of Elizabeth City, the longest-
serving Commissioner or City Council Member, or such other person as may be
designated by the Board of Commissioners and City Council, shall have and
exercise all of the powers herein given to the Chairperson and Mayor.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.31 DECLARATION IMPOSING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of Pasquotank and Camden
County and/or the City of Elizabeth City Mayor by proclamation may impose the
prohibitions and restrictions specified in §§
30.32 through
30.37 of this chapter in the manner described in those sections. The
Chairperson(s)/Mayor may impose as many of the Emergency Management specified
prohibitions and restrictions as he/she finds are necessary, because of an
emergency, to maintain an acceptable level of public order and services; and to
protect lives, safety, and property. The Chairperson(s)/Mayor shall recite his/
her findings in the proclamation.
   (B)   The proclamation shall be in writing. The Chairperson(s)/Mayor shall
take reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the proclamation to those
affected by it and shall post a copy of it in the respective County Courthouse
and the City of Elizabeth City City Hall. The Chairperson(s)/Mayor shall send
reports of the substance of the proclamation to the mass communications media
which serves the affected area. The Chairperson(s)/Mayor shall retain a text of
the proclamation and furnish upon request certified copies of it.
   (C)   All prohibitions, restrictions, and amendments imposed by declaration
pursuant to ordinances adopted under this section shall take effect in the
emergency area immediately upon publication of the declaration, unless the
declaration sets a later time. Publication shall include at minimum, posting of
a signed copy of the declaration on both of these:
      (1)   Websites of the county(s) and/or city; and
      (2)   North Carolina Department of Public Safety WebEOC critical incident
management system.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.32 EVACUATION.
   The Chairpersons(s) and/or Mayor may direct and compel the voluntary or
mandatory evacuation of all or part of the population of the county or city; to
prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and destination in connection with
evacuation; and to control ingress and egress of a disaster area, the movement
of persons within the area and the occupancy of premises therein. Details of
the evacuation may be set forth or amended in a subsequent declaration which
shall be well publicized and meets requirements of §
30.31(C).
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.33 CURFEW.
   (A)   The declaration may impose a curfew prohibiting in certain areas and
during certain periods the appearance in public of anyone who is not a member
of an exempted class. The proclamation shall specify the geographical area or
areas and the period during each 24-hour day to which the curfew applies.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in the proclamation, the curfew shall apply
during the specified period each day until the Chairperson(s) and/or Mayor by
declaration removes the curfew.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.34 RESTRICTION OF ACCESS TO AREAS.
   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit obtaining access or attempting to obtain
access to any area, designated in the manner described in this section, in
violation of any order, clearly posted notice, or barricade indicating that
access is denied or restricted.
   (B)   Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be designated by
the Pasquotank or Camden County Sheriff, Elizabeth City Police Chief, his or
her subordinates or other law enforcement officers when directed in the
proclamation to do so by the Chairperson(s) and/or Mayor. When acting under
this authority, the Sheriff(s) and/or Police Chief and his or her subordinates
may restrict or deny access to any area, street, highway or location within the
county or city if that restriction or denial of access or use is reasonably
necessary to promote efforts being made to overcome the emergency or to prevent
further aggravation of the emergency.
   (C)   During a declared emergency, and within the emergency area, the
Sheriff of Pasquotank County, the Sheriff of Camden County, and the Police
Chief of Elizabeth City are delegated authority to close streets, roads,
highways, bridges, vehicular areas, or other areas ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, except to the movement of emergency responders and other
persons necessary for recovery from the emergency. When the Sheriff(s) or
Police Chief so act, they are to provide prompt notification to the Emergency
Operations Center.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.35 RESTRICTIONS ON ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   The declaration may prohibit the possession or consumption of any alcoholic
beverage, including beer, wine, and spirituous liquor, other than on one's own
premises. It may prohibit the transfer, transportation, sale, or purchase of
any alcoholic beverage within the area of the county or city described in the
declaration. The prohibition, if imposed, may apply to the transfer of
alcoholic beverages by employees of alcoholic beverage control stores as well
as by anyone else within the geographic area described.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.36 RESTRICTIONS ON DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND SUBSTANCES.
   The declaration may prohibit or restrict the possession, transportation,
sale, purchase, storage, and use of gasoline and any dangerous weapon or
substance, except for lawfully possessed firearms and ammunition.
   DANGEROUS WEAPON OR SUBSTANCE means:
      (1)   Any item described as a “dangerous weapon or substance" as defined
in G.S. § 14-288.1.
      (2)   Any other instrument or substance that is capable of being used to
inflict serious bodily injury or destruction of property when the circumstances
indicate that there is some probability that such instrument or substance will
be so used.
      (3)   Any part or ingredient in any instrument or substance included
above when the circumstances indicate a probability that such a part or
ingredient will be so used.
   FIREARM has the same meaning as the term is defined in G.S. § 14-409.39(2).
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.37 OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
   The following activities or conditions may be prohibited or restricted:
   (A)   Movement of people in public places;
   (B)   The operation of offices, business establishments, and other places to
or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate;
   (C)   Other activities or conditions the control of which may be reasonably
necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the state of
emergency within the area designated in the proclamation.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.38 REMOVAL OF PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   The Chairpersons and/or Mayor shall by declaration terminate the entire
declaration of emergency or remove any of the prohibitions and restrictions
when the emergency no longer requires them or when directed to do so by the
Board of Commissioners or City Council. Requirements of publication in §
30.31(C) must also be followed for termination.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.39 SUPERSEDING AND AMENDING DECLARATIONS.
   The Chairpersons and/or Mayor may, in their discretion, invoke the
prohibitions and restrictions authorized by this subchapter in separate
declarations and may amend any declaration by means of an amendment to or
superseding declaration. Requirements of publication in §
30.31(C) must be followed for superseding and amending declarations.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.40 TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY.
   The Pasquotank-Camden Emergency Management Agency shall perform emergency
management, mitigation, preparedness, disaster response, and recovery functions
within the territorial limits of both Camden and Pasquotank County to include
the City of Elizabeth City, and, in addition, shall conduct such functions
outside of such territorial limits as may be required pursuant to the
provisions of North Carolina Statutes, mutual aid agreements, and in accordance
with State and Pasquotank and Camden County comprehensive emergency management
planning.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.98 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violations of any provision of this chapter or declaration enacted or
declared under this chapter shall be punished in accordance with G.S. § 14-
288.20A.
   (B)   Any person interfering with, or obstructing, hindering, or delaying
any public officer in performing their duties under the provisions of this
ordinance, or any declaration, regulation, or plan issued thereunder shall be
punished in accordance with G.S. § 14-223.
   (C)   It shall be a Class 2 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a
fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days for any person to
willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any other emergency management forces in
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or performing their duties
pursuant to any plan or restriction issued thereunder and upon conviction,
shall be punished in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
    Except as provided in §
30.36, any person violating any prohibition or restriction imposed by a
proclamation authorized by this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
CHAPTER 31: BOARDS
Section
   
31.01   Tourism Board
   
31.02   Newland Water Management and Watershed Improvement Advisory Board
§ 31.01 TOURISM BOARD.
   (A)   Created. The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism Board is created
pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-146 and 153A-76.
   (B)   Composition. The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism Board shall
consist of the following members:
      (1)   Three members, who at the time of appointment, shall reside within
the corporate limits of Elizabeth City;
      (2)   Three members, who at the time of appointment, shall be county
residents;
      (3)   The Elizabeth City Manager, Pasquotank County Manager and
Administrator for the Museum of the Albemarle or their designees, ex officio
without a vote; and
      (4)   A member of the Albemarle Regional Hospitality Association
governing board who shall be a resident of the county, ex officio with a vote.
   (C)   Appointments; terms of members. The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County
Tourism Board members shall be appointed and serve at the pleasure of the
governing board appointing them as follows.
      (1)   Three members from the class described in division (B)(1) above
shall be appointed by the Elizabeth City Council, one of whom shall be
appointed to serve a term of one year; one of whom shall be appointed to serve
a term of two years; and one of whom shall be appointed to serve a term of
three years from the initial appointment date of members. Thereafter, members
shall be appointed annually effective July 1 for terms of three years.
      (2)   Three members of the class described in division (B)(2) above shall
be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners, one of whom shall be
appointed to serve a term of one year; one of whom shall be appointed to serve
a term of two years; and one of whom shall be appointed to serve a term of
three years from the initial appointment date of members. Thereafter, members
shall be appointed annually effective July 1 for terms of three years.
      (3)   In the event of a vacancy of a member’s seat, the governing board
which appointed the vacating member shall appoint a member to fill the
unexpired term.
      (4)   Any member of the Tourism Board may be automatically removed if
that member misses three meetings during a fiscal year running July 1 through
June 30.
   (D)   Compensation of members. All members of the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank
County Tourism Board shall serve without compensation.
   (E)   Establishment of Tourism Fund. Elizabeth City and Pasquotank County
shall establish a Tourism Fund. Thereafter, the Tourism Fund shall be funded by
Elizabeth City and Pasquotank County by each remitting an amount not exceeding
50% of its net proceeds derived from the occupancy and tourism development tax
levied and collected during the previous calendar year.
   (F)   Duties and functions.
      (1)   The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism Board shall receive
requests from nonprofit corporations for grants from the Tourism Fund.
      (2)   Grants from the Tourism Fund shall not be awarded to nonprofit
corporations with which a Tourism Board member is associated as an officer or
governing board member and grants shall be used only to develop, promote and
advertise travel and tourism in Elizabeth City and Pasquotank County or to
sponsor tourist-oriented events and activities in Elizabeth City and Pasquotank
County. Grants may be expended for public purposes only.
      (3)   The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism Board shall consider
requests for grants from the Tourism Fund and forward its grant award decisions
to Elizabeth City and Pasquotank County which city and county shall disburse
grants from the Tourism Fund as determined by the Tourism Board.
      (4)   The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism Board shall receive
from grant recipients a copy of the grant recipient’s annual audit and proof of
nonprofit corporation status.
   (G)   Officers and meetings. The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism
Board shall elect a chair and other officers from among its members, each to
serve one-year terms. The Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Tourism Board shall
meet at least quarterly on call of the chair or of any three members. It shall
adopt rules of procedure to govern its meetings. A copy of the minutes of all
meetings shall be sent to the Elizabeth City Manager and Pasquotank County
Manager. All meetings or other business of the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County
Tourism Board shall be conducted in accordance with G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C,
which statute is known as the Open Meetings Statute.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1995; Ord. passed 12-6-1999; Ord. passed 11-6-2000; Ord.
passed 8-20-2001)
§ 31.02 NEWLAND WATER MANAGEMENT AND WATERSHED IMPROVEMENT ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Created. The Newland Water Management and Watershed Improvement
Advisory Board is created pursuant to G.S. § 153A-76.
   (B)   Composition. The Advisory Board shall be composed of five members who
reside within the Newland Water Management and Watershed Improvement Service
District. One member of the Board of Commissioners and the County Manager or
County Manager’s designee shall be ex officio members without a vote.
   (C)   Appointment; terms of members. The citizen members of the Advisory
Board shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Commissioners as follows:
      (1)   One member shall be appointed to serve a term of one year; two
members shall be appointed to serve terms of two years; and two members shall
be appointed to serve terms of three years, respectively, from the initial
appointment date of members. Thereafter, members shall be appointed annually on
January 1 for terms of three years.
      (2)   The commissioner serving as an ex officio member shall be appointed
by the Board of Commissioners on the first Monday in December to serve for a
two-year term.
      (3)   In the event of a vacancy of a citizen member’s seat, the Board of
Commissioners shall appoint a citizen to fill the unexpired term of office.
   (D)   Removal of members. The Board of Commissioners shall have the right to
remove any member appointed to the Advisory Board at will and appoint a
replacement member.
   (E)   Duties. The Advisory Board is charged with the duty of investigating,
studying and making recommendations to the Board of Commissioners pertaining to
the construction, enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipment, operation
and regulation of the Newland Water Management and Watershed Improvement
Service District.
   (F)   Function. The Advisory Board shall have no legislative powers of its
own but shall be an advisory body to the Board of Commissioners concerning the
matters with which it is charged, and the Board of Commissioners will receive
and consider the authority’s recommendations pertaining to the construction,
enlargement, improvement, maintenance, equipment, operation and regulation of
the Newland Water Management and Watershed Improvement Service District.
   (G)   Officers. The Advisory Board shall appoint from its membership a
chairperson and any other officers as it may deem necessary for the orderly
conduct of its business.
   (H)   Meetings. The Advisory Board shall hold meetings regularly at least
once quarterly and at hours as may be fixed by the Board. Special meetings may
be held on call of the Chairperson upon a 48-hour notice to the members of the
Board. A copy of the minutes of all meetings shall be sent to the County
Manager. All meetings or other business of the Advisory Board shall be
conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Law.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1998)
CHAPTER 32: COUNTY POLICIES
Section
   
32.01   Monthly 911 charge
   
32.02   Smoking policy
 
   
32.99   Penalty
§ 32.01 MONTHLY 911 CHARGE.
   (A)   This section may be known and may be cited as “Section to Impose a
Monthly 911 Charge.”
   (B)   (1)   A monthly charge of $1 is hereby imposed upon each exchange
access facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange access
lines are in the area served or which would be served by the 911 service for
the county. This charge shall be known as the “911 charge.”
      (2)   The 911 charge shall become effective on March 1, 1990.
      (3)   An emergency telephone system fund is hereby established for the
purpose of depositing funds from the 911 charge and expending funds for the
purposes as stated in G.S. § 62A-40 et seq.
(Ord. passed 10-16-1989; Ord. passed 6-30-1997)
§ 32.02 SMOKING POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke tobacco products, to
cause or allow smoke to be emitted from tobacco products or to use smokeless
tobacco products within the following county buildings:
      (1)   County Courthouse;
      (2)   W.C. Witherspoon Memorial Library;
      (3)   County Health and Social Services Building;
      (4)   County Cooperative Extension Building;
      (5)   County Tax and Register of Deeds Office Building;
      (6)   Public Safety Building;
      (7)   County Convenience sites;
      (8)   County landfill facilities;
      (9)   Electronics Recycling Center;
      (10)   Edgewood Center;
      (11)   Harrell House;
      (12)   Northeast Marketing Center;
      (13)   County Utilities Building;
      (14)   County Water Plant Building and accessory buildings located on the
county water plant property;
      (15)   County Reverse Osmosis Water Plant;
      (16)   Probation and Parole Office; and
      (17)   Albemarle District Jail.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave tobacco product ashes or
residue, cigarettes or cigarette butts upon any floor, stairway, windowsill, or
any other surface within the county buildings named above.
(Ord. 93-1, passed 1-19-1983; Ord. 12-3, passed 10-1-2012) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
    Any violation of §
32.02 is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. §14-4, punishable by a fine of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisonment. For a continuing offense, each day's violation is a separate
offense.
(Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
CHAPTER 33: TAXATION
Section
   
33.01   Short-term lease or rental of motor vehicles
§ 33.01 SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   The county hereby imposes and levies a tax of 1-1/2% of the gross
receipts from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the
general public.
   (B)   The county will administer and collect from operators of leasing and
rental establishments the taxes levied and the county may promulgate additional
rules and regulations necessary for implementation of the taxes.
   (C)   The taxes levied are due and payable to the county in monthly
installments on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in
which the tax accrues. Every taxable establishment required to collect the tax
shall, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and render a
return to the county. The county shall design, print, and furnish to all
taxable establishments the necessary forms for filing returns and instructions
to ensure the full collection of the tax. A return filed for this purpose is
not a public record as defined in G.S. § 132-1 and may not be disclosed except
as required by law.
   (D)   In case of failure or refusal to file a return or pay the tax for a
period of 30 days after the time required for filing the return or paying the
tax, there shall be an additional tax, as a penalty, of 5% of the tax due, with
an additional tax of 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof until the
tax is paid. The County Board of Commissioners, for good cause shown, may
compromise or forgive any penalty or additional tax imposed hereunder.
(Ord. passed 6-7-2000)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   STORMWATER
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Purpose
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Storage and disposal
   
50.04   Transfer station
   
50.05   Recycling/convenience centers
   
50.06   Prohibitions
   
50.07   Special use permit
   
50.08   Fee schedule
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose for this chapter is to regulate the storage, collection and
disposal of solid waste in the county. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in G.S. §§ 153A-121, 153A-132.1 and 153A-136.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997)
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Waste materials produced from the raising of plants and
animals, including animal manures, bedding plant stalk, hulls and vegetable
matter.
   ASBESTOS. Asbestiform varieties of chrysotile (serpentine), crocidolite
(riebecktite), amosite (cummingtonite-grunerite), anthophyllite, tremolite and
actinolite.
   BOARD. Board of County Commissioners of Pasquotank County.
   BULKY WASTE. Large items of solid waste such as household appliances,
furniture, automobiles, large auto parts, trees, branches, stumps and other
oversize wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by
normal solid waste collection, processing or disposal methods.
   COLLECTION. The act of removing solid wastes from a point of generation to a
central disposal site.
   COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid wastes generated by stores, restaurants,
warehouses and other commercial activities.
   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. Solid waste resulting solely from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations on pavement, buildings or other
structures, but does not include inert debris, land clearing debris or yard
debris.
   DEMOLITION WASTE. Stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, untreated wood and
uncontaminated earth.
   FRIABLE. Any material that when dry can be broken, crumbled, pulverized or
reduced to powder by hand pressure, and includes previously nonfriable material
after the material becomes damaged to the extent that when dry it can be
crumbled, pulverized or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
   INERT DEBRIS. Concrete, brick, concrete block, uncontaminated soil, gravel
and rock, untreated and unpainted wood, used asphalt or used asphalt mixed with
dirt, sand, gravel, rock and concrete.
   HAZARDOUS WASTES. Wastes, or a combination of wastes in a solid, liquid,
contained gaseous or semisolid form that may cause, or contribute to, an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible illness, taking into account the toxicity of the waste, its
persistence and degradability, its potential for accumulation or concentration
in tissue and other factors that may otherwise cause or contribute to adverse
acute or chronic effects on the health of persons or other organisms.
   HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE. All putrescible vegetable matter, and food wastes and
food containers, animal offal and other garbage that is normally produced in
residential dwellings, but excluding sewage.
   IMPROVED PROPERTY.
      (1)   All real property within the county upon which is located a
building fit for human use, occupation or habitation whether permanent or
temporary and whether occupied or unoccupied.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, each unit of a multiple use building
or lot of multiple use real property shall be deemed an IMPROVED PROPERTY.
   INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTE. Solid wastes generated by industrial processing and
manufacturing.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE.
      (1)   Equipment,   instruments, utensils and fomites of a disposable
nature from the rooms of patients who are suspected to have or have been
diagnosed as having a communicable disease and must therefore, be isolated as
required by public health agencies;
      (2)   Laboratory wastes, such as pathological specimens (e.g., all
tissues, specimens of blood elements, excreta and secretions from patients or
laboratory animals) and disposable fomites (any substance that may harbor or
transmit pathogenic organisms) attendant thereto; and
      (3)   Surgical operating room pathological specimens and disposable
fomites attendant thereto and similar disposable materials from outpatient
areas and emergency rooms.
   LAND CLEARING AND INERT DEBRIS LANDFILL. The county facility for the land
disposal of land clears or waste, concrete brick, concrete block,
uncontaminated soil, gravel and rock, untreated and unpainted wood used asphalt
or used asphalt mixed with dirt, sand, gravel, rock and concrete and yard
trash.
   LAND CLEARING WASTE. Solid waste which is generated solely from land
clearing, such as stumps, trees limbs, brush, grass and other naturally
occurring vegetative matter.
   LANDFILL. Sanitary, demolition, monofills, balefills and any other land
areas used for the disposal of bulky, commercial, construction and demolition,
hazardous, industrial, infectious, institutional, radioactive and residential
solid waste.
   NONFRIABLE. Any material that when dry cannot be broken, pulverized or
reduced to powder by hand pressure, and includes undamaged nonfriable material
that when dry cannot be crumbled, pulverized or reduced to powder by hand
pressure.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
governmental unit or agency or other legal entity.
   RADIOACTIVE WASTE. Any wastes that emit ionizing radiation spontaneously.
   RECYCLABLE CORRUGATED CARDBOARD. Unwaxed paper boxes and thick layered brown
paper, formed with grooves and ridges used in shipping or in which shipped
goods are received.
   RECYCLABLES. Any items being separated and collected at the recycling/
convenience centers for the purpose of being recycled.
   RECYCLING/CONVENIENCE CENTERS. A manned center which is operated for the
purpose of accepting household waste and recyclables from the public.
   SOLID WASTE. Non-hazardous garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment
plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other
discarded material, including solid material resulting from industrial,
institutional, commercial and agricultural operations, and from community
activities. This term does not include:
      (1)   Fowl and animal fecal waste;
      (2)   Solid or dissolved material in:
         (a)   Domestic sewage and sludges generated by the treatment thereof
in sanitary sewage disposal systems which have a design capacity of more than
3,000 gallons or which discharge effluent to the surface waters;
         (b)   Irrigation return flows; and
         (c)   Wastewater discharges and the sludges incidental thereto and
generated by the treatment thereof which are point sources subject to permits
granted under § 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended (P.L. 92-500), being 33
U.S.C. § 1342, and permits granted under G.S. § 143-215.1 by the Environmental
Management Commission.
      (3)   Oils and other liquid hydrocarbons controlled under G.S. Ch. 143,
Art. 21A;
      (4)   Any, radioactive material as defined by the North Carolina
Radiation Protection Act, G.S. §§ 104E-1 through 104E-29; and
      (5)   Mining refuse covered by the State Mining Act, G.S. §§ 74-46
through 74-68, and regulated by the State Mining Commission.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. A location at which solid wastes are disposed of
by sanitary landfill or other approved method.
   SOLID WASTE RECEPTACLE.
      (1)   A large metal container (also known as a dumpster) used for the
temporary storage of solid wastes and capable of being automatically emptied
into collection vehicles, containing no more than eight cubic yards, which
shall be designated household garbage and trash; and
      (2)   Large trailer body container (also known as a roll-off container)
being no smaller than 20 cubic yards and capable of being substantially larger
which is designated for large items such as trees, limbs, washing machines,
refrigerators and major household appliances.
   TRANSFER STATION. The county facility at which solid waste is collected
prior to transportation to another facility for final disposal.
   YARD WASTE. Solid waste resin from yard maintenance such as brushes, grass,
tree limbs and similar vegetative matter.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997)
§ 50.03 STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   No person shall abandon large airtight containers and appliances such
as refrigerators that have not been rendered incapable of being made airtight
again or have been rendered incapable of locking or closing. The container or
airtight appliance, all household garbage and other refuse covered by this
chapter shall be stored in a manner or fashion as individual homeowners or
garbage contractors may choose so long as the same does not constitute or
create a health hazard.
   (B)   No owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any property may deposit,
store or permit to accumulate any solid waste upon his or her property that is
not stored or disposed of in a manner prescribed by this chapter or other
applicable state and federal regulations.
   (C)   The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any property shall remove or
cause to be removed all solid waste from his or her property in a period of
time so that the same shall not constitute a health hazard.
   (D)   Garbage shall be stored in containers as the owner, occupant, tenant
or lessee may choose so long as the same is kept clean and does not produce an
odor or other nuisance condition.
   (E)   Refuse shall be stored in a manner that will not provide harborage to
rodents and vermin and will not create a fire hazard.
   (F)   No owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any building or dwelling may
leave outside the building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or unattended icebox, refrigerator or other receptacle that has an
airtight door without first removing a locking or closing mechanism of the
door.
   (G)   Solid waste shall be disposed of only in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In the county’s transfer station, as approved by the State
Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources;
      (2)   In other disposable area as has obtained all local, state and
federal air pollution control permits; and/or
      (3)   By any other method, including reclamation and recycling processes,
that has been approved by the State Department of Environment, Health and
Natural Resources.
   (H)   In addition to the methods listed in division (G) above, household
garbage may be disposed of only at the county’s convenience/recycling centers.
The recycling/convenience centers provided by the county shall not be used at
any time by any commercial or for profit hauler or transporter of garbage or
solid waste.
   (I)   Demolition wastes shall be separated from household garbage and
disposed of in the county demolition landfill as approved by the county or its
designees.
   (J)   Infectious, hazardous and radioactive wastes shall be disposed of
according to written procedures approved by the State Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources.
   (K)   Any person collecting and transporting solid wastes for disposal shall
dispose of solid wastes at the transfer station provided by the county.
   (L)   Disposal of nonfriable asbestos at the transfer station must be
arranged through the Solid Waste Director no less than two working days prior
to removing it from its original location, except for friable asbestos which
the person in possession of the friable asbestos must dispose of or cause to be
disposed of at the facility to which solid waste from the transfer station is
removed for disposal.
   (M) Disposal of sharp containers must be arranged through the Solid Waste
Director at least three working days prior to removal from the facility.
   (N)   Recyclable corrugated cardboard; aluminum cans; brown, clear and green
glass containers; plastic containers produced by use of the plastic resins
polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) and high density polyethylene (HDPE); and
newspaper shall be separated from industrial, commercial, institutional and
household solid waste and disposed of in a recycling container or delivered to
a recyclables processing facility.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 TRANSFER STATION.
   (A)   (1)   The transfer station may be used for the disposal of solid
wastes by any person who is a resident of the county and has solid wastes that
were produced, generated or collected in the county or by a resident of another
county or area as the county shall by contract authorize to utilize the
transfer station under the same terms and conditions as provided by this
chapter.
      (2)   Solid waste shall be disposed of at the transfer station in the
manner and in accordance to the procedures required by the transfer station
manager or his or her representative.
   (B)   The following wastes may not be disposed of in the transfer station:
      (1)   Radioactive wastes;
      (2)   Tires;
      (3)   Infectious wastes;
      (4)   Wet sludge;
      (5)   Lead-acid batteries;
      (6)   Liquids of any type;
      (7)   Any hollow metal drums 55 gallons or larger unless one end has been
removed;
      (8)   Any cable or wire unless it has been cut into two-foot sections or
baled;
      (9)   White goods (i.e., refrigerators, stoves, and the like);
      (10)   Recyclable corrugated cardboard generated by commercial,
institutional or industrial establishments or households;
      (11)   Friable asbestos;
      (12)   Highly flammable substances, explosives or any other waste
excluded by applicable environmental law;
      (13)   Aluminum cans;
      (14)   Brown, clear and green glass containers;
      (15)   Plastic containers produced by use of the plastic resins
polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) and high density polyethylene (HDPE);
      (16)   Newspaper;
      (17)   Land clearing waste and inert debris; and
      (18)   Yard waste.
   (C)   Any person transporting waste to the transfer station shall pay rates
for the disposal of the household garbage or waste, as defined in §
50.02, in accordance with a fee schedule that shall be adopted by the County
Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   All fees shall be paid at the time solid waste or construction and
demolition waste is delivered to the transfer station or land clearing waste,
inert debris or yard waste is delivered to the land clearing and inert debris
landfill unless prior arrangements have been made with the Solid Waste
Department.
      (2)   The following groups or persons shall be exempt from the payment of
fees for disposal of garbage or other waste:
         (a)   Residential waste of one-half ton (1,000 pounds) or less that is
brought to the transfer station by the homeowner; or (This does not apply to
residential waste that is collected by commercial haulers.)
         (b)   Any civic group that brings waste to the transfer station as a
result of roadside cleaning activities including the Department of
Transportation, or other groups performing public service cleanup activities as
authorized by the County Manager or Solid Waste Director.
      (3)   Solid waste, construction waste, demolition waste, land clearing
waste, inert debris or yard waste not produced, generated or collected in
Pasquotank or Camden Counties shall not be disposed of at the transfer station
or land clearing and inert debris landfill.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 RECYCLING/CONVENIENCE CENTERS.
   (A)   Recycling/convenience centers are maintained at various sites
throughout the county for the convenience of county residents. Solid wastes and
recyclables may be deposited in the recycling/ convenience centers only in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All solid wastes shall be deposited inside the solid waste receptacle
or as directed by the attendant. No solid waste may be left outside the gate of
the center.
   (C)   No commercial, industrial and institutional solid waste or solid waste
collected by independent collectors may be deposited at the recycling/
convenience centers, except that designated recyclables that are generated by
commercial or industrial businesses, or institutions may be deposited at the
landfill recycling/convenience center.
   (D)   The following wastes shall not be deposited in the recycling/
convenience centers:
      (1)   Hazardous wastes;
      (2)   Liquid wastes, except for used motor oil;
      (3)   Infectious wastes;
      (4)   Radioactive wastes;
      (5)   Bulky wastes, except as derived from household use which may be
placed in roll-off containers by homeowners;
      (6)   Tires, except at the landfill recycling center;
      (7)   Construction and demolition wastes, except as derived from
household use which may be placed in roll-off containers by homeowners;
      (8)   Burning or smoldering materials, or any other materials that would
create a fire hazard;
      (9)   Batteries except in approved recycling containers;
      (10)   Yard waste which weighs more than 100 pounds and/or limbs longer
than eight feet or larger than four inches in diameter; and
      (11)   Land clearing waste or inert debris.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No smoking or the use of matches or other open flames shall be
permitted at the land clearing and inert debris landfill or transfer station,
except as approved by the Solid Waste Director.
   (B)   No persons shall be allowed to go upon the premises of the land
clearing and inert debris landfill or transfer station for any reason except as
permitted by this chapter or as approved by the Solid Waste Director and/or
County Manager.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Certain landfills may be allowed within the zoning boundaries of the
county when located in the appropriately zoned district and having obtained a
special use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to high standards of planning and design, certain
property outside the zoning boundaries may be used for the construction of
landfills. In order for a landfill to be located in these areas an application
shall be filed with the Solid Waste Director. The application will include a
copy of the approved plan submitted to the state’s Solid Waste Management
Division, and be subject to a public hearing before the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Due notice of the hearing shall be given to those land owners
immediately adjacent thereto either in the rear thereof or on either side
thereof; extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of the opposite lots; specifically,
at least one week prior to the date of the hearing, the Solid Waste Director
shall furnish all adjoining property owners with written notice of the hearing.
Notice of a public hearing shall be published once a week for two consecutive
calendar weeks in a local newspaper of general circulation. The landfill
application shall not be approved except by favorable vote of a majority of all
the members of the Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   It is unlawful to operate a landfill without the approval by the
Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   There shall be an annual availability fee imposed upon the owner of
each improved property, as defined herein, within the county whether inside or
outside incorporated areas, to recover all or a portion of the costs of solid
waste management in the county. This fee shall be collected by the county and
paid into the Landfill Enterprise Fund.
   (B)   The amount to be charged as an availability fee for solid waste
management shall be established and adjusted as necessary by the Board of
Commissioners, shall be recorded in the official minutes of the Board meeting
at which the availability fees are adopted, and shall appear on a fee schedule
on file with the Finance Officer.
   (C)   (1)   The availability fee for solid waste management shall be
effective and commence on July 1, 1997, for the fiscal year which begins July
1, 1997, and continues for 12 months through June 30, 1998. The availability
fee shall be initially assessed and billed on the basis of improved property,
as defined herein, owned on January 1, 1997, and this initial fee for 12 months
will be billed on the annual ad valorem tax bill to improved property owners
which will be due on September 1, 1997. Each year thereafter the billing period
will commence with the fiscal year which begins on July 1, and continues until
the following June 30.
      (2)   Availability fees will be assessed and billed on the basis of
improved property owned on January 1, prior to the fiscal year covered by the
availability fee. The availability fee is due on each September 1 and shall
become delinquent if not paid before the following January 6. There shall be a
penalty charge of 2% if the availability fee is not paid before each January 6
and 0.75% per month for each succeeding month that the availability fee remains
unpaid. The availability fee shall be discounted in the same manner as property
taxes paid prior to the due date when a discount for taxes paid prior to the
due date is authorized by the Board of Commissioners. The collection of the
availability fee, delinquent fee and collection costs will be governed by the
North Carolina General Statutes involving the collection of ad valorem taxes on
real or personal property.
   (D)   The availability fee shall be assessed, billed and collected by the
Tax Collector from the owners of all improved property, as defined herein,
within the county. The owner will be assessed an availability fee for each
occurrence of above-described improvements on the applicable tax bill.
      (1)   Solid waste is collected from improved property by the county,
Elizabeth City or private contractor and the collection fee includes a charge
for the availability and use of the county’s solid waste management system; or
      (2)   On the date the availability fee is billed the improved property
is:
         (a)   Uninhabited and has been uninhabited on and after January 1; and
         (b)   The improved property will remain uninhabited during the period
for which the availability fee is assessed.
   (E)   (1)   Request for the exemption set forth in division (D)(2) above
must be submitted by affidavit to the Tax Assessor who shall investigate and
determine whether the exemption is warranted. The Tax Assessor shall report
availability fee exemptions to the Board of Commissioners monthly and the
exemptions shall be recorded in the official minutes of the meeting where the
report is made.
      (2)   An applicant whose availability fee exemption is denied by the Tax
Assessor may in writing appeal the denial to the Board of Commissioners for
review.
   (F)   The availability fee shall be billed with property taxes, shall be
payable in the same manner as property taxes, and in the case of nonpayment,
shall be collected in any manner by which the delinquent personal or real
property taxes can be collected and the fees are a lien on the real property
described in the bill that includes the fee.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
as provided by G.S. § 14-4, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both. Each day’s violation of this
chapter is a separate offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal
proceedings pursuant to this section does not relieve a person of his or her
liability for fees or civil penalties imposed under this chapter.
   (B)   In addition, enforcement of this chapter may be by appropriate
equitable remedy, injunction or order of abatement issuing from a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(d) and (e).
   (C)   In addition to and not in lieu of the criminal penalties and other
sanctions provided in this chapter, a violation of this chapter may also
subject the offender to the civil penalties set forth below.
      (1)   Civil penalties may be recovered by the county in a civil action in
the nature of debt or may be collected in other amounts as prescribed in this
section within the prescribed time following the issuance of notice for the
violation.
      (2)   Notice of violation shall, among other things:
         (a)   State upon its face the amount of the penalty if the penalty be
paid within 72 hours from and after the issuance of the notice;
         (b)   Notify the offender that a failure to pay the penalties within
the prescribed time shall subject the offender to a civil action in the nature
of debt for the stated penalty, plus an additional penalty in the amount of
$25, together with the cost of the action to be taxed by the court;
         (c)   Further provide that the offender may answer the notice of
violation by mailing the notice, and stated penalty to the Finance Office at
its mailing address, or by making payment of the Finance Office at the
appropriate address, and that upon payment the case or claim and right of
action by the county will be deemed compromised and settled; and
         (d)   State that penalties must be paid within 72 hours from issuance
of notice of violation. The notice shall further state that if the notice of
violation is not paid within the 72-hour period, court action by the filing of
a civil complaint for collection of the penalty may be taken.
      (3)   The Finance Officer is authorized to accept payments in full and
final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which the
county may have to enforce the penalty by civil action in the nature of debt.
Acceptance of the penalty shall be deemed a full and final release of any and
all claims, or rights of action arising release of any and all claims, or
rights of action arising out of the contended violation or violations.
      (4)   The civil penalty for violation of this chapter is $50.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the provision of division (C)(4) above, any person
disposing of solid waste from residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments which contain 25% or more of recyclable corrugated
cardboard; aluminum cans; brown, clear or green glass; plastic containers
produced by the use of the plastic resins polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) or
high density polyethylene (HDPE); or newspaper or any combination thereof by
weight or volume shall, in addition to the established tipping fee, pay as
civil penalty the following:
         (a)   For the first violation, a written warning and civil penalty of
the then existing per ton tipping fee assessed for disposal of solid waste at
the transfer station; and
         (b)   For the second and any subsequent violation, a civil penalty in
the amount of two times the then existing per ton tipping fee assessed for
disposal of solid waste at the transfer station.
      (6)   The notice of violation referred to in this section may be
delivered to the person violating the provisions of this chapter in person or
may be mailed by first class mail to the person at his or her last known
address.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 95-1, passed 1-9-1995; Ord. passed 7-21-1997;
Ord. passed 9-22-1997; Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Authority and General Regulation
   
51.001   Title, authority, enactment and preamble
   
51.002   Short title
   
51.003   Exception to applicability
   
51.004   Severability
   
51.005   Effective date
Subdivision of Land
   
51.020   General provisions
   
51.021   Subdivision application and review procedures
   
51.022   Subdivision standards and required improvements
   
51.023   Construction procedures
Development Regulations
   
51.035   Establishment of watershed areas
   
51.036   Watershed areas described
   
51.037   Cluster development
   
51.038   Buffer area required
   
51.039   Rules governing the interpretation of watershed area boundaries
   
51.040   Application of regulations
   
51.041   Existing development
   
51.042   Watershed protection permit
   
51.043   Building permit required
   
51.044   Watershed protection occupancy permit
   
51.045   Inspections
Public Health Regulations
   
51.060   Public health, in general
   
51.061   Abatement
Administration, Enforcement, and Appeals
   
51.075   Administrator; duties
   
51.076   Appeal from the Watershed Administrator
   
51.077   Changes and amendments to the water supply watershed protection
chapter
   
51.078   Public notice and public hearing required
   
51.079   Fees for application to Watershed Board of Adjustment
   
51.080   Establishment of Watershed Review Board
   
51.081   Establishment of Watershed Board of Adjustment
   
51.082   Powers and duties of Watershed Board of Adjustment
   
51.083   Appeals from the Watershed Board of Adjustment
Definitions
   
51.095   General definitions
   
51.096   Word interpretation
 
   
51.999   Penalty
AUTHORITY AND GENERAL REGULATION
§ 51.001 TITLE, AUTHORITY, ENACTMENT AND PREAMBLE.
   A chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by the legislature of the
State of North Carolina, in Chapter 153A, Art. 6 § 121, General Ordinance
Authority; and in Chapter 143, Art. 21, Watershed Protection Rules, for the
purposes of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry; to provide for the establishment of watershed regulations within a
portion of Pasquotank County where waters flow directly to the Pasquotank River
(WS-IV, Pasquotank River Basin) above the potable water intake for the City of
Elizabeth City defined by the state to be critical or protected areas; such
regulations which stipulate the density and intensity of residential,
commercial and industrial development use of stormwater controls, stream
buffers, sludge/contaminated soil applications, septic/on-site disposal
systems, landfills, agricultural vegetative buffers, roads/transportation
systems and recreational activities; to prescribe procedures for applying for
approval of development, vested rights, and appeals; to provide for
administration and enforcement including establishment of a Watershed Board
with duties prescribed in this chapter; and to supersede any ordinances in
conflict with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Water Supply Watershed Ordinance of
Pasquotank County, North Carolina”. The watershed map(s) referred to in this
chapter, which is identified by the title Official Watershed Map of Pasquotank
County, North Carolina shall be known as the “Watershed Map”. This chapter and
map shall be permanently kept on file in the office of the County Watershed
Administrator.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.003 EXCEPTION TO APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall repeal, modify or amend any
federal or state law or regulation, or any ordinance which these regulations
specifically replace.
   (B)   It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. However, if the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions or higher standards for
the use of a building or land, then the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
   (C)   Existing development, as defined in this chapter, is not subject to
the requirements of this chapter. Expansions to structures classified as
existing development must meet the requirements of this chapter, however, the
built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in
the density calculations.
   (D)   If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot
owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall not be subject to the
development restrictions of this chapter if it is developed for single-family
residential purposes. Any lot or parcel created as part of a family subdivision
after the effective date of these rules shall be exempt from these rules if it
is developed for one single-family detached residence and if it is exempt from
local subdivision regulation. Any lot or parcel created as part of any other
type of subdivision that is exempt from a local subdivision ordinance shall be
subject to the land use requirements (including impervious surface
requirements) of these rules, except that such a lot or parcel must meet the
minimum buffer requirements to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.004 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration shall
not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part of this chapter
that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.005 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on May 27, 1994.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 51.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No subdivision plat of land within the Water Supply Watershed shall be
filed or recorded by the Register of Deeds until it has been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Likewise, the county Clerk of
Superior Court shall not order or direct the recording of a plat if the
recording of such plat would be in conflict with this chapter.
   (B)   The approval of a plat does not constitute or effect the acceptance by
the county or the public of the dedication of any street or other ground,
easement, right-of-way, public utility line or other public facility shown on
the plat and shall not be construed to do so.
   (C)   All subdivisions shall conform with the mapping requirements contained
in G.S. 47-30 and the County Subdivision Regulations enacted March, 1989.
   (D)   All subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction of the county after
the effective date of this chapter shall require compliance with the provisions
of this chapter prior to or concurrent with approval of a final plat prepared,
approved and recorded pursuant to the County Subdivision Regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.021 SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed by the Administrator for
conformance with this chapter prior to recording with the Register of Deeds to
determine whether or not the property is located within the designated Water
Supply Watershed. Subdivisions that are not within the designated watershed
area shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter and may be recorded
provided the Administrator initials the plat. Subdivisions within the
designated watershed area are subject to the provisions of this chapter only
when an erosion and sedimentation plan is required under the provisions of
state law, or approved local program. Subdivisions within the designated
watershed area shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other
state and local requirements that may apply.
   (B)   The Administrator shall conduct a preliminary review of the
subdivision’s preliminary plat, which plat shall be submitted at a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet or larger. The Administrator shall either approve, approve
conditionally or disapprove each application. The Watershed Administrator shall
take final action on the preliminary plat within 45 days of submission of the
application. The Administrator or the Board may provide public agencies an
opportunity to review the proposed subdivision plat and make recommendations.
However, failure of the agencies to submit their comments and recommendations
shall not delay action within the prescribed time limit. Public agencies may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The District Highway Engineer with regard to proposed streets and
highways;
      (2)   The Director of the Health Department with regard to proposed
private water system or sewer systems normally approved by the Health
Department;
      (3)   The state Division of Environmental Management with regard to
proposed sewer systems normally approved by the Division, engineered stormwater
controls or stormwater management in general; and
      (4)   Any other agency or official designated by the Administrator or
Watershed Review Board.
   (C)   If the Watershed Administrator approves the subdivision, such approval
shall be indicated on two copies of the plat by the following certificate and
signed by the Watershed Administrator:
Certificate of Approval for Recording
      I certify that this plat complies with the Water Supply Watershed Chapter
and is approved by the Watershed Review Board for recording in the Register of
Deeds office.
      Date______               Watershed
Administrator___________________________
      NOTICE: THIS PROPERTY IS LOCATED WITHIN A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED-
DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS MAY APPLY.
   (D)   If the Watershed Administrator disapproves or approves conditionally
the application, the reasons for such action shall be stated in writing for the
applicant and entered in the minutes. The subdivider may make changes and
submit a revised plan which shall constitute a separate request for the purpose
of review.
   (E)   All subdivision plats within the watershed boundaries as delineated on
the Watershed Map shall comply with these requirements for recording of deeds.
   (F)   The plat shall be recorded within 90 days of approval. The subdivider
shall provide the Administrator with evidence the plat has been recorded with
the Register of Deeds within five working days of recordation.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.022 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Building space.
      (1)   All lots shall provide adequate building space in accordance with
the development standards contained in §§
51.035 through
51.045 of this chapter.
      (2)   Lots which are smaller than the minimum required for residential
lots may be developed using built-upon area criteria in accordance with §§
51.035 through
51.045.
   (B)   Built-upon area. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total
project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is
to be developed.
   (C)   Stormwater drainage facilities. Any application for preliminary plat
approval being submitted and lying within the boundaries of the watershed as
depicted on the Watershed Map shall be accompanied by a proposed stormwater
drainage plan. The plan shall provide for a drainage system that diverts
stormwater runoff away from surface waters and incorporates best management
practices to minimize water quality impacts. The subdivider shall provide a
written statement that the plan has been submitted to and approved by the State
Division of Environmental Management, Water Quality Section.
   (D)   Erosion and sedimentation control. The applications described in
division (C) above shall, where required, be accompanied by a written statement
that a Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan has been submitted to and
approved by the State Division of Land Quality.
   (E)   Road constructed in critical areas and watershed buffer areas. Where
possible, roads shall be located outside the critical areas and watershed
buffer areas. Roads constructed within these areas shall be designed and
constructed so to minimize their impact on water quality.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.023 CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   No construction or installation of improvements, other than survey
monuments, flags or stakes, shall commence in a proposed subdivision within the
watershed boundaries until the subdivision has been reviewed and approved by
the Watershed Review Board.
   (B)   Within the watershed boundaries, no building or other permits shall be
issued for erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of
adoption of this chapter until all requirements of this chapter have been met.
The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make
arrangements with the Administrator to provide for adequate inspection.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 51.035 ESTABLISHMENT OF WATERSHED AREAS.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to list and describe the watershed
areas adopted in this chapter.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, areas within the county are divided into
the following areas, as appropriate:
      (1)   WS-IV-CA (Critical area); and
      (2)   WS-IV-PA (Protected area).
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.036 WATERSHED AREAS DESCRIBED.
   (A)   WS-IV Watershed Areas-Critical Area (WS-IV-CA). Only new development
activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan under state law
or approved local government program are required to meet the provisions of
this chapter when located in a WS-IV watershed. Single-family residential
development shall be allowed at a maximum of two dwelling units per acre. All
other residential and nonresidential development shall not exceed 24%
impervious coverage. New residuals application sites and landfills are
specifically prohibited.
      (1)   Allowed uses.
         (a)   Agriculture subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act
of 1985, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3801 et seq. and Food, Agriculture, Conservation
and Trade Act of 1990, being 7 U.S.C. §§ 1421 et seq. and the rules and
regulations of the Soil and Water Conservation Commission;
         (b)   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices
Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 1I.6101-.0209);
         (c)   Residential; and
         (d)   Non-residential development, excluding:
            1.   Landfills; and
            2.   Sites for land application of residuals or petroleum
contaminated soils.
      (2)   Density and built-upon limits.
         (a)   Single-family residential development shall not exceed two
dwelling units per acre on a project by project basis. No single-family
residential lot shall be less than one-half acre (or 20,000 square feet
excluding roadway right-of-way) except within an approved cluster development.
         (b)   All other residential and non-residential development shall not
exceed 24% built-upon area. For the purpose of calculating the built-upon area,
total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the
project is to be developed.
      (3)   Erosion/sedimentation control plan waiver.
         (a)   The person(s) conducting the land disturbing activities need not
submit a local erosion control plan if such persons obtain an erosion control
plan waiver certificate from the Administrator. An application for this form
shall be submitted containing the name, address and telephone number of the
developer and owner, a description and drawing of the proposed development or
activity, the location of the development and any other information requested
by the Administrator that is necessary to evaluate the proposed development.
The Administrator shall issue the erosion control plan waiver certificate if
the Administrator finds that the land-disturbing activity will result in
uncovering less than one acre and:
         (b)   The land-disturbing activity is not to be conducted with any of
the following types of development:
            1.   Any activity involving the temporary or permanent storage
(above or below ground) of any toxic or hazardous substance, including fuel
storage facilities;
            2.   Shopping centers;
            3.   Industrial and commercial facilities; or
            4.   Major subdivisions.
   (B)   WS-IV Watershed Areas-Protected Area (WS-IV-PA). Only new development
activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan under state law
or approved local government program are required to meet the provisions of
this chapter when located in a WS-IV watershed.
      (1)   Uses allowed.
         (a)   Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act
of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990;
         (b)   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices
Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 1I.6101-.0209);
         (c)   Residential development; and
         (d)   Non-residential development.
      (2)   Density and built-upon limits.
         (a)   Single-family residential developments with curb and gutter
street systems shall not exceed two dwelling units per acre or 24% built-upon
area. Developments without curb and gutter street systems shall not exceed
three dwelling units per acre or 36% built-upon area. No single-family
residential lot shall be less than one-half acre (or 20,000 square feet
excluding roadway right-of-way), or one-third acre for projects without a curb
and gutter street system except within an approved cluster development,
consistent with zoning regulations.
         (b)   All other residential and non-residential developments with curb
and gutter street systems shall not exceed 24% built-upon area. For projects
without a curb and gutter street system, development shall not exceed 36%
built-upon area. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project
area shall include acreage in the tract on which the project is to be
developed.
         (c)   (Optional for local governments that do not choose to
incorporate the high density option) In addition to the development allowed
under divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) above, new development and expansions
to existing development may occupy up to 10% of the protected area with up to
70% built-upon area on a project by project basis, when approved as a special
intensity allocation (SIA). The Watershed Administrator is authorized to
approve SIAs consistent with the provisions of this chapter. Projects must, to
the maximum extent practicable, minimize built-upon surface area, direct
stormwater away from surface waters and incorporate best management practices
to minimize water quality impacts. For the purpose of calculating built-upon
area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the
project is to be developed.
      (3)   Erosion/sedimentation control plan waiver.
         (a)   The person(s) conducting the land disturbing activities need not
submit a local erosion control plan if such persons obtain an erosion control
plan waiver certificate from the Administrator. An application for this form
shall be submitted containing the name, address and telephone number of the
developer and owner, a description and drawing of the proposed development or
activity, the location of the development and any other information requested
by the Administrator that is necessary to evaluate the proposed development.
The Administrator shall issue the erosion control plan waiver certificate if
the Administrator finds that the land-disturbing activity will result in
uncovering less than one acre and:
         (b)   The land-disturbing activity is not to be conducted with any of
the following types of development:
            1.   Any activity involving the temporary or permanent storage
(above or below ground) of any toxic or hazardous substance, including fuel
storage facilities;
            2.   Shopping centers;
            3.   Industrial and commercial facilities; or
            4.   Major subdivisions.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.037 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.
   Cluster development is allowed in the watershed area under the following
conditions.
   (A)   Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster
development projects; however, the total number of lots or dwelling units shall
not exceed the number of lots or dwelling units allowed for single-family
detached developments as provided in §
51.036. Density or built-upon area for the project shall not exceed that
allowed for the critical area or protected area, whichever applies.
   (B)   All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize
stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated
stormwater flow.
   (C)   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural
state. The title to the open space area shall be conveyed to an incorporated
homeowners association for management, to a local government for preservation
as a park or open space, or to a conservation organization for preservation in
a permanent easement. Where a property association is not incorporated, a
maintenance agreement shall be filed with the Register of Deeds.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.038 BUFFER AREA REQUIRED.
   (A)   A minimum 100-foot vegetative buffer is required for all new
development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise, a minimum
30-foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required along all
perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000
(7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government
studies. Desirable artificial streambank or shoreline stabilization is
permitted.
   (B)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent
structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs and security lights
which result in only diminutive increases in impervious area and public
projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical alternative
exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff
away from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of stormwater best
management practices.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.039 RULES GOVERNING THE INTERPRETATION OF WATERSHED AREA BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the watershed areas,
as shown on the Watershed Map, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following
either street, alley, highway lines or centerlines thereof, such lines shall be
construed to be the watershed boundaries.
      (2)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the watershed boundaries.
However, a surveyed plat prepared by a registered land surveyor may be
submitted to the county as evidence that one or more properties along these
boundaries do not lie within the watershed area.
      (3)   Where area boundaries lie at a scaled distance more than 25 feet
from any parallel lot line, the location of watershed boundaries shall be
determined by use of the scale appearing on the Watershed Map.
   (B)   Where area boundaries lie at a scaled distance of 25 feet or less from
any parallel lot line, the location of watershed boundaries shall be construed
to be the lot line.
   (C)   Where other uncertainty exists, the Administrator shall interpret the
Watershed Map as to location of such boundaries. This decision may be appealed
to the Watershed Review Board.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.040 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No building or land shall be used and no development shall take place
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter specified for the
watershed area in which it is located.
   (B)   No area required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall be included in the area required for another building.
   (C)   If a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being
allowed in a watershed area, such use or class of use is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.041 EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   General. Existing development, as defined in this chapter, may be
continued and maintained subject to the provisions provided in this chapter.
Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet the
requirements of this chapter, however, the built-upon area of the existing
development is not required to be included in the built-upon area calculations.
   (B)   Uses of land. This category consists of uses existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter where such use of the land is not permitted to be
established by this chapter in the watershed area in which it is located. Such
uses may be continued except as follows:
      (1)   When prohibited use of land has been changed to an allowed use, it
shall not thereafter revert to any prohibited use;
      (2)   Prohibited use of land shall be changed only to an allowed use; or
      (3)   When prohibited use ceases for a period of at least one year, it
shall not be reestablished.
   (C)   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas. Any existing building
or built-upon area not in conformance with the restrictions of this chapter
that has been damaged or removed may be repaired and/or reconstructed, except
that there are no restrictions on single-family residential development,
provided:
      (1)   The building or built-upon area is in conformance with all other
applicable ordinances of the county;
      (2)   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within 12 months and
completed within two years of such damage; and
      (3)   The total amount of space devoted to built-upon area may not be
increased unless Stormwater Control that equals or exceeds the previous
development is provided.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.042 WATERSHED PROTECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   No building or built-upon area shall be erected, moved, enlarged or
structurally altered, nor shall any building permit be issued nor shall any
change in the use of the building or land be made until a watershed protection
permit has been issued by the Administrator. No watershed protection permit
shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Watershed protection permit applications shall be filed with the
Administrator. The application shall include a completed application form (see
Appendix A, attached to Ord. passed 7-15-2002) and supporting documentation
deemed necessary by the Administrator.
   (C)   Prior to issuance of a watershed protection permit, the Administrator
may consult with qualified personnel for assistance to determine if the
application meets the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   A watershed protection permit shall expire if a building permit or
watershed occupancy permit is not obtained by the applicant within 12 months
from the date of issuance.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.043 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No permit required under the North Carolina State Building Code shall be
issued for any activity for which a watershed protection permit is required
until the watershed protection permit has been issued.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.044 WATERSHED PROTECTION OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
   (A)   The Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a watershed
protection occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this chapter
have been met prior to occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected,
altered or moved and/or prior to the change of use of any building or land.
   (B)   A watershed protection occupancy permit, either for the whole or part
of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
watershed protection permit and shall be issued or denied within ten days after
the erection or structural alterations of the building. The building must have
received approval by the Building Inspector for compliance with the North
Carolina State Building Code prior to issuance of the watershed protection
occupancy permit.
   (C)   When only a change in use of land or existing building occurs, the
Watershed Administrator or his or her designee shall issue a watershed
protection occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this chapter
have been met coincident with the watershed protection permit.
   (D)   No building or structure which has been erected, moved or structurally
altered may be occupied until the Administrator has approved and issued a
watershed protection permit.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.045 INSPECTIONS.
   The Inspections Division of the county Planning and Inspections Department
has the duty in furtherance of this chapter to:
   (A)   Make all necessary inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (B)   Issue or deny certificates of compliance;
   (C)   Issue or deny certificates of occupancy;
   (D)   Issue stop work orders or orders to correct violations;
   (E)   Maintain adequate records of permits issued or denied, inspections
made, corrections ordered, and certificates issued; and
   (F)   Take other actions that may be required to adequately enforce this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
PUBLIC HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 51.060 PUBLIC HEALTH, IN GENERAL.
   No activity, situation, structure or land use which poses a threat to water
quality and the public health, safety and welfare shall be allowed within the
watershed. Such conditions may arise from inadequate on-site sewage systems
which utilize ground absorption; inadequate sedimentation and erosion control
measures; the improper storage or disposal of junk, trash or other refuse
within a buffer area; the improper management of stormwater runoff; or any
other situation found to pose a threat to water quality.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.061 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The Administrator or his or her designee shall monitor land use
activities within the watershed areas to identify situations that may pose a
threat to water quality.
   (B)   The Administrator or his or her designee shall report all findings to
the Watershed Review Board. The Administrator may consult with any public
agency or official and request recommendations.
   (C)   Where the Watershed Review Board finds a threat to water quality and
the public health, safety and welfare, the Watershed Review Board shall
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or abate
the condition and/or violation.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS
§ 51.075 ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   The county shall appoint an Administrator, who shall be duly sworn.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter as follows.
      (1)   The Administrator shall issue watershed protection permits and
watershed protection occupancy permits as prescribed in this chapter. A record
of all permits shall be kept on file and shall be available for public
inspection during regular office hours of the Administrator.
      (2)   The Administrator or his or her designee shall serve as Clerk to
the Watershed Review Board.
      (3)   The Administrator shall keep records of all amendments to this
chapter and shall provide copies of all amendments upon adoption to the Water
Quality Division of the State Department Division of Environment and Natural
Resources.
      (4)   The Administrator is granted the authority to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Administrator or the
Administrator’s designee may enter any building, structure or premises, as
provided by law, to perform any duty imposed by this chapter.
      (5)   The Administrator shall keep a record of variances to this chapter.
This record shall be submitted for each calendar year to the Local Government
Assistance Unit of the Division of Water Quality on or before January 1 of the
following year, and shall provide a description of each project receiving a
variance and the reasons for granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.076 APPEAL FROM THE WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Administrator may be appealed to and decided by the Watershed Board of
Adjustment.
   (B)   An appeal from a decision of the Administrator must be submitted to
the Watershed Board of Adjustment within 30 days from the date the order,
interpretation, decision or determination is made. All appeals must be made in
writing stating the reasons for the appeal. Following submission of an appeal,
the Administrator shall transmit to the Watershed Board of Adjustment all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
unless the Administrator certifies to the Watershed Board of Adjustment, after
the notice of appeal has been filed with the Administrator, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the Administrator’s opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings may not be
stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Watershed
Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
Administrator and on due cause shown.
   (D)   The Watershed Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing the appeal and give notice of the hearing to the parties and shall
decide the appeal within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may
appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.077 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO THE WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED PROTECTION
CHAPTER.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may, on its own motion or on
petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement, change or modify
the watershed regulations and restrictions as described in this chapter.
   (B)   No action shall be taken until the proposal has been submitted to the
Watershed Review Board for review and recommendations. The Watershed Review
Board shall have 45 days from the time the proposed amendment is submitted in
which to make its recommendation. If the Watershed Review Board fails to submit
a report within 45 days, the County Board of Commissioners may proceed as
though a favorable report had been received. The County Board of Commissioners
is not bound by the recommendations, if any, of the Watershed Review Board.
   (C)   Under no circumstances shall the County Board of Commissioners adopt
amendments, supplements or changes that would cause this chapter to violate the
watershed protection rules as adopted by the State Environmental Management
Commission. All amendments shall be filed with the State Division of Water
Quality, State Division of Environment and Natural Resources and the State
Division of Community Assistance.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.078 PUBLIC NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before adopting or amending this chapter, the County Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the proposed changes. A notice of
the public hearing shall be given once a week for two successive calendar weeks
in a newspaper having general circulation in the county. The notice shall be
published for the first time not less than ten nor more than 25 days before the
date set for the hearing.
   (B)   Written notification must be forwarded by first class mail to each
local government having jurisdiction within the watershed and to the entity
using the water supply for consumption where an amendment or a variance is
being considered. Prior to the request being reviewed by the Watershed Review
Board, each governmental entity shall be allowed 30 days (from the date the
notices are mailed) to respond with any concerns.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.079 FEES FOR APPLICATION TO WATERSHED BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   Application fees for variances or appeals to the Watershed Board of
Adjustment shall be established by the County Board of Commissioners in order
to cover necessary administrative costs and advertising expenses. Fees shall be
paid prior to the placement of an item on any agenda of the Watershed Board of
Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.080 ESTABLISHMENT OF WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD.
   The County Planning Board, consisting of seven members appointed by the
County Board of Commissioners, shall serve as the Watershed Review Board.
Officers and duties, rules of conduct for members and meeting procedures shall
be conducted in accordance with the Rules of Procedure for the County Planning
Board (July 15, 1993 and any subsequent amendments) described in Appendix I,
attached to Ord. passed 7-15-2002.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.081 ESTABLISHMENT OF WATERSHED BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The County Zoning Board of Adjustment, consisting of five active members and
two alternate members appointed by the County Board of Commissioners, shall
serve as the Watershed Board of Adjustment. Officers and duties, rules of
conduct for members and meeting procedures shall be conducted in accordance
with Rules of Procedure for the Zoning Board of Adjustment (February 1,1993 and
any subsequent amendments) described in Appendix H, attached to Ord. passed 7-
15-2002.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.082 POWERS AND DUTIES OF WATERSHED BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Administrative Review. The Watershed Board of Adjustment shall hear
and decide appeals from any decision or determination made by the Administrator
in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Variances. The Watershed Board of Adjustment shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, minor variances from the terms of this chapter as
will not be contrary to the public interests where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.
      (1)   The Administrator shall notify and allow a reasonable comment
period for all other local governments having jurisdiction in the designated
watershed where the variance is being considered.
      (2)   Applications for a variance shall be made on the proper form
obtainable from the Administrator and shall include the following information:
         (a)   A site plan, drawn to a scale of at least one inch to 50 feet,
indicating the property lines of the parcel upon which the use is proposed; any
existing or proposed structures; parking areas and other built-upon areas;
surface water drainage. The site plan shall be neatly drawn and indicate north
point, name and address of person who prepared the plan, date of original
drawing, and an accurate record of any later revisions;
         (b)   A complete and detailed description of the proposed variance,
together with any other pertinent information which the applicant feels would
be helpful to the Watershed Board of Adjustment in considering the application;
and
         (c)   The Administrator shall notify in writing each local government
having jurisdiction in the watershed. Notice shall include a description of the
variance being requested. Local governments receiving notice of the variance
may, within 30 days from the date notice is issued, submit comments to the
Administrator prior to a decision by the Watershed Board of Adjustment. The
comments shall become a part of the record of proceedings of the Watershed
Board of Adjustment.
      (3)   Before the Watershed Board of Adjustment may grant a variance it
shall make the following three findings, which shall be recorded in the
permanent record of the case, and shall include the factual reasons on which
they are based:
         (a)   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the chapter. In order to determine
that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships the Watershed
Board of Adjustment must find and conclude that the five following conditions
exist:
            1.   If the applicant complies with the provisions of the chapter,
the applicant can secure no reasonable return from, nor make reasonable use of,
his or her property. Merely proving that the variance would permit a greater
profit to be made from the property will not be considered adequate to justify
the granting of a variance. Moreover, the Watershed Board of Adjustment shall
consider whether the variance is the minimum possible deviation from the terms
of the chapter that will make possible the reasonable use of the applicant’s
property;
            2.   The hardship results from the application of the chapter to
the property rather than from other factors such as deed restrictions or other
hardship;
            3.   The hardship is due to the physical nature of the applicant’s
property, such as its size, shape or topography which is different from that of
neighboring property;
            4.   The hardship is not the result of the actions of an applicant
who knowingly or unknowingly violates the chapter, or who purchases the
property after the effective date of the chapter and then comes to the
Watershed Board of Adjustment for relief; and
            5.   The hardship is particular to the applicant’s property rather
than the result of conditions that are widespread. If other properties are
equally subject to the hardship created in the restriction, then granting a
variance would be a special privilege denied to others and would not promote
equal justice.
         (b)   The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of the chapter and preserves its spirit.
         (c)   In the granting of the variance the public safety and welfare
have been assured and substantial justice has been done. The Board of
Adjustment shall not grant a variance if it finds that doing so would in any
respect impair the public health, safety or general welfare.
      (4)   In granting the variance, the Watershed Board of Adjustment may
attach conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the
proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of
the purpose of this chapter. If a variance for the construction, alteration or
use of property is granted, construction, alteration or use shall be in
accordance with the approved site plan.
      (5)   The Watershed Board of Adjustment shall refuse to hear an appeal or
an application for a variance previously denied if it finds that there have
been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the
appeal or application.
      (6)   A variance issued in accordance with this section shall be
considered a watershed protection permit and shall expire if a building permit
or watershed occupancy permit for the use is not obtained by the applicant
within six months from the date of the decision.
      (7)   If the application calls for the granting of a major variance, and
if the Watershed Board of Adjustment decides in favor of granting the variance,
the Watershed Board of Adjustment shall prepare a preliminary record of the
hearing with all deliberate speed. The preliminary record of the hearing shall
include:
         (a)   The variance application;
         (b)   The hearing notices;
         (c)   The evidence presented;
         (d)   Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence and rulings on
them;
         (e)   Proposed findings and exceptions; and
         (f)   The proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be
added to the permit.
      (8)   The preliminary record shall be sent to the State Environmental
Management Commission for its review as follows:
         (a)   If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that the
variance qualifies as a major variance and that:
            1.   The property owner can secure no reasonable return from nor
make any practical use of the property unless the proposed variance is granted;
and
            2.   The variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat
to the water supply; then the Commission shall approve the variance as proposed
or approve the proposed variance with conditions and stipulations. The
Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the Watershed
Board of Adjustment. If the Commission approves the variance as proposed, the
Watershed Board of Adjustment shall prepare a final decision granting the
proposed variance. If the Commission approves the variance with conditions and
stipulations, the Board shall prepare a final decision, including such
conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed variance.
         (b)   If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that the
variance qualifies as a major variance and that:
            1.   The property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make
a practical use of the property without a variance; or
            2.   The variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to
the water supply; then the Commission shall deny approval of the variance as
proposed. The Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the
Watershed Board of Adjustment. The Board shall prepare a final decision denying
the variance as proposed.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.083 APPEALS FROM THE WATERSHED BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   Each decision of the Watershed Board of Adjustment is subject to review by
the county Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any
petition for review by the county Superior Court shall be filed with the county
Clerk of Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of the Watershed
Board of Adjustment is filed in the office of the Administrator, or after a
written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved party who has
filed a written request for a copy of the decision with the Administrator or
Chairperson of the Watershed Board of Adjustment at the time of its hearing of
the case, whichever is later. The decision of the Watershed Board of Adjustment
may be delivered to the aggrieved party either by personal service or by
registered or certified mail return receipt requested.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
DEFINITIONS
§ 51.095 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. An official or designated person of the County Commission
responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   AGRICULTURAL USE. The use of waters for stock watering, irrigation and other
farm purposes.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). A structural or nonstructural management-
based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source
inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.
   BUFFER. Any natural buffer from the wetland boundary line as defined by the
U.S. Corps of Engineers, or an area of natural or planted vegetation through
which stormwater runoff flows on a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not
become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and
filtering of pollutants. The BUFFER is measured landward from the normal pool
elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or
rivers.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property. The
connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway, passageway,
carport or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall not be
deemed to make them one building.
   BUILT-UPON AREA. Built-upon areas should include that portion of a
development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover
including buildings, pavement, gravel areas (e.g. roads, parking lots, paths),
and recreation facilities of whatever nature. Wooden slatted decks and the
water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. The grouping of buildings in order to conserve land
resources and provide for innovation in the design of the project including
minimizing stormwater runoff impacts. This term includes non-residential
development as well as single-family residential and multi-family developments.
For the purpose of this chapter, planned unit developments and mixed use
development are considered as CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.
   CRITICAL AREA. The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where
risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of
the watershed. The CRITICAL AREA is defined as extending one-half mile upstream
from the intake located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the-river) or
the ridge line of the watershed, whichever comes first. Local governments may
extend the critical area as needed. Major landmarks such as highways or
property lines maybe used to delineate the outer boundary of the critical area
if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary
of one-half mile.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any land disturbing activity which adds to or changes the
amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which
otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
   DISCHARGING LANDFILL. A landfill which discharges treated leachate and which
requires a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and
permanent living facilities for one family.
   EXISTING DEVELOPMENT. Those projects that are built on those projects that
at a minimum have established a vested right under state zoning law as of the
effective date of this chapter based on at least one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Substantial expenditures of resources (time, labor, money) based on
a good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to
proceed with the project;
      (2)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by the
General Statutes (G.S. § 153A-344.1 and G.S. § 160A-385.1); or
      (3)   Having an approved site specific or phased development plan as
authorized by the General Statutes (G.S. § 153A-344.1 and G.S. § 160A-385.1).
   EXISTING LOT (LOT OF RECORD). A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat
of which has been recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds prior
to the adoption of this chapter or a lot described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that
unless all members are related by blood or marriage or adoption, no such FAMILY
shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants
employed or living on the premises maybe housed on the premises without being
counted as a family or families.
   FAMILY SUBDIVISION. A division of a tract of land:
      (1)   To convey the resulting parcels, with the exception of parcels
retained by the grantor, to a relative or relatives as a gift or for nominal
consideration, but only if no more than one parcel is conveyed by the grantor
from the tract to any one relative; or
      (2)   To divide land from a common ancestor among tenants in common, all
of whom inherited by intestacy or by will.
   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any non-residential development that requires an
NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or requires the use or storage of
any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing,
cleaning or developing any product or commodity.
   LANDFILL. A facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in a sanitary
manner in accordance with the G.S. Ch. 130A, Art. 9. For the purpose of this
chapter, this term does not include composting facilities.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or
group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary
accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.
   MAJOR VARIANCE. A variance that results in the relaxation, by a factor
greater than 10%, of any management requirements such as buffer, density or
built-upon area.
   MINOR VARIANCE. A variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection
rules that results in a relaxation, by a factor of up to 10%, of any management
requirement such as buffer, density or built-upon area.
   NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. A lot described by a plat or a deed that was
recorded prior to the effective date of local watershed protection regulations
(or their amendments) that does not meet the minimum lot size or other
development requirements of the statewide watershed protection rules.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. All development other than residential
development, agriculture and silviculture.
   PLAT. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been,
subdivided according to the County Subdivision Regulations.
   PROTECTED AREA. The area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of WS-
IV watersheds. The boundaries of the PROTECTED AREA are defined as within five
miles of and draining to the normal pool elevation of the reservoir or to the
ridgeline of the watershed; or within ten miles upstream and draining to the
intake located directly in the stream or river or to the ridgeline of the
watershed.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Buildings for residence such as attached and
detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums,
townhouses, cottages and the like, and their associated outbuildings such as
garages, storage buildings, gazebos and the like, and customary home
occupations.
   RESIDUALS. Any solid or semi-solid waste generated from a wastewater
treatment plant, water treatment plant or air pollution control facility
permitted under the authority of the Environmental Management Commission.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. Any development where:
      (1)   No building contains more than one dwelling unit;
      (2)   Every dwelling unit is on a separate lot; and
      (3)   Where no lot contains more than one dwelling unit.
   STREET (ROAD). A right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the
principal means of access to abutting properties.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected including, but not limited to,
buildings which require location on the land or attachment to something having
permanent location on the land.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops any
land deemed to be a subdivision as defined in this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land (in addition to the
undivided remaining portion of the original undivided tract) into two or more
lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development (whether immediate or future) and includes all division of land
involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets;
however, the following is not included within this definition and is not
subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this part:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided or recorded lots if the total number of lots is not increased and
the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the county as shown
in its subdivision regulations;
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres if no
street right-of-way dedication is involved;
      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for widening
or opening streets;
      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership, the entire area of
which is no greater than two acres, into not more than three lots if no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and if the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the county as shown by its subdivision regulations;
      (5)   The division of a tract of land into one lot where:
         (a)   The lot fronts upon a state-maintained road;
         (b)   The lot is served by a public water system; and
         (c)   The lot is large enough to meet applicable state and local
health codes and other local ordinances.
      (6)   (a)   The gift by a property owner of a single lot to the property
owner’s child or parent or to each of the property owner’s children or parents
where:
            1.   The lot fronts upon a state-maintained road;
            2.   The lot is served by a public water system; and
            3.   The lot is large enough to meet applicable state and local
health codes and other local ordinances.
         (b)   This exemption shall be for a one-time gift of a single lot to
each child or parent of the property owner. A gift of any additional lot to the
same child or parent shall require compliance with the county’s subdivision
ordinance.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any substance or combination of substances (including
disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the
environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the potential
to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations,
physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in
reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organisms or their
offspring or other adverse health effects.
   VARIANCE. A permission to develop or use property granted by the Watershed
Board of Adjustment relaxing or waiving a water supply watershed management
requirement adopted by the State Environmental Management Commission that is
incorporated into this chapter.
   WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURE. Any structure for which the use requires access
to or proximity to or siting within surface waters to fulfill its basic
purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary
facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and
commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.
   WATERSHED. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific
point (e.g., the water supply intake).
   WATERSHED IV. Waters protected as water supplies which are generally in
moderately to highly developed watersheds. Point source discharges of treated
wastewater are permitted pursuant to Rules .0104 and .0216 of subchapter 2B,
Surface Water and Wetland Standards, of the Division of Water Quality Rules
Manual, being 15A NCAC 02B.0104 and .0216.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.096 WORD INTERPRETATION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as
follows:
   (A)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
   (B)   Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in
the plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise.
   (C)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, corporation, trust and
company as well as an individual.
   (D)   The word “structure” shall include the word “building”.
   (E)   The word “lot” shall include the words “plot”, “parcel” or “tract”.
   (F)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   (G)   The word “will” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day any violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   (1)   If any subdivision, development or land use is found to be in
violation of this chapter, the Administrator or his or her designee may, in
addition to all other remedies available either in law or in equity, institute
a civil penalty in the amount of $50; action or proceedings to restrain,
correct or abate the violation; to prevent occupancy of the building, structure
or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about
the premises. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   If the Administrator or the Enforcement Officer for the county
finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, the
Administrator or the Enforcement Officer shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Administrator or the
Enforcement Officer shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land,
buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures, or of
additions, alterations or structural changes to illegal structures;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any action
authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of
its provisions. If a ruling of the Administrator or the Enforcement Officer is
questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the
Watershed Board of Adjustment.
   (C)   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land
located within the jurisdiction of the county, thereafter subdivides his or her
land in violation of this chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land
before the plat has been properly approved under this chapter and recorded in
the office of the Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the
transaction from this penalty. The county may bring an action for injunction of
any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance or sale of land, and the court
shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the
offending party to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994; Ord. passed 7-15-2002)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
   
52.01   Septic tank inspection
§ 52.01 SEPTIC TANK INSPECTION.
   (A)   The fee imposed by the Albemarle Regional Health Services for the
annual inspection of provisional septic tanks or other innovative septic
systems in the county may be billed and payable in the same manner as property
taxes, and in the case of nonpayment, may be collected in any manner by which
real or personal property taxes can be collected. The annual inspection fee is
due and payable upon invoice by the Albemarle Regional Health Services and at
that time becomes a lien on the land described in the invoice or tax bill that
includes the annual inspection fee.
   (B)   Fees imposed and due for the annual inspection of provisional septic
tanks or other innovative septic systems in the county from April 7, 1998,
until the effective date of this section may be billed and payable in the same
manner as property taxes and in the case of nonpayment, may be collected in any
manner by which real or personal property taxes can be collected and is a lien
on the land described in the invoice or tax bill that includes the annual
inspection fee.
(Ord. 97-1, passed 4-7-1997; Ord. 98-1, passed 4-6-1998; Ord. 00-03, passed 5-
15-2000)
CHAPTER 53: STORMWATER
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Title, enactment and preamble
   
53.02   Short title
   
53.03   Authority
   
53.04   Findings
   
53.05   Purpose
   
53.06   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
53.07   Interpretation
   
53.08   Design manual
   
53.09   Relationship to other laws, regulations and private agreements
   
53.10   Severability
   
53.11   Effective date and transitional provisions
   
53.12   Definitions
Administration and Procedures
   
53.25   Review and decision-making entities
   
53.26   Review and approval procedures
   
53.27   Applications for approval
   
53.28   Approvals
   
53.29   Appeals
Standards
   
53.40   General standards
   
53.41   Development standards
   
53.42   Comprehensive watershed plan
   
53.43   Standards for stormwater control measures
   
53.44   Variances
Enforcement and Violations
   
53.55   General
   
53.56   Remedies and penalties
   
53.57   Procedures
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 TITLE, ENACTMENT AND PREAMBLE.
   (A)   An ordinance, in pursuance of the authority granted by G.S. Chapter
153A, Article 18, (parts 1, 2 and 3), including particularly but not limited to
G.S. §§ 153A-324, 153A-330, 153A-331 and 153A-340, and other related laws, for
the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare; to provide for the establishment of a stormwater ordinance within
Pasquotank County; to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof; and to
supersede any ordinances in conflict herewith.
   (B)   Whereas, the Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners deem it
necessary, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and morals or
general welfare of the county to enact such an ordinance; and whereas, the
Pasquotank County Planning Board has given reasonable consideration and
approval of the stormwater ordinance.
   (C)   Now, therefore, the Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners does
hereby ordain and enact into law throughout the unincorporated areas of
Pasquotank County the following articles and sections, this sixteenth day of
February, 2009.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be officially known as “The Pasquotank County Stormwater
Ordinance.” It is referred to herein as “this chapter.”
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.03 AUTHORITY.
   The Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners is authorized to adopt this
chapter pursuant to North Carolina law, including, but not limited to Chapter
153A, Article 18 (Parts 1, 2 and 3) of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.04 FINDINGS.
   It is hereby determined that:
   (A)   Development and redevelopment alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, soil
erosion, stream channel erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution, and
sediment transport and deposition, as well as reducing groundwater recharge.
   (B)   These changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased quantities
of water-borne pollutants and alterations: in hydrology that are harmful to
public health and safety as well as to the natural environment; and these
effects can be managed and minimized by applying proper design and well-planned
controls to manage stormwater runoff from development sites.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.05 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and
enhance the public health, safety, environment and general establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-
development stormwater runoff and nonpoint and point source pollution
associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that
proper management of construction-related and post-development stormwater
runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure;
safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare; and protect water and
aquatic resources.
   (B)   Specific. This chapter seeks to meet its general purpose through the
following specific objectives and means:
      (1)   Establishing decision-making processes for development that protect
the integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
      (2)   Requiring that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-
development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as
practicable for the applicable design storm to reduce flooding, streambank
erosion, nonpoint and point source pollution and increases in stream
temperature, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic
habitats;
      (3)   Establishing minimum post-development stormwater management
standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater
runoff quantity and quality;
      (4)   Establishing design and review criteria for the construction,
function, and use of structural stormwater BMPs that may be used to meet the
minimum post-development stormwater management standards;
      (5)   Encouraging the use of better management and site design practices,
such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the preservation of
greenspace, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to the maximum extent
practicable;
      (6)   Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review,
approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.06 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   General. Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this
chapter shall be applicable to all development and redevelopment, within
Pasquotank County outside the jurisdiction of any municipality, including, but
not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading
applications, unless exempt pursuant to division (B) of this section,
Exemptions.
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Development that cumulatively disturbs less than 10,000 square feet
and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale is exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Redevelopment that cumulatively disturbs less than 10,000 square
feet and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale is exempt
from the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Development and redevelopment that disturb less than 10,000 square
feet are not exempt if such activities are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, even though multiple, separate or distinct activities take
place at different times on different schedules.
      (4)   Family subdivisions approved pursuant to the Pasquotank County
Subdivision Ordinance consisting of a new lot and a residual parcel.
      (5)   Activities that are exempt from permit requirements of Section 404
of the federal Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing
farming and forestry activities) are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   No development or redevelopment until compliance and permit. No
development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or unless exempted. No development for which a
permit is required pursuant to this chapter shall occur except in compliance
with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.07 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Meaning and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the general and
specific purposes set forth in §
53.05 Purpose. If a different or more specific meaning is given for a term
defined elsewhere in Pasquotank County’s Code of Ordinances, the meaning and
application of the term in this chapter shall control for purposes of
application of this chapter.
   (B)   Text controls in event of conflict. In the event of a conflict or
inconsistency between the text of this chapter and any heading, caption,
figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
   (C)   Authority for interpretation. The Stormwater Administrator has
authority to determine the interpretation of this chapter. Any person may
request an interpretation by submitting a written request to the Stormwater
Administrator, who shall respond in writing within 30 days. The Stormwater
Administrator shall keep on file a record of all written interpretations of
this chapter.
   (D)   References to statutes, regulations, and documents.  Whenever
reference is made to a resolution, chapter, statute, regulation, manuals
(including the Pasquotank County Stormwater Design Manual [(hereinafter the
“Design Manual”) or the State of North Carolina Best Management Design Manual]
or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of
such that has been finalized and published with due provision for notice and
comment, unless otherwise specifically stated.
   (E)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline
or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by
Pasquotank County, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next
day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by Pasquotank County.
References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
   (F)   Delegation of authority. Any act authorized by this chapter to be
carried out by the Stormwater Administrator of Pasquotank County may be carried
out by his or her designee.
   (G)   Usage.
      (1)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words “shall,” “must,” and
“will” are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision. The words “may” and “should” are permissive in
nature.
       (2)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: The word “and” indicates that all
connected items, conditions, provisions and events apply. The word “or”
indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events apply.
      (3)   Tense, plurals, and gender. Words used in the present tense include
the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number
and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the
particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine
gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
   (H)   Measurement and computation. Lot area refers to the amount of
horizontal land area contained inside the lot lines of a lot or site.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.08 DESIGN MANUAL.
   (A)   Reference to design manual. The Stormwater Administrator shall use the
policy, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and
standards, in the design manual as the basis for decisions about stormwater
permits and about the design, implementation and performance of drainage
attenuating measures.
   (B)   Relationship of design manual to other laws and regulations. If the
specifications or guidelines of the design manual are more restrictive or apply
a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent
application of the specifications or guidelines in the design manual.
   (C)   Changes to standards and specifications. If the standards,
specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the
design manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for
approval pursuant to this chapter but prior to approval, the new information
shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in
implementing this chapter with regard to the application.
   (D)   Amendments to design manual.  The design manual may be updated and
expanded from time to time, based on advancements in technology and
engineering, improved knowledge of local conditions, or local monitoring or
maintenance experience. Prior to amending or updating the design manual,
proposed changes shall be generally publicized and made available for review,
and an opportunity for comment by interested persons shall be provided.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.09 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Conflict of laws. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any
other chapter, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of
this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other chapter, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this chapter
imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule,
regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive
or imposes higher protective standards for human or environmental health,
safety, and welfare shall control.
   (B)   Private agreements. This chapter is not intended to revoke or repeal
any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the
regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such an easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern. Nothing in this chapter shall modify
or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or
restriction shall not legitimize any failure to comply with this chapter. In no
case shall Pasquotank County be obligated to enforce the provisions of any
easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.11 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Effective date. This chapter shall take effect on February 16, 2009.
   (B)   Final approvals, complete applications. All development and
redevelopment projects for which complete and full applications were submitted
and approved by Pasquotank County prior to the effective date of this chapter
and which remain valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise terminated at
the time of development or redevelopment shall be exempt from complying with
all provisions of this chapter dealing with the control and/or management of
postconstruction runoff, but shall be required to comply with all other
applicable provisions. A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior
to the effective date of this chapter if it has been approved by all necessary
government units, it remains valid, unexpired, unrevoked and not otherwise
terminated, and it shows:
      (1)   For the initial or first phase of development, the type and
intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels, including at a minimum, the
boundaries of the project and a subdivision plan that has been approved.
      (2)   For any subsequent phase of development, sufficient detail so that
implementation of the requirements of this chapter to that phase of development
would require a material change in that phase of the plan.
   (C)   Violations continue. Any violation of provisions existing on the
effective date of this chapter shall continue to be a violation under this
chapter and be subject to penalties and enforcement under this chapter unless
the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.12 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning set forth in this section, unless other provisions of this chapter
specifically indicate otherwise.
   BUILT-UPON AREA (BUA). That portion of a development project that is covered
by impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not limited to,
buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as roads, parking lots, and paths;
and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. BUILT-UPON AREA does not
include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or pervious
or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving material
absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving material.
   DEPARTMENT.  The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.
   DESIGN MANUAL. Pasquotank County Stormwater Design Manual. The stormwater
design manual is provided to establish the design criteria for stormwater
conveyance systems and stormwater attenuating systems within the county. Design
storm definitions and technical requirements are provided, The design manual
will be revised and modified as new technology and information on the County’s
drainage ways and basins become available and that information is applied to
better protect the health and welfare of its citizens.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of
built-upon area or that otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.
   DIVISION. The Division of Water Quality in the Department.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. Any area where multiple separate
and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities will occur under one
plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation (including but not
limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, loan
application, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design)
or physical demarcation (including but not limited to boundary signs, lot
stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that construction activities may occur
on a specific plot.
   OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term or
commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding proprietary rights in
the property or having legal power of management and control of the property.
OWNER shall include long-term commercial tenants; management entities, such as
those charged with or engaged in the management of properties for profit; and
every person or entity having joint ownership of the property. A secured lender
not in possession of the property does not constitute an owner, unless the
secured lender is included within the meaning of OWNER under another
description in this definition, such as a management entity.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any development on previously-developed land, other than a
rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area and
provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development.
   STRUCTURAL BMP. A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or filter
pollutants from stormwater runoff; to alter or reduce stormwater runoff
velocity, amount, turning, or other characteristics; to approximate the pre-
development hydrology on a developed site; or to achieve any combination of
these goals. STRUCTURAL BMP includes physical practices such as constructed
wetlands, vegetative practices, filter strips, grassed swales, and other
methods installed or created on real property. STRUCTURAL BMP is synonymous
with “structural practice,” “stormwater control facility,” “stormwater control
practice,” “stormwater treatment practice,” “stormwater management practice,”
“stormwater control measures,” “structural stormwater treatment systems,” and
similar terms used in this chapter.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS. For the purposes of determining whether sufficient
progress has been made on an approved plan, one or more of the following
construction activities toward the completion of a site or subdivision plan
shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting grading activity on a
continuous basis and not discontinued for more than 30 days; or installation
and approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a building permit for the
construction and approval of a building foundation. SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS for
purposes of determining whether an approved plan is null and void is not
necessarily the same as “substantial expenditures” used for determining vested
rights pursuant to applicable law.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
§ 53.25 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES.
   Stormwater Administrator.
   (A)   Designation. A Stormwater Administrator shall be designated by the
Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners to administer and enforce this
chapter.
   (B)   Powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties that may be
conferred by other provisions of the Code of Ordinances and other laws, the
Stormwater Administrator shall have the following powers and duties under this
chapter:
      (1)   To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
applications for approval of plans pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   To make determinations and render interpretations of this chapter;
      (3)   To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal
and review of applications and appeals, to review and make recommendations to
the Board of Commissioners on applications for development or redevelopment
approvals;
      (4)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with its
enforcement provisions;
      (5)   To maintain records, maps, forms and other official materials as
relate to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and administration of this
chapter;
      (6)   To provide expertise and technical assistance to the Board of
Commissioners, upon request;
      (7)   To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the
powers and duties of the Stormwater Administrator; and
      (8)   To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.26 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Permit required; must apply for permit. A stormwater permit is
required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to this
chapter. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly submitted and
reviewed permit application, pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Effect of permit.
      (1)   A stormwater permit shall govern the design, installation, and
construction of stormwater management and control practices on the site,
including structural BMPs and elements of site design for stormwater management
other than structural BMPs.
      (2)   The permit is intended to provide a mechanism for the review,
approval, and inspection of the approach to be used for the management and
control of stormwater for the development or redevelopment site consistent with
the requirements of this chapter. The permit does not continue in existence
indefinitely after the completion of the project.
   (C)   Authority to file applications. All applications required pursuant to
this chapter shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator by the land
owner or the land owner’s duly authorized agent.
   (D)   Establishment of application requirements, schedule, and fees.
      (1)   Application contents and form. The Stormwater Administrator shall
establish requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall
amend and update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the
stormwater permit narrative application shall describe in detail how post-
development stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design of all
stormwater facilities and practices, and how the proposed project will meet the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Submission schedule. The Stormwater Administrator shall establish a
submission schedule for applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by
which complete applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring that
there is adequate time to review applications; and that the various stages in
the review process are accommodated.
      (3)   Permit review fees. The Board of Commissioners shall establish
permit review fees as well as policies regarding refund of any fees upon
withdrawal of an application, and may amend and update the fees and policies
from time to time.
      (4)   Administrative manual. For applications required under this
chapter, the Stormwater Administrator shall compile the application
requirements, submission schedule, fee schedule, a copy of this chapter, and
information on how and where to obtain the design manual in an administrative
manual, which shall be made available to the public.
   (E)   Submittal of complete application.
      (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator
pursuant to the application submittal schedule in the form established by the
Stormwater Administrator, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant
to this section.
      (2)   An application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it
contains all elements of a complete application pursuant to this chapter, along
with the appropriate fee. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that an
application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient
elements and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete
application. However, the submittal of an incomplete application shall not
suffice to meet a deadline contained in the submission schedule established
above.
   (F)   Review. The Stormwater Administrator, with the assistance of the
county’s Drainage Engineer, if necessary, shall review the application and
determine whether the application complies with the standards of this chapter.
      (1)   Approval. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the
application complies with the standards of this chapter, the Stormwater
Administrator shall approve the application. The Stormwater Administrator may
impose conditions of approval as needed to ensure compliance with this chapter.
The conditions shall be included as part of the approval.
      (2)   Fails to comply. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the
application fails to comply with the standards of this chapter, the Stormwater
Administrator shall notify the applicant and shall indicate how the application
fails to comply. The applicant shall have an opportunity to submit a revised
application.
      (3)   Revision and subsequent review. 
         (a)   A complete revised application shall be reviewed by the
Stormwater Administrator after its re-submittal and shall be approved, approved
with conditions or disapproved.
         (b)   If a revised application is not re-submitted within 60 calendar
days from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be
considered withdrawn. An applicant may request a 30 day extension from the
Stormwater Administrator which may be granted at their discretion. After that
extension a new submittal with the appropriate review fee shall be required for
a future review of the project.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.27 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Concept plan and consultation meeting. Before a stormwater management
permit application is deemed complete, the Stormwater Administrator (or the
County's Drainage Engineer, if necessary) and the design consultant shall meet
to review a concept plan for the post-construction stormwater management system
to be utilized in the proposed development project. This consultation meeting
shall take place before the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or
other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to
discuss the post-construction stormwater management measures necessary for the
proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities
and potential approaches to stormwater management designs before formal site
design engineering is commenced. Applicable local watershed studies and plans,
and other relevant resource information should be consulted in the discussion
of the concept plan. To accomplish this goal, the following information should
be included in the concept plan, which should be submitted in advance of the
meeting:
      (1)   Existing conditions / proposed site plans. Existing conditions and
proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and
proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant
soils from soil surveys; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation;
proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed
roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
      (2)   Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of
natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the
commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of
soil conditions, forest cover, geologic features, topography, wetlands, and
native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of
other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as lakes, ponds,
floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well
setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to
environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development and stormwater management.
      (3)   Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic
concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system
including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater
controls; low-impact design elements; location of existing and proposed
conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow
paths; location of floodplain/ floodway limits; relationship of site to
upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of
any proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
   (B)   Stormwater management permit application. The stormwater management
permit application shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be
controlled and managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements
of this chapter, including §§
53.40 through
53.44 Standards. All such plans shall be prepared by a qualified registered
North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape
architect, and the engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape architect
shall perform services only in their area of competence, and shall verify that
the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the
submittal requirements for complete applications, that the designs and plans
are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies found in the
design manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with this
chapter.
The submittal shall include all of the information required in the submittal
checklist established by the Stormwater Administrator. Incomplete submittals
shall be treated pursuant to §
53.26(E).
   (C)   As-built plans and final approval. 
      (1)   Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy
shall be granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed project is in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plans and designs, and shall
submit actual “as built” plans for all stormwater management facilities or
practices after final construction is completed.
      (2)   The plans shall show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and practices and the field location, size,
depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices, as
installed. The designer of the stormwater management measures and plans shall
certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls, and
devices are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs and with the requirements of this chapter. A final inspection and
approval by the Stormwater Administrator shall occur before the release of any
performance securities.
   (D)   Other permits. No certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be
issued by the County Planning and Inspections Office without a final inspection
and approval by the Stormwater Administrator.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.28 APPROVALS.
   (A)   Effect of approval. Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward
with only the specific plans and activities authorized in the permit. The
approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from obtaining other
applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities.
   (B)   Time limit/ expiration. An approved plan shall become null and void if
the applicant fails to make substantial progress on the site within 24 months
after the date of approval by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of
Commissioners may grant a single, one-year extension of this time limit, for
good cause shown, upon receiving a written request from the applicant before
the expiration of the approved plan. In granting an extension, the Board of
Commissioners may require compliance with standards adopted since the original
application was submitted unless there has been substantial reliance on the
original permit and the change in standards would infringe the applicant’s
vested rights.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.29 APPEALS.
   (A)   Right of appeal. Any aggrieved person affected by any decision, order,
requirement, or determination relating to the interpretation or application of
this chapter made by the Stormwater Administrator, may file an appeal to the
Board of Commissioners within 30 days.
   (B)   Filing of appeal and procedures. 
      (1)   Appeals shall be taken within the specified time period by filing a
notice of appeal and specifying the grounds for appeal on forms provided by the
county. The Stormwater Administrator shall transmit to the Board of
Commissioners all documents constituting the record on which the decision
appealed from was taken.
      (2)   The hearing conducted by the Board of Commissioners shall be
conducted in the nature of a quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of
fact supported by competent, material evidence.
   (C)   Review by superior court. Every decision of the Board of Commissioners
shall be subject to superior court review by proceedings in the nature of
certiorari. Petition for review by the superior court shall be filed with the
clerk of superior court within 30 days after the latter of the following:
      (1)   The decision of the Board of Commissioners is filed; or
      (2)   A written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved
party who has filed a written request for such copy with the Clerk to the Board
of Commissioners at the time of its hearing of the case.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
STANDARDS
§ 53.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   All development and redevelopment to which this chapter applies shall comply
with the standards of this section (and the design manual).
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.41 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Stormwater runoff from the development shall be transported from the
development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   All built-upon area shall be at a minimum of 30 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters. A perennial or intermittent surface
water shall be deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on either
the most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle
topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An
exception to this requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not
present in accordance with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B .0233 (3)(a) or
similar site-specific determination made using Division-approved methodology.
   (C)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as a recorded deed
restriction or protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
   (D)   North Carolina State stormwater quality requirements shall be met and
all applicable permits from Stormwater and Land Management shall be obtained
prior to preliminary plan approval from the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.42 COMPREHENSIVE WATERSHED PLAN.
   The county reserves this section acknowledging that studies are underway
which may direct or modify stormwater management in some watersheds.
Directives, measures, and requirements unique to a watershed will be included
as appendices to the design manual.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.43 STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   Evaluation according to contents of design manual. All stormwater
control measures as required by the design manual and stormwater treatment
practices (also referred to as Best Management Practices, or BMPs) required by
state permitting shall be evaluated by the Stormwater Administrator according
to the policies, criteria, and information, including technical specifications
and standards and the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice, in
both the design manual and State of North Carolina Best Management Design
Manual. The Stormwater Administrator shall determine whether proposed BMPs will
be adequate to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Determination of adequacy; presumptions and alternatives. Stormwater
attenuating practices that are designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the criteria and specifications in the design manual will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quantity performance standards of this
chapter. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or practices not
designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and specifications in
the design manual, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that
the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water quantity performance standards
of this chapter. The Stormwater Administrator may require the applicant to
provide the documentation, calculations, and examples necessary for the
Stormwater Administrator to determine whether such an affirmative showing is
made.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.44 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person may petition the county for a variance granting permission
to use the person’s land in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. To
qualify for a variance, the petitioner must show all of the following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this
chapter.
      (2)   The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as the location, size, or topography of the property.
      (3)   The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this chapter; will secure public safety and welfare; and will
preserve substantial justice.
   (B)   The county may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions and
safeguards upon any variance it grants.
   (C)   Statutory exceptions. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section,
exceptions from the 30-foot landward location of built-upon area requirement as
well as the deed restrictions and protective covenants requirements shall be
granted in any of the following instances:
      (1)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing,
railroad crossing, bridge, airport facility, or utility crossing as long as it
is located, designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance,
provide maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation,
have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water
quality to the maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.
      (2)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater
management practice or facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility,
including, but not limited to, water, sewer, or gas construction and
maintenance corridor, as long as it is located 15 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters and as long as it is located,
designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance, provide maximum
nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation, have the least
adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water quality to the
maximum extent practicable through the use of BMPs.
      (3)   A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating
that, considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or
density of the proposed activity and all alternative designs, the basic project
purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a manner which would avoid or
result in less adverse impact to surface waters.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
§ 53.55 GENERAL.
   (A)   Authority to enforce. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
by the Stormwater Administrator, his or her designee, or any authorized agent
of the county. Whenever this section refers to the Stormwater Administrator, it
includes his or her designee as well as any authorized agent of the county.
   (B)   Violation unlawful. Any failure to comply with an applicable
requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this chapter, or
the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment
approval or authorization granted pursuant to this chapter, is unlawful and
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Each day a separate offense.  Each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense.
   (D)   Responsible persons/ entities.
      (1)   Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether
actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter,
repair or maintain any structure, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of
this chapter shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement
actions in accordance with this section. Persons subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth herein may include any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who participates in,
assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or
constitutes a violation of this chapter, or fails to take appropriate action,
so that a violation of this chapter results or persists; or an owner, any
tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use or development of the property on which the
violation occurs.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subchapter, responsible person(s) shall
include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Person maintaining condition resulting in or constituting
violation. An architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or
any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or
maintains a condition that constitutes a violation of this chapter fails to
take appropriate action, so that a violation of this chapter results or
persists.
         (b)   Responsibility for land or use of land. The owner of the land on
which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person
who is responsible for stormwater controls or practices pursuant to a private
agreement or public document, or any person who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of the property.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 53.56 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this chapter, whether
civil or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy
provided by law, and may be exercised in any order.
   (A)   Remedies.
      (1)   Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The Stormwater
Administrator or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of
occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being
constructed on the site and served by the stormwater practices in question
until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures
set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations
described therein.
      (2)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. As
long as a violation of this chapter continues and remains uncorrected, the
Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may withhold, and the Board
of Commissioners may disapprove, any request for permit or development approval
or authorization provided for by this chapter or the zoning, subdivision, and/
or building regulations for the land on which the violation occurs.
      (3)   Injunction, abatements, etc. The Stormwater Administrator may
institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or
prohibitory injunction and order of abatement to correct a violation of this
ordinance. Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the full range
of equitable remedies provided in the General Statutes or at common law.
      (4)   Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, etc. If the
violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by G.S. § 160A-193, the
Stormwater Administrator may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs
to be assessed as a lien against the property.
      (5)   Stop work order. The Stormwater Administrator may issue a stop work
order to the person(s) violating this chapter. The stop work order shall remain
in effect until the person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the
notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations
described therein. The stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable
the person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or
violations.
   (B)   Civil penalties. Violation of this chapter may subject the violator to
a civil penalty to be recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt if
the violator does not pay the penalty within 30 days after notice of the
violation is issued by the Stormwater Administrator. Civil penalties may be
assessed up to $50 per day.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009; Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
§ 53.57 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Initiation/complaint. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or
is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint shall state fully the alleged violation and the basis thereof, and
shall be filed with the Stormwater Administrator, who shall record the
complaint. The complaint shall be investigated promptly by the Stormwater
Administrator.
   (B)   Inspection. The Stormwater Administrator shall have the authority,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land,
building, structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Notice of violation and order to correct. 
      (1)   When the Stormwater Administrator finds that any building,
structure, or land is in violation of this chapter, the Stormwater
Administrator shall notify, in writing, the property owner or other person
violating this chapter. 'The notification shall indicate the nature of the
violation, contain the address or other description of the site upon which the
violation is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the violation, and
give a deadline for correcting the violation. If civil penalties are to be
assessed, the notice of violation shall also contain a statement of the civil
penalties to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the time within which
they must be paid or be subject to collection as a debt.
      (2)   The Stormwater Administrator may deliver the notice of violation
and correction order personally, by the County Sheriff’s Department or County
Code Enforcement Officer, by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, or by any means authorized for the service of documents by Rule 4 of
the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
      (3)   If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time,
as provided in the notification, the Stormwater Administrator may take
appropriate action under this chapter to correct and abate the violation and to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Extension of time. A person who receives a notice of violation and
correction order, or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may
submit to the Stormwater Administrator a written request for an extension of
time for correction of the violation. On determining that the request includes
enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected within the
specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the person requesting
the extension, the Stormwater Administrator may extend the time limit as is
reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but
not exceeding 30 days. The Stormwater Administrator may grant an additional 30-
day extension in addition to the foregoing extension if the violation cannot be
corrected within the permitted time due to circumstances beyond the control of
the person violating this chapter. The Stormwater Administrator may grant an
extension only by written notice of extension, The notice of extension shall
state the date prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator
will be subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and
correction order.
   (E)   Enforcement after time to correct. After the time has expired to
correct a violation, including any extension(s) if authorized by the Stormwater
Administrator, the Stormwater Administrator shall determine if the violation is
corrected. If the violation is not corrected, the Stormwater Administrator may
act to impose one or more of the remedies and penalties authorized by this
chapter.
   (F)   Emergency enforcement. If delay in correcting a violation would
seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this chapter or pose an
immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then the Stormwater
Administrator may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so
ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The Stormwater Administrator may
seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or
penalty authorized by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
71.   GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS
CHAPTER 70: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Parking on county-owned property
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 PARKING ON COUNTY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Property designated. The provisions of this section shall apply to
real property owned by the county and held and maintained for governmental and
related purposes to provide services to its citizens.
   (B)   Posting. The county-owned property referred to in division (A) above
shall be designated as county-owned by posted sign or placard.
   (C)   Designation of enforcement officials. The County Manager may designate
the officials as deemed advisable to administer and enforce the rules and
regulations contained in this section, in addition to those officials set
forth.
   (D)   Authorization for parking by county officers, employees; and the like.
The County Manager may authorize county officials, agents or employees or other
officials to park on county-owned property referred to in division (A) above,
the authorization to be evidenced by a tag, decal or seal to be issued and
affixed to the vehicle authorized to be parked.
   (E)   Designation of public parking areas. The County Manager may authorize
and prescribe public parking areas for those persons properly utilizing
facilities located upon county-owned property.
   (F)   Unauthorized parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle upon the county-owned property referred to in division (A)
above, unless the person has been authorized to park, as provided in this
section. Each hour, or fraction thereof, during which a vehicle remains parked
in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
   (G)   Information to be recorded; notice. Whenever any motor vehicle is
found parked or stopped in violation of this section, the county employee
designated to inspect county-owned lots for the purpose of ascertaining the
existence of unauthorized parking thereon shall record the motor vehicle’s
registration license tag number and may take down or record any other
information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall
conspicuously affix to the vehicle a notice in writing on a form provided by
the county, for the driver or owner to answer to the charge of unauthorized
parking on county-owned property within 48 hours, during the hours and at the
place specified in the notice. The county employee affixing the notice shall
send one copy of the notice to the County Tax Collector. The county employee
shall record the name of the driver of the vehicle upon the notice if the
driver is present.
   (H)   Removal of vehicle.
      (1)   Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of this section may be
removed or towed away from the county-owned property by or under the direction
of the Department of General Services or the county to a storage area or
garage. The owner of the vehicle shall be deemed to have appointed the
Department of General Services as his or her agent for the purpose of arranging
for the transportation and safety storage of the vehicle and accepting a
warehouse receipt from the person or firm providing the transportation and
storage.
      (2)   The owner of the vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof,
shall pay to the county all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and
storage of the vehicle and any fines or penalties due for violation of this
section.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 2016-1, passed 9-6-2016) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person violating §
70.01(F) may pay to the County Tax Collector, within 48 hours after the notice
prescribed in §
70.01(G) has been attached to his or her vehicle, a penalty of $5 in full
satisfaction of the violation. The penalty may be paid in person or it may be
mailed to the Tax Collector within the time in the envelope attached to the
vehicle with the notice.
      (2)   If a person violating §
70.01(F) does not pay the penalty prescribed in division (A)(1) above within
the specified time, a complaint shall be filed and a warrant of arrest or
summons issued for the violation. Upon conviction, the person shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as prescribed in G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   The penalties provided for in this chapter, as and when collected,
shall be paid into the School Fund of the county.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 2016-1, passed 9-6-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to operate off-street parking facilities, see G.S. §§ 153A-274 et
seq.
   Authority to remove motor vehicle parked on county-owned property, see G.S.
§ 153A-170
CHAPTER 71: GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS
Section
   
71.01   Purpose, intent and findings
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Policy statement and liability disclaimer
   
71.04   Rules and regulations
   
71.05   Permit required
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PURPOSE, INTENT AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 153A-245, the county may by ordinance regulate the
operation of golf carts as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01 (12a) on any public
street, road or highway where the speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less
within the county that is located in any unincorporated areas of the county or
on any property owned or leased by the county.
   (B)   Further pursuant to G.S. § 153A-245, the county may by ordinance
require the registration of golf carts, charge a fee for the registration,
specify who is authorized to operate golf carts, and specify the required
equipment, load limits, and the hours and methods of operation of golf carts.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners desires to allow the use of golf carts
within the county in accordance with state law and local law while at the same
time preserve and address the interest of public safety associated with such
use.
   (D)   The county finds that unregulated use of golf carts on public streets
and roads is detrimental to the safety of the citizens of the county. This
chapter is intended to apply only to Newbegun Land Subdivision. The chapter may
be expanded to other areas of the county at a later date or to the entire
county.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of
exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 71.03 POLICY STATEMENT AND LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.
   This chapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety under which
the provisions of G.S. § 153A-245 which provides counties with the authority to
regulate the use of golf carts that have not been outfitted and registered as
required by state law. Generally, golf carts (hereinafter “carts”) that have
not been outfitted and registered are not designated or manufactured to be used
anywhere other than golf courses, and the county in no way advocates or
endorses their operation elsewhere within the county. The county, by regulating
such operation, is merely trying to address obvious safety issues, and adoption
of this chapter is not to be relied upon as a determination that operation is
safe or advisable if done in accordance with this chapter. All persons who
operate or ride upon carts do so at their own risk and peril, and must be
observant of and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including
their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The county has
no liability under any theory of liability for permitting carts to operate in
the county. The owner and operator of the cart is responsible for any liability
involved in using the cart. The county does not encourage cart operation and
does not represent that the operation of carts under these rules will render
cart operation safe and without risk to the driver and passenger(s) of a cart.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 71.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Carts that are not equipped and registered as required by the State
Motor Vehicle Law may only operate on public streets and roads within the
county as set forth herein and in accordance with these rules and regulations.
Operation of carts in violation of these rules and regulations shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of §
71.99 or, in egregious cases, may constitute reckless driving as defined in the
North Carolina General Statutes.
   (B)   All carts operated on the streets must have a valid permit sticker
from the County Sheriff’s Office. A yearly fee as established by the County
Commissioners on a per cart basis will be charged by the County Sheriff’s
Office for a permit sticker (see Pasquotank Fee Schedule below). There will be
no prorated registrations nor will there be any refunds issued. A 31-day re-
registration period for all previously registered golf carts will be permitted
during the month of January each year for an annual registration charge per the
Pasquotank Fee Schedule. Owners re-registering after January 31 of each year
will be considered expired until re-registered and not permitted to use the
golf carts in the associated areas. Driving a golf cart without a current
registration will result in a fine as determined by the Pasquotank County Fee
Schedule. A list of all registrations will be maintained by the Pasquotank
County Sheriff's Office. The golf cart owner is responsible for maintaining
their registration, no notices will be mailed. If a golf cart is purchased
during the calendar year, the fee will not be prorated and would be the amount
established as per the Pasquotank County Fee Schedule.
   PASQUOTANK COUNTY
   Sheriff's Office Fee Schedule
Golf Cart Permits
 
Annual Fee                     $25.00
Late Listing Fee (for sticker) $50.00
Non-Compliance                 $150.00
 
   (C)   Any person who operates a cart on a street in the county must adhere
to all applicable state laws concerning the possession and use of alcoholic
beverages and all illegal drugs, as well as all other state traffic laws.
   (D)   Any person who operates a cart in the county and fails to receive or
properly display a county permit sticker will be subject to state law requiring
registration and any other applicable laws, in addition to the requirements of
this chapter.
   (E)   Any person who operates a cart in the county takes full responsibility
for all liability associated with operating the cart.
   (F)   Carts may not be operated on or alongside a public road or street with
a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
   (G)   This chapter is intended to apply to the Newbegun Land and Mt. Hermon
Village Subdivisions.
   (H)   Drivers of carts shall stay to the far right of the traveled portion
of the road and yield to the right-of-way to overtake motor vehicles.
   (I)   Any cart operating between the time of one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with and have in use headlights.
   (J)   Carts shall be equipped with at least one operational rear-view mirror
and at least two rear reflectors. Red rear reflectors must be at least three
inches in width.
   (K)   Persons are prohibited from standing on a cart while the cart is in
operation.
   (L)   The maximum occupancy of a cart traveling on the street is one person
per bucket seat or two people per bench seat.
   (M)   Children must be properly seated while a cart is in motion and may not
be transported in a negligent manner.
   (N)   If the cart is equipped with seat belts, all passengers are to wear
the seat belts at all times the cart is in motion.
   (O)   A driver must be at least 16 years old and possess a valid state-
issued driver's license. Cart operators must carry their driver's license on
their person at all times while operating a cart on public streets and roads in
the county.
   (P)   No cart may be operated at a speed greater than reasonable and prudent
for the existing conditions, and in no instance at a speed greater than 20
miles per hour.
   (Q)   No cart may be operated in a careless or reckless manner.
   (R)   Carts shall not be operated on sidewalks.
   (S)   Carts shall not be operated on private property without the permission
and consent of the property owner, property manager or home owner's
association, if applicable.
   (T)   The County Sheriff’s Office’s interpretation of the above rules and
regulations are final. The County Sheriff’s Office will maintain its
interpretation in a written and published manner.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 10-17-2022)
§ 71.05 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Cart owners must complete the golf cart owner registration form and
show proof of license to drive to the County Sheriff’s Office. The completed
forms will be maintained by the County Sheriff’s Office. Visible proof of
compliance must be attached to a conspicuous place on the cart.
   (B)   The County Sheriff’s Office is hereby authorized to issue a permit for
a fee as published by the County Fee Schedule to all appropriate applicants,
one per cart. When issuing this permit the County Sheriff’s Office staff shall
require the applicant to sign a statement certifying he or she has read the
provisions on the county's ordinance on cart usage as set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation and/or repeated violations of this chapter may result in
any combination of the following: a fine, loss of privileges (loss of permit
sticker) for up to one year and/or revocation of said permit, and/or
prosecution in a court of law.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. §
14-4, punishable by a fine of not more than $150 or imprisonment for not more
than 30 days, or both fined and imprisonment. In addition, a violation of this
ordinance may be punished with a fine as published by the Board of
Commissioners for each violation, provided, however, that operating a cart
under the influence of an impairing substance, alcohol or drugs, on a public
road or highway is not a violation of this chapter, but a violation of state
law, and is publishable as provided in G.S. Chapter 20.
   (C)   The County Sheriff’s Office retains the right to refuse to issue any
permit. The County Sheriff retains the right to revoke any permit for up to 12
months in the event of repeated violations of this chapter or conviction of
driving while impaired and/or reckless driving.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Title
   
90.02   Purpose and objectives
   
90.03   Definitions
   
90.04   Jurisdiction
   
90.05   Complaints
   
90.06   Abandonment prohibited; removal
   
90.07   Nuisance vehicles
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Chapter Regulating
Abandoned and Junked Motor Vehicles in Pasquotank County.”
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 90.02 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   The purpose and objectives of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   To ensure the public health, safety and general welfare by providing
controls on the removal and disposal of abandoned and junked motor vehicles;
   (B)   To prohibit abandoned or junked motor vehicles from being disposed of
by leaving them on public or private property;
   (C)   To eliminate the present accumulation of abandoned and junked motor
vehicles;
   (D)   To prevent future accumulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles;
and
   (E)   To promote or enhance community, neighborhood or area appearance.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 90.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words in the
singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular;
the word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that:
      (1)   Is left on public grounds or county-owned property in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left for longer than 24 hours on property owned or operated by
the county;
      (3)   Is left for longer than two hours on private property without the
consent of the owner, occupant or lessee of the property; or
      (4)   Is left for longer than seven days on public grounds.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of Pasquotank County,
North Carolina.
   COUNTY. Pasquotank County, North Carolina.
   HEALTH HAZARD. An abandoned or junked motor vehicle shall be declared to be
a HEALTH HAZARD when its condition is such that the motor vehicle can or does
harbor diseases, furnish shelter and breeding places for mosquitoes and other
insects, or become a breeding ground and harbor for rats and other pests.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that does not display a current license
plate and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes any machine designed or intended to travel over land
or water by self-propulsion or while attached to a self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance and
unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects, or a
breeding ground or harbor for rats or other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation eight
or more inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of combustible items such as gasoline,
oil, other flammable or explosive materials including but not limited to boxes,
paper, old clothes, rags, refuse or any other combustible materials or objects
of alike nature;
      (5)   One which has parts thereof which may fall and injure members of
the public, or one which may have parts which fall or be closed and become an
area of confinement which may not be released for opening from the inside;
      (6)   One which is so situated and located that there is a danger of the
vehicle falling, rolling, turning over or creating an unsafe movement such as
unattended, blocked or jacked vehicles;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges
of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Board of Commissioners.
   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND THE LIKE.
      (1)   Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, employee,
department or agency, without further qualification, it shall be construed to
be followed by the words “of Pasquotank County,” unless otherwise specifically
provided.
      (2)   A reference to an officer shall include the officer’s designated
representative.
   SAFETY HAZARD. An abandoned or junked motor vehicle shall be declared to be
a SAFETY HAZARD when its condition is such that the motor vehicle’s areas of
confinement, which cannot be opened from the inside, such as trunk compartments
and engine compartments or glass, windows or any exterior or interior fixtures
present physical dangers to the safety and well-being of children or other
persons.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 90.04 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall govern the removal and disposal of abandoned or junked
motor vehicles on public grounds and private property within the county and not
within a city unless specified below. However, this chapter shall govern the
removal and disposal of abandoned or junked motor vehicles on county-owned
property wherever located.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 90.05 COMPLAINTS.
   Prior to an investigation to determine whether a motor vehicle is an
abandoned or junked motor vehicle, a complaint must be submitted in writing
with the appropriate county officer or employee.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 90.06 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; REMOVAL.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle
on public grounds and private property within the unincorporated areas of the
county and on county-owned property wherever located.
      (2)   The county may remove, to a storage garage or area, abandoned motor
vehicles that are found to be in violation of this chapter. An abandoned motor
vehicle may not be removed from private property without the written request of
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises unless the Board of Commissioners
or a duly authorized county official or employee has declared the vehicle to be
a health or safety hazard. Appropriate county officers and employees may, upon
presentation of proper credentials, enter on any premises within the county
ordinance-making jurisdiction at any reasonable hour in order to determine if
any vehicles are health or safety hazards. The county may require a person
requesting the removal of an abandoned motor vehicle from private property to
indemnify the county against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of
vehicle’s removal, storage or sale.
      (3)   (a)   Whenever a vehicle with a valid registration plate or
registration is towed, the authorizing person shall immediately notify the
last-known registered owner of the vehicle of the following:
            1.   A description of the vehicle;
            2.   The place where the vehicle is stored;
            3.   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
            4.   The possible sale or other disposition of the vehicle;
            5.   The procedure owner must follow to have the vehicle returned
to him or her; and
            6.   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable
cause hearing on the towing.
         (b)   If the vehicle has a state registration plate or registration,
notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the vehicle is not
registered in this state, notice shall be given to the owner within 72 hours.
This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner
is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed to the owner’s last-known
address unless the owner or the owner’s agent waives this notice in writing.
         (c)   Whenever a vehicle with neither a valid registration plate nor
registration is towed, the authorizing person shall make reasonable efforts,
including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last-
known registered owner of the vehicle and notify the owner as required herein.
Unless the owner has otherwise been given notice, it is presumed that the
authorizing person has not made reasonable efforts, as required under this
section, unless notice that the vehicle would be towed was posted on the
windshield or some other conspicuous place at least ten days before the towing
actually occurred; except, no pre-towing notice need be given if the vehicle
impeded the flow of traffic or otherwise jeopardized the public welfare so that
immediate towing was necessary.
         (d)   The owner or any other person entitled to claim possession of
the vehicle may regain possession of the motor vehicle by paying to the county
all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage.
         (e)   The owner or any person entitled to claim possession of the
vehicle may request in writing a hearing to determine if probable cause existed
for the towing. The request shall be filed with the magistrate’s office in the
county. The magistrate shall set the hearing within 72 hours of his or her
receiving the request. The owner, the person who requested the hearing if
someone other than the owner, the tower and the person who authorized the
towing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   After holding an abandoned motor vehicle for 30 days after the date
of removal, the county may sell or dispose of the vehicle as follows:
         (a)   If the vehicle appears to be worth less than $100, the county
may dispose of the vehicle as a junked motor vehicle as provided herein. With
the consent of the owner, the county may remove and dispose of a motor vehicle
as a junked motor vehicle without regard to the value, condition or age of the
vehicle and without holding it for any prescribed period of time.
         (b)   If the vehicle appears to be worth $100 or more, the vehicle
shall be sold at public auction. The county shall give 20 days’ written notice
of the sale to the registered owner at his or her last-known address, to each
holder of a lien of record against the vehicle and to the State Division of
Motor Vehicles. Any person having an interest in the vehicle may redeem it at
any time before the sale by paying all costs accrued to date. The proceeds of
the sale shall be paid to the finance officer of the county, who shall pay to
the appropriate officers or persons the cost of removal, storage,
investigation, sale and liens in that order. The remainder of the proceeds of
sale, if any, shall be paid over to the registered owner, or held by the county
for 60 days if the registered owner cannot be located with reasonable
diligence. If the owner does not claim the remainder of the proceeds within 60
days after the day of the sale, the funds shall be deposited in the county’s
General Fund and the owner’s rights in the vehicle are extinguished.
      (5)   This section does not apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building,
to any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the county.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a junked motor
vehicle on public grounds and on private property within the unincorporated
areas of the county and on county-owned property wherever located.
      (2)   Junked motor vehicles found to be in violation of this chapter may
be removed to a storage garage or area, but no the vehicle shall be removed
from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee or
occupant of the premises unless the Board of Commissioners or a duly authorized
county officer or employee finds in writing that the aesthetic benefits of
removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property
owner. The finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the
apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or
enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following among other
relevant factors, may be considered:
         (a)   Protection of property values;
         (b)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;
         (c)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
         (d)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community;
and
         (e)   Promotion of comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
      (3)   The county may require any person requesting the removal of junked
motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the county against any loss,
expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale of the
junked motor vehicle.
      (4)   (a)   Whenever a vehicle with a valid registration plate or
registration is towed, the authorizing person shall immediately notify the
last-known registered owner of the vehicle of the following:
            1.   A description of the vehicle;
            2.   The place where the vehicle is stored;
            3.   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
            4.   The possible sale or other disposition of the vehicle;
            5.   The procedure owner must follow to have the vehicle returned
to him or her; and
            6.   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable
cause hearing on the towing.
         (b)   If the vehicle has a state registration plate or registration,
notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the vehicle is not
registered in this state, notice shall be given to the owner within 72 hours.
This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner
is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed to his or her last-known
address unless he or she or his or her agent waives this notice in writing.
         (c)   Whenever a vehicle with neither a valid registration plate nor
registration is towed, the authorizing person shall make reasonable efforts,
including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last-
known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the
information as required herein. Unless the owner has otherwise been given
notice, it is presumed that the authorizing person has not made reasonable
efforts, as required under this section, unless notice that the vehicle would
be towed was posted on the windshield or some other conspicuous place at least
ten days before the towing actually occurred; except, no pre-towing notice need
be given if the vehicle impeded the flow of traffic or otherwise jeopardized
the public welfare so that immediate towing was necessary.
         (d)   The owner or any other person entitled to claim possession of
the vehicle may regain possession of the motor vehicle by paying to the county
all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage.
         (e)   The owner or any person entitled to claim possession of the
vehicle may request in writing a hearing to determine if probable cause existed
for the towing. The request shall be filed with the magistrate’s office in the
county. The magistrate shall set the hearing within 72 hours of his or her
receiving the request. The owner, the person who requested the hearing if
someone other than the owner, the tower and the person who authorized the
towing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing. Any decision by
the magistrate may be appealed by either party to district court.
      (5)   After holding a junked motor vehicle for 15 days, the county may
destroy it or sell it at private sale as junk. Within 15 days after the final
disposition of a junked motor vehicle, the county shall notify the state
division of motor vehicles that the vehicle has been determined to be a junked
motor vehicle and has been disposed of as such. The notice shall contain as
full and accurate a description of the vehicle as can be reasonably determined.
The full proceeds of the sale of the junked motor vehicle shall be paid to the
finance officer of the county, who shall pay to the appropriate officers or
persons the cost of removal, storage, investigation, sale and liens, in that
order. The remainder of the proceeds of sale, if any, shall be held by the
county for 30 days after the day the vehicle is disposed of. The funds shall be
deposited in the county’s General Fund, and the owner’s rights in the vehicle
are extinguished.
      (6)   If a junked motor vehicle does not display a current license plate
and the vehicle identification numbers have been removed or defaced so as to be
illegible, the county may dispose of a junked motor vehicle under this section
rather than § 90.08(D). The county may destroy the vehicle or sell it at
private sale, without regard to value, after having held the vehicle for 48
hours. The proceeds shall be placed in the county’s General Fund.
      (7)   This section does not apply to the following:
         (a)   Any motor vehicle in the process of repair or restoration on
property under the control of the owner of the vehicle or property under the
control of the person repairing or restoring the vehicle. Visible evidence of
repair or restoration shall be apparent on a monthly basis; and
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is used on a regular basis for business
or personal use.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 NUISANCE VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle. Upon
investigation, proper officials of the Inspections Department may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as
defined in this chapter, and order the vehicle removed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The county may secure injunctions, abatement orders and other
appropriate equitable remedies to further ensure compliance as provided in G.S.
§ 153A-123.
   (B)    The violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as provided by
G.S. § 14-4 and in addition to, or lieu of, remedies authorized in division (A)
above shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. For a continuing offense, each day’s violation is a separate
offense.
   (C)   Any act constituting a violation of this chapter or a failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty of $50 for each day the violation continues. If the offender fails to
pay this penalty within 15 days after being cited for a violation, the penalty
may be recovered by the county in a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (D)   Any one, all or any combination of the foregoing penalties and
remedies may be used to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 93-3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord. 00-01, passed 3-6-2000; Ord. passed 11-21-
2022)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Establishment and composition of the Animal Control Board
   
91.03   General duties of the Animal Services Department
   
91.04   General duties of keepers of animals
   
91.05   Cruelty to animals
   
91.06   Adequate feed, water, shelter and tethering
   
91.07   Animals at large in certain subdivisions
   
91.08   Animals creating nuisance
   
91.09   Destruction of animals that cannot be seized by reasonable means
   
91.10   Setting humane animal traps and authority to receive trapped animals
   
91.11   Confinement and control of dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs
   
91.12   Requirements for dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs
   
91.13   Requirements for attack training facility
   
91.14   Confiscation of dangerous dog
   
91.15   Required notification to Animal Service Department by owners of
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog
   
91.16   Appeal process for potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog
   
91.17   Dogs designated as potentially dangerous dog or dangerous under prior
ordinance
   
91.18   Teasing and molesting
   
91.19   Law enforcement dogs excluded
   
91.20   Interference with enforcement of chapter
Rabies Control
   
91.30   Compliance with state law, subchapter as supplement to state law
   
91.31   Inoculation of dogs, cats and other animals
   
91.32   Inoculation tag and proof of vaccination for dogs and cats
   
91.33   Evidence of inoculation of cats and ferrets
   
91.34   Report and confinement of animals biting persons or showing symptoms of
rabies
   
91.35   Management of dogs, cats and ferrets exposed to rabies
   
91.36   Area-wide emergency quarantine
   
91.37   Postmortem diagnosis
   
91.38   Unlawful killing, releasing and the like of certain animals
   
91.39   Failure to surrender animal for quarantine or euthanasia
Community Cat Initiative
   
91.45   Community cats
   
91.46   Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return Programs
Impoundment
   
91.50   Generally
   
91.51   Notice to owner or community cat sponsoring organization
   
91.52   Redemption by owner or community cat caregiver generally
   
91.53   Destruction or adoption of unredeemed animals generally
   
91.54   Procedure with respect to redemption or adoption of unvaccinated dog or
cat
   
91.55   Suspected rabid animals not to be redeemed or adopted
   
91.56   Destruction of wounded or diseased animals
   
91.57   Immediate placement for adoption or destruction of animal surrendered
by owner
   
91.58   Effective date
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. To forsake, desert or give up an animal previously under the
custody or possession of a person without having secured another owner or
custodian or by failing to make reasonable arrangements for adequate care for
24 or more consecutive hours. A community cat caregiver or the Animal Services
Department who provides care to or has temporary custody of a community cat in
accordance with a Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return Program as defined in this
chapter is not deemed to have abandoned the cat.
   ABUSE.
      (1)   Overworking or overdriving any animal causing physical pain,
suffering or death to the animal;
      (2)   Beating, torturing, molesting, harassing, injuring, tormenting,
poisoning or mutilating any animal causing physical pain, suffering or death to
the animal;
      (3)   Failing to provide adequate medical attention for any sick,
diseased or injured animal in order to prevent physical pain, suffering or
death to the animal;
      (4)   Keeping any animal under conditions which cause physical pain,
suffering, disability or death to the animal or which increase the probability
of the transmission of disease;
      (5)   Conveying any type of animal in a motor vehicle or in a wagon or
trailer pulled by a motor vehicle or in a truck or the back of a truck in the
way as to cause physical pain, suffering, disability or death to the animal; or
      (6)   Placing or confining an animal or allowing an animal to be placed
or confined in a motor vehicle under the conditions or for the period of time
as to cause physical pain, suffering or death to the animal due to temperature,
lack of food or drink or other conditions.
   ADEQUATE FOOD. The provision at suitable intervals, not to exceed 24 hours,
of quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species and age, sufficient
to maintain nutrition in each animal. Such foodstuff shall be served in a
receptacle, dish or container.
   ADEQUATE WATER. The provision at suitable intervals, not to exceed 24 hours,
access to a supply of clean, fresh water suitable for drinking and provided in
a sanitary manner.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER. Shelter or portion of an outside enclosure which will keep
a non-aquatic animal dry and out of the direct sun, at a temperature level that
is healthful for the animal. The structure should have dry bedding such as hay
or straw for warmth during cold temperatures. For dogs, cats or other small
animals, the shelter shall be a wind and moisture resistant structure of
suitable size to accommodate the animal (the animal should be able to stand up
and turn around in the structure). The enclosure shall be stable and include
surrounding walls, a roof and a solid floor with an opening entrance large
enough to allow access to the animal. The animal must have access to shaded
areas other than the shelter during warm or hot days. If there are dangerous
temperatures all animals should be brought inside or provided with adequate
shelter. For all animals, the containment area shall be free of accumulated
waste and debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without
coming into contact with any such waste or debris and drainage shall be
provided to eliminate excess water or moisture. Shelters that are not adequate
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Underneath houses, outdoor steps, decks or stoops or underneath
motor vehicles;
      (2)   Inside metal barrels or cardboard box;
      (3)   Shelters that are prone to flood; and
      (4)   Shelters surrounded by debris, obstructions or impediments that may
endanger the animal; or
      (5)   Confinement of the animal in storage rooms, sheds or out buildings
without windows and proper ventilation if the Animal Services Department
determines the shelter is inadequate.
   ANIMAL. Excluding fish, any non-human vertebrate species, domestic or non-
domestic.
   ANIMAL BITE. An animal bite occurs when the teeth of the animal scratch or
break the skin of a human being or animal, regardless of the location of the
scratch or bite on the body.
   ANIMAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT. Pasquotank County Animal Services Department.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by the county for the purpose of
impounding and caring for all animals found running at large or otherwise
subject to impounding in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   AT LARGE. Any animal shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when it is not under the
restraint of a competent person when the animal is off the real property of the
owner. REAL PROPERTY in this context, includes curtilage and does not include
public rights-of-way or easements.
   ATTACK. An approach to a person by an unrestrained animal in a vicious,
terrorizing or threatening manner or apparent attitude of attack, without the
animal having been teased, molested, provoked, beaten, tortured or otherwise
harmed.
   ATTACK TRAINING FACILITY. Any person, group of persons, partnership or
corporation engaged in boarding, breeding, selling or training dogs or other
animals in mode of attack.
   COMMUNITY CAT. A cat that is abandoned, stray, lost, or feral and cared for
by a community cat caregiver pursuant to this chapter.
   COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER.
      (1)   A person who, in accordance with the Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return
Program defined in this chapter:
         (a)   Provides care, including food, shelter, or medical care to a
community cat; or
         (b)   Has temporary custody over a community cat.
      (2)   A COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER shall not be considered the owner or
keeper of a community cat.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that has demonstrated a fierce or dangerous
propensity or tendency to do any act, which may endanger persons or property
and/or any non-domesticated animal indigenous to the state including hybrid
animals that are part wild. This would include, but not be limited to, any dog
which bites, attacks or inflicts severe injury on a human being without
provocation and/or which, while at large has killed or inflicted severe injury
on a pet or domestic animal. A potentially dangerous dog may be reclassified as
DANGEROUS DOG if it has two or more separate potentially dangerous dog
citations or violations (which fall under potentially dangerous dog) within 24
consecutive months. Exceptions: No dog is dangerous, pursuant to this
definition, if, at the time, the threat, injury or damage was sustained, the
person attacked was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or has
in the past teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the dog or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime. Nor shall a dog be considered dangerous, pursuant
to this definition, if it has attacked or injured a pet or domesticated animal
in defense of an attack by another animal or if it is protecting or defending
its young. A DANGEROUS DOG that has killed or inflicted severe injury on a pet
or domestic animal can have the designation removed if a) the dog and the owner
successfully pass an AKC Canine Good Citizen Test and b) have no reported
incidents to Animal Control for the 36 consecutive months after designation of
DANGEROUS DOG. It is the responsibility of the dog owner to submit a request
for designation removal to the Animal Services Department after 36 consecutive
months and completion of AKC Canine Good Citizen Test. The dangerous dog
designation remains in effect until the dog owner receives written notification
from the Animal Services Department that it has been removed.
   DEALER. Any person who is licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as
a dealer.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any of various animals such as horses, sheep, cattle,
goats, hogs, poultry and the like, domesticated by humans so as to live and
breed in a tame condition.
   EARTIPPING. The surgical removal of the tip of a community cat's left ear,
performed while the cat is under anesthesia, to identify the community cat as
being sterilized and lawfully vaccinated for rabies.
   EXHIBITOR. Any person who is licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
as an exhibitor.
   EXPOSED TO RABIES. An animal has been EXPOSED TO RABIES within the meaning
of this chapter, if it has been bitten by, or been exposed to, any animal known
or suspected to have been infected with rabies.
   FERAL CAT. A community cat deemed by a competent authority to be non-
socialized to humans and unsuitable for adoption or fostering in a residential
setting. Competent authority includes, but is not limited to: licensed
veterinarians, licensed animal shelter owner/operators and the Animal Services
Department.
   IMPOUNDMENT. The placement of an animal in the custody of the County Animal
Control Section or person or entity duly authorized by this chapter or the
Board of County Commissioners or by state law for the purpose.
   KENNEL, DEALER or BREEDER. Any person, group of persons, partnership or
corporation engaged in buying, selling, breeding or boarding animals.
   LOCAL HEALTH DIRECTOR. The Director of Albemarle Regional Health Services,
or designee.
   NEUTERED. Any male animal, which has been operated upon to prevent
reproduction.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm, partnership or corporation
owning, keeping, having charge of, sheltering, feeding, harboring or taking
care of any animal for more than five days. The owner is responsible for the
care, actions and behavior of his or her animals. In the event that the owner
of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be held
liable for noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter. A person, group
of persons, firm, government agency, partnership or corporation caring for or
having temporary custody of a community cat as a community cat caregiver shall
not be considered the owner or keeper of the cat.
   OWNER'S REAL PROPERTY. Any real property owned or leased by the owner of the
animal, but does not include any public right-of-way or a common area of a
condominium, apartment complex or townhouse development.
   PET. A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog which:
         (a)   When unprovoked and at large, on two separate occasions within
the prior 24-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive
action by any person to prevent bodily injury;
         (b)   Any dog which, when unprovoked and at large, bites a person
causing physical injury; or
         (c)   Any dog which, when unprovoked and at large within the prior 24-
month period, has seriously bitten, inflicted injury or otherwise caused injury
to a domestic animal.
      (2)   A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG may be reclassified as a dangerous dog
if it has two or more separate POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG violations within 24
consecutive months. A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG that does not have any reported
violations for 36 consecutive months can have the label of POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS DOG removed. It is the responsibility of the dog owner to submit a
request for designation removal to the Animal Services Department after 36
consecutive months. The POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG designation remains in effect
until the dog owner receives written notification from the Animal Services
Department that it has been removed.
   PREMISES. A definite portion of real estate, including land with its
appurtenances, a building or part of a building curtilage.
   RESTRAINT. An animal is under RESTRAINT within the meaning of this chapter
if:
      (1)   It is within the real property limits of its owner;
      (2)   It is secured by means of a leash or lead no more than six feet in
length being held by an adult capable of controlling the animal;
      (3)   It is in a vehicle in a manner that would prevent escape or contact
with other persons or animals; or
      (4)   It is within the dwelling house.
      (5)   This definition does not apply to dogs that have been deemed a
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.
   RESTRAINT OF A DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that has been deemed a dangerous dog is
under restraint within the meaning of this chapter if: (a) it is within the
real property limits of its owner and securely confined thereon by a solid,
physical fence at least six feet in height and in the presence of an adult or
securely confined within the home or a secure enclosure; or (b) when the
dangerous dog is off of the owner's real property, it is secured by means of a
leash or lead no more than six feet in length being held by a competent person
capable of controlling the dog and the dog is wearing an appropriately sized
and secure basket muzzle. If a dangerous dog does escape the above requirements
for RESTRAINT OF A DANGEROUS DOG, the owner may be required to install
additional security measures, which may include but are not limited to: (a) a
45 degree angled top to the fence to prevent the dog from climbing/jumping over
the fence; (b) building a secure enclosure in which to contain the dog within
the secure, solid fenced yard; (c) install preventative measures to prevent
digging under the fence.
   RESTRAINT OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that has been designated a
potentially dangerous dog is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter
if it is within the real property limits of its owner and securely confined
within a secure enclosure. While off the owner's real property, the definition
of restraint applies.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of adequate height, forming or
causing a humane enclosure suitable to prevent the animal from escaping and to
prevent the entry of children. Underground fence is not a secure enclosure.
   SEVERE INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones, severe
lacerations, severe punctures, severe internal injuries or surgery.
   SHERIFF'S OFFICE. Pasquotank County Sheriff's Office.
   SPAYED. Any female animal, which has been operated upon to prevent
conception.
   STERILIZATION. Any surgical or chemical procedure performed by a licensed
veterinarian that renders any male or female animal permanently incapable of
reproducing.
   STRAY. Any animal, which is running at large or appears to be lost, unwanted
or abandoned, or whose owner is unknown or not readily available.
   TRAP-NEUTER-VACCINATE-RETURN. The process of humanely trapping, sterilizing,
vaccinating for rabies, eartipping, and returning community cats to their
original location.
(Ord. passed 7-9-2018; Am. Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.02 ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL BOARD.
   There is hereby created the Animal Control Board. The Animal Control Board
shall consist of five members, which shall be composed of two members appointed
by the Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners and two members appointed by
the City Council of Elizabeth City, and one member being a representative of
the SPCA of Northeastern North Carolina, recommended by the SPCA Board of
Directors, which shall be jointly appointed by the County Commissioners of
Pasquotank County and City Council of Elizabeth City.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.03 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE ANIMAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Animal Services Department shall be charged with the
responsibility of:
      (1)   Enforcing, in the county, all state and county laws, chapters and
resolutions relating to the care, custody and control of animals;
      (2)   Assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard
to animals and especially with regard to vaccination of animals against rabies
and the confinement or controlling of dangerous dogs;
      (3)   Investigating cruelty or abuse with regard to animals;
      (4)   Making the canvases of the county, including the homes in the
county, as it deems necessary or as requested by law enforcement of the county
municipalities for the purpose of ascertaining that all animals are vaccinated
against rabies as required by local chapters or state statute;
      (5)   Operating, pursuant to policies of the Board of County
Commissioners; and
      (6)   Execution of county operated TNVR programs and coordination with
contracted animal service providers in support of their TNVR programs.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Services Department to keep, or
cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of:
      (1)   Animals impounded, bite cases, violations and complaints, and
investigation of same.
   (C)   Employees or agents of the Animal Services Department shall enforce
this chapter. In the performance of their duties, employees of the Animal
Services Department shall have all the powers, authority and immunity granted
under this chapter and by the general laws and statutes of the state to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, relating to the care, treatment, control or
impounding of animals.
   (D)   Except as may be otherwise provided by statutes, laws or chapters, no
officer, agent or employee of the county or Animal Services Department charged
with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or other applicable
laws shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of the
duties.
   (E)   The Sheriff's Office may assist the Animal Services Department with
any provision of the ordinance when necessary.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.04 GENERAL DUTIES OF KEEPERS OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse an animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession,
charge, custody or control of an animal to abandon the animal or leave that
animal on a street, road, highway, public place or private property without
having made adequate provision for the animal's care.
   (C)   Breeding and reproduction of diseased animals are prohibited. A person
owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of an animal shall not
breed, sell, give away or allow to reproduce any animal with a disease
contagious to animals or human beings.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse, molest, torture,
torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, beat, mutilate or kill, wound,
injure, poison, abandon or subject to conditions detrimental to its health or
general welfare any animal, or to cause or procure the action. The words
"torture" and "torment" shall be held to include every act, omission or neglect
whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted;
but the terms shall not be construed to prohibit lawful shooting of birds, deer
and other game for human food; nor to prohibit an animal's owner, a
veterinarian, the Local Health Director or Animal Services Department, agents,
or the county animal shelter from destroying dangerous, unwanted or injured
animals in a humane manner, nor to prohibit the lawful use of animals in
scientific research.
   (B)   Animal cruelty investigator(s) may be appointed by the Board of
Commissioners as provided under G.S. § 19A-45. An animal cruelty investigator
has the responsibility for carrying out the defined duties of an animal cruelty
investigator as mandated by G.S. § 19A, Article 4. The Animal Services
Department and Sheriff's Office may be requested to accompany the investigator
on animal seizures.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 ADEQUATE FEED, WATER, SHELTER AND TETHERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to fail to provide all dogs and cats adequate
feed, adequate water and adequate shelter.
   (B)   Tethering. It shall be unlawful to tether an animal unless the device
complies with the chapter. Any tethering device shall be designed and placed to
prevent choking or strangulation and must be attached to the animal by means of
a properly fitting nylon or leather collar. (Use of choke chains, pinch-style,
rope and/or wire is not acceptable).
      (1)   A tether shall be equipped with a swivel on both ends.
      (2)   Such tether device shall not restrain the dog from adequate food,
water, shelter and exercise.
      (3)   The weight of the tether shall not exceed 10% of the total body
weight of the dog but shall be of sufficient strength to prevent breakage.
      (4)   The tether device must allow for the animal to lie down
comfortably, to move freely without becoming entangled and have access to
adequate food, water and shelter.
      (5)   Collar should be compatible with the size of the dog.
      (6)   Tether shall be attached to a buckle type collar or harness and
under no circumstances shall the tether itself be placed directly around a
dog's neck.
      (7)   All dogs that are tethered must be at least four months old.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 ANIMALS AT LARGE IN CERTAIN SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful within all residential subdivisions located
within areas zoned R-15, R-25, R-15A, R-25A, R-35A, RMH-15, and RMH-25 and
existing mobile home parks in areas which are not zoned residential to allow an
owner to permit a dog to run at large.
   (B)   Hunting dogs shall be excluded from the provisions of this section
while the dogs are engaged in hunting or training provided that the hunting
complies with North Carolina law.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 ANIMALS CREATING NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain
an animal in the manner so as to constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when an animal disturbs
the rights of, threatens the safety of or damages a member of the general
public or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of private or public
property:
      (1)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly disturbs,
interferes with or annoys human beings;
      (2)   Maintaining an animal that tips over garbage pails or damages
gardens, flowers or vegetables;
      (3)   Failing to confine in a building or secure enclosure a female dog
while in estrus;
      (4)   Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl or yowl in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or to make other noise in the manner
so as to result in a serious annoyance or interference with the reasonable use
and enjoyment of neighboring premises;
      (5)   Maintaining an animal that chases, snaps at, attacks or otherwise
molests pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle passengers or farm stock or
domestic animals;
      (6)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or continuously loiters on
public places; and
      (7)   Maintaining an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the health
of the public unless under the care of a licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.09 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS THAT CANNOT BE SEIZED BY REASONABLE MEANS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an animal that cannot
be seized by reasonable and normal means, retrieved by the Animal Services
Department, trapped in a humane, live-capture animal trap provided by the
Animal Services Department, or tranquilized by the Animal Services Department,
may be humanely destroyed in the field. Provided, a vicious animal, a dangerous
animal so designated by the Animal Services Department, or an animal attacking
a human being, another pet or livestock may be immediately destroyed if, in the
opinion of the Animal Services Department, the destruction is necessary for the
protection of the public health and safety of the public or livestock.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.10 SETTING HUMANE ANIMAL TRAPS AND AUTHORITY TO RECEIVE TRAPPED ANIMALS.
   The Animal Services Department is authorized to place, upon request of the
property owner or lessee, live-capture animal traps on private or public
property to trap and remove stray, at large, abandoned or nuisance animals. It
is unlawful for any person other than a member of the Animal Services
Department to remove any animal from the trap or to damage, destroy, move or
tamper with the trap. The Animal Services Department is authorized to receive
and impound animals that are trapped by other agencies or persons. The Animal
Services Department shall offer to a property owner, lessee, or other resident
who calls about stray or community cats information about Trap-Neuter-
Vaccinate-Return, and shall offer to refer the individual to a Trap-Neuter-
Return Program.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 CONFINEMENT AND CONTROL OF DANGEROUS DOGS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS
DOGS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner to maintain or harbor unrestrained any
dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog.
   (B)   For a dangerous dog, the owner shall post a plainly visible sign upon
the premises warning that a dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall be
deemed an incidental sign for the purposes of the County Zoning Ordinance. The
sign's placement will be determined and approved by the Animal Services
Department.
   (C)   A dog deemed a DANGEROUS DOG shall be under constant restraint, under
the definition for restraint of a dangerous dog, from the date that the dog is
deemed dangerous and during any appeal process. If the appeal process is
exhausted and the dangerous dog designation is upheld, the dog will be kept
under RESTRAINT OF A DANGEROUS DOG from that point on until any such time that
said designation may be removed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   A dog deemed POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS shall be under constant restraint,
under the definition for restraint of a potentially dangerous dog, from the
date that the dog is deemed a potentially dangerous dog and during any appeal
process. If the appeal process is exhausted and the potentially dangerous dog
designation upheld, the dog will be kept under RESTRAINT OF POTENTIALLY
DANGEROUS DOG from that point on until any such time that said designation may
be removed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Dogs trained or being trained in mode of attack are subject to this
section.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 REQUIREMENTS FOR DANGEROUS DOGS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   If a dog is declared to be a DANGEROUS DOG by the Animal Services
Department, the dog's owner shall have the dog microchipped within 30 days of a
final determination of being “dangerous” and exhaustion of any appeal(s)
thereof, and shall provide proof that the dog has been microchipped to the
Animal Services Department.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.13 REQUIREMENTS FOR ATTACK TRAINING FACILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, partnership or
corporation to conduct training in mode of attack for dogs or other animals at
any location unless the training is conducted within a secure enclosure.
   (B)   The training within a secure enclosure is within the meaning of this
chapter if it is performed within a fence or structure of adequate height to
prevent the dog or animal from jumping, climbing or otherwise escaping from the
enclosure, and the training is conducted in the presence of the owner(s) or
trainer(s) at all times.
   (C)   Any dog or animal trained or being trained in mode of attack is deemed
to be dangerous and is subject to all the provisions of this chapter relative
to dangerous dogs or dangerous animals.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.14 CONFISCATION OF DANGEROUS DOG.
   Any potentially dangerous dogs or any dangerous dogs not kept in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter may be confiscated by the Animal Services
Department and harbored at the owner's expense until the owner complies with
the requirements of this chapter, or disposed of as provided in §
91.11.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.15 REQUIRED NOTIFICATION TO ANIMAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT BY OWNERS OF
DANGEROUS DOG OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
   The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall inform the
Animal Services Department as soon as practicable, but not later than 24 hours,
after the occurrence of any of the following:
   (A)   An assault, attack or biting upon a human committed by any such animal
in the owner's care or control;
   (B)   An attack or biting upon any domesticated animal or pet while the dog
is at large;
   (C)   The roaming or escape of any dog required to be restrained;
   (D)   The transfer, gift, sale, or other conveyance of ownership, possession
or death of a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous dog;
   (E)   The removal from Pasquotank County of a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog, its confinement in a veterinary facility, its removal from the
territorial jurisdiction of the county, or its death; and
   (F)   If a dog is caused to be moved into Pasquotank County from another
jurisdiction (whether it be a municipality, county or other local government),
which has caused that dog to be classified as potentially dangerous or
dangerous (or some other similar classification), or an animal so classified
elsewhere is situated within Pasquotank County at any time, the Sheriff or his
designee shall review the case and classification of the previous jurisdiction
and, if appropriate, cause the owner of said dog to register the dog within the
county as potentially dangerous or dangerous.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 APPEAL PROCESS FOR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG OR DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Owners of dogs that have been deemed a potentially dangerous dog or a
dangerous dog have the right to appeal the designation to the Animal Control
Board. A request to appeal shall be in writing and addressed to the Animal
Services Department within five days of the designation. If the fifth day falls
on a weekend or holiday, the timeframe shall be extended to the next business
day.
   (B)   Any such appeal shall be quasi-judicial in nature and heard by the
Animal Control Board within ten business days, or as soon as the matter can be
scheduled, after receipt of the appeal.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 DOGS DESIGNATED AS POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG OR DANGEROUS UNDER PRIOR
ORDINANCE.
   A dog that has been designated as a potentially dangerous dog or dangerous
dog prior to January 1, 2025 is subject to the provisions of this chapter and
may have that designation removed, provided the current provisions of this
chapter are satisfied. The date the dog was designated as either a potentially
dangerous dog or dangerous dog shall be used in determining the appropriate
time requirement.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.18 TEASING AND MOLESTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tease or molest any animal. Examples
of molesting and teasing include, but are not limited to, throwing objects over
or through fences, poking sticks or any objects at the animal. It shall be
unlawful for any person to entice or lure any animal out of an enclosed area or
off the property of its owner or keeper.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 LAW ENFORCEMENT DOGS EXCLUDED.
   Any dog used by a law enforcement agency in the investigation of crimes or
as otherwise necessary in the enforcement of the law is excluded from
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.20 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest
members of the Animal Services Department, its agents or officers or
veterinarians in the performance of any duty authorized by this chapter, or to
seek to release any animal in the custody of the agents or officers.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
RABIES CONTROL
§ 91.30 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW, SUBCHAPTER AS SUPPLEMENT TO STATE LAW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any animal owner to fail to comply with the
state laws relating to the control of rabies.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to supplement the state laws by
providing a procedure for the enforcement of state laws relating to rabies
control, in addition to the criminal penalties provided by state law.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 INOCULATION OF DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for an owner to fail to provide current inoculation
against rabies (hydrophobia) for any dog, cat or ferret four months of age or
older.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 INOCULATION TAG AND PROOF OF VACCINATION FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   Upon complying with the provisions of §§
91.30 through
91.39, there shall be issued to the owner of the animal inoculated a numbered
metallic tag, stamped with the vaccination number and the year for which it was
issued, the words "North Carolina" or the initials "N.C." and the words "rabies
vaccine."
   (B)   Dogs shall wear rabies vaccination tags at all times.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to use for an animal a rabies inoculation tag
issued for another animal.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, cat or ferret to fail to
provide written proof that the animal has a current rabies inoculation when the
Animal Services Department demands written proof.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.33 EVIDENCE OF INOCULATION OF CATS AND FERRETS.
   Cats and ferrets shall not be required to wear the metallic tag referred to
in §
91.32 of this subchapter, but the owner of a cat or ferret shall maintain the
rabies vaccination certificates as written evidence to prove that the cat or
ferret has a current rabies inoculation.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.34 REPORT AND CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS BITING PERSONS OR SHOWING SYMPTOMS OF
RABIES.
   (A)   Notice. When a person has been bitten by an animal required to be
vaccinated under this subchapter, the person or parent, guardian or person
standing in loco parentis of the person and the owner of the animal shall
notify the Local Health Director and Animal Services Department immediately and
give the name and address of the person bitten and the owner of the animal. If
the animal that bites a person is a stray or feral animal, the Animal Services
Department shall make a reasonable attempt to locate the owner of the animal.
If the owner cannot be identified within 72 hours of the event, the Local
Health Director may authorize the animal be euthanized, and the head of the
animal shall be immediately sent to the State Laboratory of Public Health for
rabies diagnosis. If the event occurs on a weekend or State holiday the time
period for owner identification shall be extended 24 hours. A physician who
attends a person bitten by an animal known to be a potential carrier of rabies
shall report the incident within 24 hours to the Local Health Director. The
report must include the name, age, and sex of the person.
      (1)   If there is any evidence that an animal bite may have occurred, it
shall be assumed by law that a bite did occur, and quarantine procedures shall
apply if required.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to inform the Local
Health Director and Animal Services Department as soon as possible that an
animal has bitten a person.
   (B)   Confinement. When an animal required to be vaccinated under this
subchapter bites a person, the animal shall be immediately confined for ten
days in a place designated by the Local Health Director.
      (1)   The Local Health Director may authorize a dog trained and used by a
law enforcement agency to be released from confinement to perform official
duties upon submission of proof that the dog has been vaccinated for rabies in
compliance with this subchapter.
      (2)   After reviewing the circumstances of the particular case, the Local
Health Director may allow the owner to confine the animal on the owner's
property. If animal is confined on its owner's premises, the Animal Services
Department shall revisit the premises for inspection purposes on the fifth and
tenth day of the confinement period or as ordered by the Local Health Director.
If the owner fails to provide continuous quarantine of the animal on his or her
premises as instructed, the animal shall be removed by the Animal Services
Department and quarantined at a veterinary hospital or at the animal shelter at
the owner's cost. The owner shall agree in writing to the above conditions
prior to the Local Health Director authorizing confinement on the owner's
property. An owner who fails to confine an animal in accordance with the
instructions of the Local Health Director shall be guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor. If the owner of the animal that has bitten a person refuses to
confine the animal as required by this subchapter, the Local Health Director
may order seizure of the animal and its confinement for ten days at the expense
of the owner.
      (3)   If rabies does not develop within ten days after the animal is
quarantined under this subchapter, the animal may be released from quarantine
with the documented permission of the Local Heath Director and Animal Services
Department.
      (4)   Every animal quarantined under this subchapter shall be confined at
the expense of its owner in a veterinary hospital or at the animal shelter, if
space is available.
   (C)   In the case of a non-dog, cat or ferret or bat suspected of carrying
rabies, the animal may be euthanized, and the head examined for rabies.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.35 MANAGEMENT OF DOGS, CATS AND FERRETS EXPOSED TO RABIES.
   (A)   When the Local Health Director reasonably suspects that an animal
required to be vaccinated under this section has been exposed to the saliva or
nervous tissue of a proven rabid animal or animal reasonably suspected of
having rabies that is not available for laboratory diagnosis, the animal shall
be considered to have been exposed to rabies. The recommendations and
guidelines for rabies post-exposure management specified by the National
Association of State Public Health Veterinarians in the most current edition of
the Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and Control shall be the required
control measures.
   (B)   Dogs, cats and ferrets exposed to rabies shall be seen by a North
Carolina licensed veterinarian immediately for wound care and guidance on post-
exposure management.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.36 AREA-WIDE EMERGENCY QUARANTINE.
   (A)   An area may be declared under emergency quarantine against rabies by
the Local Health Director when the disease exists to the extent that the lives
of persons are endangered. When an emergency quarantine is declared, each
animal in the area that is required to be vaccinated under this section shall
be confined on the premises of the owner or in a veterinary hospital unless the
animal is on a leash or under the control and in the sight of a responsible
adult. During the quarantine, each animal required to be vaccinated under this
section may be taken or shipped from the county without written permission of
the Animal Services Department. The Animal Services Department is hereby
directed during the emergency quarantine to impound any animal required to be
vaccinated running at large in the county. During the quarantine period, the
Animal Services Department or local health authorities shall provide for a
section of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency rabies
vaccination facilities located throughout the county.
   (B)   In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring
during the period of quarantine, the period of quarantine may be extended at
the discretion of the Local Health Director.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.37 POSTMORTEM DIAGNOSIS.
   An animal diagnosed as having rabies by a licensed veterinarian shall be
destroyed and its head sent to the State Laboratory of Public Health. The heads
of all animals that die during a confinement period required by this section
shall be immediately sent to the State Laboratory of Public Health for rabies
diagnosis.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.38 UNLAWFUL KILLING, RELEASING AND THE LIKE OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or release any animal under
observation for rabies, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies,
or any animal biting a human, or to remove the animal from the county without
permission from the Local Health Director and Animal Services Department.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.39 FAILURE TO SURRENDER ANIMAL FOR QUARANTINE OR EUTHANASIA.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any
animal for quarantine or euthanasia as required in this subchapter or when the
Animal Services Department makes demand.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
COMMUNITY CAT INITIATIVE
§ 91.45 COMMUNITY CATS.
   The County of Pasquotank adopts this community cat initiative subchapter.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.46 TRAP-NEUTER-VACCINATE-RETURN PROGRAMS.
   (A)   Organizations or individuals that engage in Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-
Return are encouraged to register through a sponsoring organization.
Organizations performing or supporting Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return in
Pasquotank County shall identify and nominate a community cat sponsoring
organization and provide contact information to the Animal Services Department.
   (B)   The community cat sponsoring organization shall make available to the
public information about its Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return programs. The Animal
Services Department when encountering eartipped cats, receiving complaints
regarding non-feral community cats, or calls about large numbers of cats at a
specific location, shall coordinate community cat sponsoring organizations to
ensure impoundment and/or enforcement actions are not taken on animals managed
by a community cat caregiver.
   (C)   Responsibilities of the community cat caregiver:
      (1)   Cats must be trapped using humane trapping techniques;
      (2)   Cats must be assessed by a veterinarian and deemed healthy at the
time of spay/neuter surgery;
      (3)   Cats must be spayed or neutered;
      (4)   Cats must be vaccinated for rabies;
      (5)   Cats must be eartipped; and
      (6)   Cat bites must be reported to the Animal Services Department.
   (D)   Responsibilities of the Animal Services Department.
      (1)   Persons that contact the Animal Services Department about stray or
community cats shall be provided information about Trap-Neuter-Vaccinate-Return
and referred to the community cat sponsoring organization.
      (2)   When a person contacts the Animal Services Department with a
complaint about an eartipped community cat, county staff will contact the
community cat sponsoring organization for assistance in resolving the
complaint.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 91.50 GENERALLY.
   Any animal which appears to be lost, stray or unwanted, or which is not
wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag, as required by state law or this
chapter, and found at large, may be impounded by the Animal Services Department
and confined in the county animal shelter. Impoundment of the animal shall not
relieve the owner thereof from any penalty, which may be imposed for violation
of this chapter. An eartipped community cat shall not be impounded under this
section unless a complaint has been lodged against the cat pursuant to other
applicable sections of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.51 NOTICE TO OWNER OR COMMUNITY CAT SPONSORING ORGANIZATION.
   Immediately upon impounding an animal, the Animal Services Department shall
make reasonable efforts to notify the owner or community cat caregiver and
inform the owner or community cat caregiver of the conditions whereby the
animal may be redeemed. If the owner or community cat caregiver is unknown or
cannot be located, the animal shall be assigned an impoundment identification
number and release date. The impoundment identification number and release date
shall be posted on the animal's cage or kennel at the county animal shelter for
a minimum of three business days and any information about the animal,
including the time and place of the taking of the animal and the time and date
of posting the notice of impoundment, shall be available at the animal shelter
by reference to the impoundment identification number.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.52 REDEMPTION BY OWNER OR COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER GENERALLY.
   (A)   The owner or community cat caregiver of an animal impounded under this
chapter may redeem the animal (except dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous
dogs) and regain possession thereof within 72 hours or three business days
after notice of impoundment is given or posted, as required by §
91.51 by complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter and paying
any necessary veterinarian's fee, boarding fee and cost incurred as set by the
County Animal Shelter.
   (B)   The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog impounded
under this chapter may redeem the animal and regain possession thereof within
72 hours or three business days after exhausting all appeals. Notice of the
impoundment shall be given as required under §
91.51. If the determination that the animal is affirmed after all appeals, the
owner shall pay all necessary veterinarian's fee, boarding fee and cost
incurred as set by the County Animal Shelter. If the determination that the
animal is not a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog after exhausting all
appeals, the owner shall not be responsible for any costs incurred.
   (C)   No animal or community cat caregiver owner may be permitted to adopt
his or her own animal under the provisions of §
91.53 in order to reclaim an animal that has been impounded pursuant to state
law or this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.53 DESTRUCTION OR ADOPTION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS GENERALLY.
   (A)   If an impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner or community cat
caregiver within the period prescribed in §
91.52, it may be destroyed in a humane manner or shall become the property of
the animal shelter and offered for adoption. A new adult owner or community cat
caregiver who agrees to comply with this chapter may acquire an impounded
animal; however, any prospective new owner or community cat caregiver shall not
be an animal dealer who acquires animals for resale. The prospective new owner
must pay any required fees. Fees may be waived at the discretion of the animal
shelter or designee for rescue groups, community cat caregivers and other
animal welfare groups that apply in writing to the section. The placement of
animals with these organizations will be determined on a case-by-case basis.
   (B)   All unsterilized dogs and cats five months of age or older adopted
from the animal shelter shall be either spayed or neutered within 60 days of
their adoption. All animals adopted under five months of age shall be spayed or
neutered at six months of age. The adopter shall promptly provide written proof
of the sterilization to the animal shelter. The adoption of any animal not
sterilized pursuant to this section shall be deemed to violate the provision of
this section and must be returned by the applicant for re-adoption to the
animal shelter. The animal shelter is authorized to obtain an adoption
agreement from an applicant to implement the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Written proof that a licensed veterinarian has performed the required
sterilization must be returned to the animal shelter. A person who fails within
the specified time to arrange for the sterilization of an unsterilized cat or
dog adopted from the animal shelter shall surrender the cat or dog to the
animal shelter.
   (D)   No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray and
unclaimed shall be allowed to be adopted from the county animal shelter during
a period of emergency rabies quarantine invoked pursuant to §
91.36 except by special authorization of the Local Health Director.
   (E)   Any animal that exhibits fierce, dangerous or aggressive behavior will
not be offered for adoption.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.54 PROCEDURE WITH RESPECT TO REDEMPTION OR ADOPTION OF UNVACCINATED DOG OR
CAT.
   (A)   Unless proof of a current rabies vaccination can be furnished, every
person who either adopts or redeems a dog or cat at the animal shelter shall
have his or her animal vaccinated for rabies. A one-year vaccination may be
obtained at the time of reclaim or adoption at the animal shelter. Each
redeemed community cat shall be vaccinated at the animal shelter. If the owner
or adopter wishes to receive the vaccine for his or her animal at a veterinary
practice of their choice, they will be given a "proof of rabies vaccination
card" at the time of the redemption or adoption. This card will be stamped with
a date stating the maximum time limit allowed to take the dog or cat to the
veterinarian of the person's choice for rabies vaccination. The time limit for
dogs and cats four months and older will be 72 hours, with Sundays and holidays
excluded. For puppies and kittens under four months, the county animal shelter
will determine the time limit according to their age within 72 hours of the
designated date.
   (B)   The "proof of rabies vaccination card" will be completed and returned
to the animal shelter by the veterinarian. If this card is not returned to the
animal shelter within the time limit specified on the card, an animal control
officer will be dispatched to retrieve the dog or cat.
   (C)   Payment for the rabies vaccination provided for in this section will
be the responsibility of the person redeeming or adopting the animal.
   (D)   The adoption agreement will be completed at the time of adoption. If
the adopter fails to comply with the agreement, the Animal Services Department
may be dispatched to retrieve the dog or cat if corrective action has not been
taken by the animal's owner.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.55 SUSPECTED RABID ANIMALS NOT TO BE REDEEMED OR ADOPTED.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, animals impounded which
appear to be suffering from rabies shall not be redeemed or adopted, but shall
be dealt with in accordance with §§
91.30 through
91.39 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.56 DESTRUCTION OF WOUNDED OR DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, any animal
impounded, which is seriously wounded or diseased (not a rabies suspect) and
has no identification shall be destroyed immediately. If the animal has
identification, the Animal Services Department shall attempt to notify the
owner before disposing of such, but if the owner cannot be reached readily, and
the animal is suffering, the Animal Services Department or animal shelter may
destroy the animal, at its discretion, in a humane manner.
   (B)   The Animal Services Department has the authority to humanely destroy
severely injured livestock upon the owner's request or when the owner is
unknown.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.57 IMMEDIATE PLACEMENT FOR ADOPTION OR DESTRUCTION OF ANIMAL SURRENDERED
BY OWNER.
   An animal surrendered by its owner to the Animal Services Department or
animal shelter may be immediately placed for adoption or humanely destroyed
without compliance with §
91.51 when the owner:
   (A)   Affirmatively represents in writing that he or she is the legal owner
of the animal;
   (B)   Agrees to hold the county and its officials and employees harmless
from any liability, claims or damages that may be sustained by reason of the
adoption or destruction of the animal; and
   (C)   Transfers ownership of the animal to the Animal Services Department or
animal shelter.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.58 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter supersedes all previous related ordinances. This chapter is
adopted on December 2, 2024 and is effective January 1, 2025.
(Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be fined a civil penalty of $200. If the
violation is continued, each day's violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Payment of the penalties shall be made within ten days. Civil
penalties may be assessed by citation and recovered by the county in a civil
action in the nature of a debt.
      (2)   If any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, when unprovoked,
causes severe injury or kills a human, the owner shall pay a $500 civil penalty
and, after a ten-day waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays, the dog
shall be destroyed under the direction of the Animal Services Department.
      (3)   If any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall, when
unprovoked, kills or assist in killing any domestic animal or pet, the owner of
the dog shall pay a $250 civil penalty.
      (4)   If any dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall, on two
separate occasions, when unprovoked, kills or assist in killing any domestic
animal or pet, the owner of the dog shall pay a $250 civil penalty. The Animal
Services Department shall confiscate and, after the expiration of a ten-day
waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays, under its direction, destroy
the dangerous dog.
      (5)   Violation of this chapter may subject the violator to criminal as
well as civil action. In addition to the civil penalties or fees imposed under
this chapter, violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as provided by
statute in G.S. § 14-4 for which a criminal summons may be issued and subject
the violator to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day's violation of
this section is a separate offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal
proceedings pursuant to this division does not relieve a person of his or her
liability for taxes, civil penalties or fees imposed under this chapter.
      (6)   In addition, enforcement of this chapter may be by appropriate
equitable remedy, injunction or order of abatement issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 11-18-1991; Ord. 94-3, passed 6-20-1994; Ord. 98-2, passed 5-4-
1998; Ord. passed 7-9-2018; Ord. passed 12-2-2024; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Certain conditions declared nuisances
   
92.02   Investigation of complaints
   
92.03   Notice and order to abate
   
92.04   Appeal of order of abatement
   
92.05   Abatement by county
   
92.06   Annual notice to chronic violators of public nuisance regulations
   
92.07   Remedies
   
92.08   Effective date
§ 92.01 CERTAIN CONDITIONS DECLARED NUISANCES.
   The existence of any of the following conditions on any lot, whether
improved or not, or other parcel of land within the county limits is hereby
declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to
constitute a public nuisance:
   (A)   Growth of weeds and grass. The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or
grass causing or threatening to cause a hazard detrimental to the public health
or safety. In no event may the grass or weeds on any portion of a lot located
in a platted subdivision and not used for active farming or woodlands exceed
the height of 18 inches;
   (B)   Accumulations of rubbish, and the like. Any accumulation of rubbish,
trash, or junk causing or threatening to cause a fire hazard, causing or
threatening to cause the accumulation of stagnant water or causing or
threatening to cause the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin
of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health;
   (C)   Obstruction of drainage ways. The placement of rubbish, trash, yard
debris, soil, vegetation, or other items impeding the flow of water and/or
causing or threatening to cause the obstruction of drainage ways.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019; Ord. passed 9-14-2020)
§ 92.02 INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   The County Manager, or County Manager’s designee, upon notice from any
person of the existence of any of the conditions described as a nuisance shall
cause to be made, by the appropriate county official, such investigation as may
be necessary to determine whether such conditions exist as to constitute a
public nuisance.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019)
§ 92.03 NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE.
   (A)   Upon determination that the conditions constituting a public nuisance
exist, the County Manager, or County Manager’s designee, shall notify, in
writing, the owner, occupant, or person in possession of the premises in
question of the conditions constituting such public nuisance and shall order
the prompt abatement thereof within 14 days from the receipt of such written
notice. The written notice should also include the right to appeal the notice
of abatement to the County Manager, or the County Manager’s designee.
   (B)   Abatement of a public nuisance shall consist of taking whatever
appropriate steps are reasonably necessary to remove the condition or
conditions which result in the declaration of a public nuisance.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019)
§ 92.04 APPEAL OF ORDER OF ABATEMENT.
   At any time before the expiration of the abatement period the respondent may
request a hearing before the County Manager, or County Manager’s designee, to
appeal the finding of the administrator that a public nuisance as defined by
this chapter exists on the premises. The request for a hearing must be in
writing and must be filed in the office of the County Manager. The County
Manager, or County Manager’s designee, shall fix a time for the hearing, and
the initial abatement order shall be temporarily suspended pending such
hearing. The hearing must be held by the County Manager, or County Manager’s
designee, within 30 calendar days following receipt of the request for hearing
by the office of the County Manager. At the hearing, the individual affected by
the order shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the
findings which supported the abatement order. Upon completion of the hearing,
the County Manager or County Manager’s designee shall consider the evidence
provided and shall either revoke the initial order, issue a final order which
differs from the initial order, or reinstate the initial order as a final
abatement order. The decision of the County Manager, or County Manager’s
designee, may be appealed to the General Court of Justice as provided by G.S. §
153A-140.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019)
§ 92.05 ABATEMENT BY COUNTY.
   (A)   If any person, having been ordered to abate a public nuisance, fails,
neglects, or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance
within 14 days from receipt of the order, the County Manager, or County
Manager’s designee, shall cause such condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having an independent contractor go upon such premises and remove
or otherwise abate such nuisance under the supervision of an officer or
employee designated by the County Manager.
   (B)   The actual cost incurred by the county in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance, including administrative costs, shall be charged
to the owner of such lot or parcel of land and it shall be the duty of the
County Tax Collector to forward, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
statement of such charges to the owner or other person in possession of such
premises with instructions that such charges are due and payable within 30 days
from receipt thereof.
   (C)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges as
provided for above, such charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises
where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as
provided in G.S. § 153A-140.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019)
§ 92.06 ANNUAL NOTICE TO CHRONIC VIOLATORS OF PUBLIC NUISANCE REGULATIONS.
   Under the provisions of G.S. § 153A-140.2, effective October 1, 2009, the
county may notify a chronic violator of the county's public nuisance ordinance
that, if the violator’s property is found to be in violation of the ordinance,
the county shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which notice
is given, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense of the action
shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
The notice shall be sent by certified mail. A chronic violator is a person who
owns property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the county gave notice
of violation at least three times under any provision of the public nuisance
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019)
§ 92.07 REMEDIES.
   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. §14-4,
punishable by a fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30
days, or both fined and imprisonment. For a continuing offense, each day's
violation is a separate offense. The remedies set forth in this chapter shall
be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law
for the abatement of public nuisances.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019; Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
§ 92.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be appropriately modified in the County
Code of Ordinances and shall be in full force and effect from and after the
date of its adoption, this 17th day of June 2019.
(Ord. passed 6-17-2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PAWNBROKERS
      
111.   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS; JUNKYARDS
      
112.   AMBULANCE SERVICES
      
113.   MATERIALS INSTALLATION
      
114.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Licensing
   
110.03   Revocation of license
   
110.04   Record keeping requirements
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWN or PAWN TRANSACTION. A written bailment of personal property as
security for debt, redeemable on certain terms within 180 days, unless renewed,
and with an implied power of sale on default.
   PAWNBROKER. A person engaged in the business of lending money on the
security of pledged goods and who may also purchase merchandise for resale from
dealers or traders.
   PAWNSHOP. The location at which or in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts
business.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, joint venture, association or any other
legal entity, however organized.
   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property which is deposited with or
otherwise delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his or
her business in connection with a pawn transaction.
   PURCHASE. Any item purchased from an individual for the purpose of resale
whereby the seller no longer has a vested interest in the item.
(Ord. passed 4-17-2000)
§ 110.02 LICENSING.
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or operate a
pawnbroker business without first having applied for and been granted the
license provided by this section.
      (2)   Every application for a pawnbroker’s license shall be upon a form
approved by the Board of Commissioners and shall be filed with the Tax
Administrator. Each application shall be made under oath and shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the person, and in case of a firm or
partnership, the names and addresses of the persons composing the firm or of
the officers of a corporation;
         (b)   The name of the business and the street address and mailing
address where the business is to be operated;
         (c)   A statement indicating the amount of net assets or capital
proposed to be used by the petitioner in operation of the business; (This
statement shall be accompanied by an unaudited statement from an accountant
verifying the information contained in the statement.)
         (d)   An affidavit by the petitioner that he has not been convicted of
a felony; and
         (e)   A certificate from the County Sheriff or the State Bureau of
Investigation certifying that the petitioner has not been convicted of a
felony.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator shall transmit a copy of the application to
the Sheriff’s Department for an investigative report, to the Inspections
Department for a determination as to compliance with zoning and development
regulations, and to the Fire Marshal to determine compliance with laws relating
to fire protection. These departments shall report back to the Tax
Administrator within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days.
      (4)   An application in proper form shall be placed on the printed agenda
of the first regular Board of Commissioner meeting after completion of the
reports and for which the normal agenda deadline date can be met.
   (B)   (1)   Before issuing a license, the Board of Commissioners shall be
satisfied that the applicant is a suitable person to hold a pawnbroker license
and that the location is a suitable place to hold the proposed license. To be a
suitable place, the establishment shall comply with all the rules and
regulations set out in G.S. Ch. 91A. Other factors the Commissioners may
consider in determining whether the applicant and the business location are
suitable shall include all of the following:
         (a)   The application contains no misstatement of fact;
         (b)   The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable zoning,
building and fire prevention codes;
         (c)   The applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony within a
ten-year period preceding the filing of the application;
         (d)   Parking facilities and traffic facilities in the neighborhood;
         (e)   The recommendations of the County Sheriff;
         (f)   Any other evidence that would tend to show whether the applicant
would comply with the provisions of G.S. §§ 66-385 through 66-399 and the
applicable provisions of this chapter and whether the operation of the business
at that location would be detrimental to the neighborhood.
      (2)   Upon approval of the application by the Board of Commissioners and
upon receipt of a license fee of $275, the Tax Administrator shall issue a
pawnbrokers license to the applicant. The license must be renewed annually.
      (3)   At the time of receiving the license, the applicant shall file with
the Clerk to the Board of Commissioners a bond payable to the county in the
amount of $5,000 to be executed by the licensee and by two sureties or a surety
company licensed to do business in the state, which shall be for the faithful
performance of the requirements and obligations pertaining to the licensed
business. The county may sue for forfeiture of the bond upon breach, and any
other person who obtains a judgment against a pawnbroker and upon which
judgment execution is returned unsatisfied may maintain an action in his or her
own name upon the bond to satisfy the judgment.
(Ord. passed 4-17-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license issued pursuant to §
110.02 (B) of this chapter may be revoked by action of the Board of
Commissioners for substantial abuses of this chapter or G.S. §§ 66-385 through
66-399. Before the Board of Commissioners revokes a license pursuant to this
chapter, and before the Board of Commissioners considers an application for a
license pursuant to this chapter, a written notice shall be sent to the
licensee or applicant affected, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the address listed on the application.
   (B)   (1)   The notice shall advise the affected party of a right to appear
before the Board of Commissioners, with or without legal counsel, at a stated
time and place at least ten days following the date of the notice for the
purpose of presenting any evidence relevant to the revocation or application
and for the purpose of cross-examining any person providing evidence against
the respondent.
      (2)   A revocation hearing can be initiated by the Sheriff or by the
Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 4-17-2000)
§ 110.04 RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep consecutively numbered records of each
pawn transaction. The records shall correspond in all essential particulars to
a detachable pawn ticket or copy thereof attached to the record.
   (B)   The pawnbroker shall, at the time of making the pawn or purchase
transaction, enter upon the pawn ticket a record of the following information
which shall be typed or written in ink and in the English language:
      (1)   A clear and accurate description of the property, including model
and serial number if indicated on the property;
      (2)   The name, residence address, phone number and date of birth of the
pledger;
      (3)   The date of the transaction;
      (4)   The type of identification and identification number accepted from
pledger;
      (5)   Physical description of the pledger;
      (6)   The amount of money advanced;
      (7)   The date and the amount due;
      (8)   All monthly pawn charges, including interest, annual percentage
rate on interest and total recovery fee; and
      (9)   Agreed upon stated value between the pledger and the pawnbroker in
case of loss or destruction of pledged item. Unless otherwise noted the stated
value is the same as the loan value.
   (C)   The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets:
      (1)   The statement that “Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker
within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment
made on the account for a period of 60 days past maturity date of the original
contract. No further notice is necessary.”;
      (2)   The statement that “The pledger of this item attests that it is not
stolen, has no liens or encumbrances, and is pledger’s to sell or to pawn.”;
      (3)   The statement that “The item pawned is redeemable only by the
bearer of this ticket or by identification of the person making the pawn.”;
and/or
      (4)   A blank line for the pledger’s signature or initials.
   (D)   (1)   The pledger shall sign the pawn ticket and shall receive an
exact copy of the pawn ticket, which shall be signed or initialed by the
pawnbroker or an employee of the pawnbroker. The pawn ticket shall be available
for inspection each regular workday by the Sheriff’s Department.
      (2)   Upon request of the Sheriff’s Department, a pawnbroker shall mail
or hand deliver an exact copy of the pawn ticket to the Sheriff’s Department
within 24 hours of the request. Otherwise, the pawnbroker shall daily mail or
hand deliver to the Sheriff’s Department a computer printout which shall
include information as provided by division (B) above.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this section any person presenting a
pawn ticket for redemption is presumed to be entitled to redeem the property
described by the ticket.
   (F)   Any item purchased from an individual for the purpose of resale
whereby the seller no longer has a vested interest in the item shall not be
resold by the pawnbroker for a period of three days following purchase of the
item.
(Ord. passed 4-17-2000) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided by G.S. § 66-
396.
(Ord. passed 4-17-2000)
CHAPTER 111: AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS; JUNKYARDS
Section
   
111.01   Title
   
111.02   Purpose; objectives
   
111.03   Definitions
   
111.04   Prohibitions
   
111.05   Exceptions
   
111.06   Nonconforming uses
   
111.07   Enforcement
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and may be cited as “Chapter Regulating the
Operation or Maintenance of Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards.”
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987)
§ 111.02 PURPOSE; OBJECTIVES.
   The purposes and objectives for which this chapter is passed are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the citizens and residents of the county from possible
injury at automobile graveyards and junkyards;
   (B)   To preserve the dignity and aesthetic quality of the environment in
the county;
   (C)   To preserve the physical integrity of land in close proximity to
residential areas;
   (D)   To protect the economic interests of the citizens and residents of the
county which are dependent on tourism; and
   (E)   To achieve responsible economic growth in areas of the county that is
compatible with growth and development in nearby areas.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987)
§ 111.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used
in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
      AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment which is maintained, used or
operated for storing, keeping, buying and selling two or more wrecked,
scrapped, ruined, dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles and which are not
being restored to operation, regardless of the length of time which individual
motor vehicles are stored or kept at the establishment.
      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and
designated or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any place, land, building or structure on which or in
which there is operated or maintained a business or growing concern for profit.
      FENCE. A continuous, opaque, unperforated barrier extending from the
surface of the ground to a uniform height of not less than six feet from the
ground at any given point, constructed of dirt, wood, stone, steel, other metal
or any substance of a similar nature and strength.
      GARAGE. An establishment which is maintained and operated for the primary
purpose of making mechanical and/or body repairs to motor vehicles and which
receives 50% or more of its gross income from charges made for the repairs.
      GATE. A door or other device attached to a fence which, when opened,
provides a means of ingress and egress of persons and things for which it was
intended, and which, when closed, forms a continuous barrier as a part of the
fence to which it is attached.
      HOUSING UNIT. A house, an apartment, a group of rooms or a single room
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters.
      JUNK. Old or scrapped copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, debris, waste, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof,
iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials.
      JUNKYARD. An establishment which is maintained, operated or used for
storing, keeping, buying or selling junk regardless of the length of time that
junk is stored or kept, or for maintenance or operation of an automobile
graveyard, but shall not include garbage dumps or county operated sanitary
landfills.
      PUBLIC ROAD. Any road or highway which is now or hereafter designated and
maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation as part of the
state highway system, whether primary or secondary, hard-surfaced or other
dependable highways, and any road which is a NEIGHBORHOOD PUBLIC ROAD, as
defined in G.S. § 136-67, which definition is incorporated into this chapter by
reference.
      REPAIR SHOP. An establishment which is maintained and operated for the
primary purpose of making mechanical and/or body repairs to motor vehicles and
which receives 50% or more of its gross income from charges made for the
repairs.
      SCHOOL. Any public or private institution for the teaching of children
under 18 years of age which is recognized and approved by the State Board of
Education.
      SERVICE STATION. Any establishment which is maintained and operated for
the primary purpose of making retail sales of fuels, lubricants, air, water and
other items for the operation and routine maintenance of motor vehicles and/or
making mechanical repairs, servicing and/or washing of motor vehicles, and
which receives more than 50% of its gross income from the retail sale of the
aforesaid items and/or from the making of mechanical repairs, servicing and/or
washing of motor vehicles.
      SUBSTANTIAL. Ample to satisfy the   purpose for which an object is
intended.
      VEGETATION. Evergreen trees,   including, but not limited to which pine
and/or hemlock, evergreen shrubs or plants with a minimum height of six inches
when planted, which reach a height of at least six feet at maturity.
      VISIBLE. Capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal
visual acuity.
      WIRE FENCE. A continuous, translucent, perforated barrier extending from
the surface of the ground to a uniform height of not less than six feet from
the ground at any given point, constructed of wire, steel or nylon mesh, or any
substance of a similar nature and strength, but which perforations or openings
are no larger than one square inch.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987)
§ 111.04 PROHIBITIONS.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful after the effective
date of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity
to operate or maintain, in any unincorporated area of the county, a junkyard or
automobile graveyard within a residential area if there are ten or more housing
units within a geographical area comprised of a one-mile-wide strip, contiguous
and parallel to the external boundary lines of the tract of real property on
which the automobile graveyard or junkyard is located.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to service stations, repair shops or
garages.
   (B)   (1)   Junkyards or automobile graveyards may be operated and/or
maintained without restrictions if and providing that the junkyard or
automobile graveyard shall be fenced at all points where the fencing shall be
necessary to screen the view of persons from public roads, schools or
residential areas, and where the screening is not already substantially
provided.
      (2)   The fence or wire fence shall have at least one gate for the
purpose of ingress and egress.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987)
§ 111.06 NONCONFORMING USES.
   Automobile graveyards or junkyards existing at the effective date of this
chapter, which would be in violation of this chapter, but for this section
shall be granted a grace period of 12 months to conform to the provisions of
this chapter, thereafter same shall be in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987)
§ 111.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   The County Health Department shall be responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and may take informal measures to procure compliance
from any person deemed by the Department or its representative to be in
violation. If informal measures fail to obtain compliance, the Department,
through its representative, shall be responsible for obtaining warrants for
violations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
    Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. §14-4,
punishable by a fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30
days, or both fined and imprisonment. For a continuing offense, each day's
violation is a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 4-6-1987; Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
CHAPTER 112: AMBULANCE SERVICES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Franchise required
   
112.03   Application
   
112.04   Granting franchise
   
112.05   Terms
   
112.06   Drivers and attendants
   
112.07   Vehicles and equipment
   
112.08   Communications
   
112.09   Insurance
   
112.10   Records
   
112.11   Rates and charges
   
112.12   Enforcement
   
112.13   Ambulance Service Board created
   
112.14   Amendments
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle, aircraft or vessel
that is specially designed, constructed or modified and equipped and is
intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for transportation, on
the streets or highways, waterways or airways of this state, of persons who are
sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
   AMBULANCE ATTENDANT. An individual who has completed a training program in
emergency medical care and first aid approved by the State Department of Human
Resources and has been certified as an AMBULANCE ATTENDANT by the Department of
Human Resources, Office of Emergency Medical Services.
   AMBULANCE PROVIDER. An individual, firm, corporation or association who
engages or professes to engage in the business or service of transporting
patients in an ambulance.
   APPROVED. Approved by the State Medical Care Commission pursuant to the
rules and regulations promulgated under G.S. § 143B-165.
   COUNCIL. The Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board.
   COUNTY. The Counties of Pasquotank and Camden.
   DISPATCHER. A person who is available at all times to receive requests for
emergency service, to dispatch emergency services and to advise local law
enforcement agencies and emergency medical facilities of any existing or
threatened emergency.
   EMERGENCY or EMERGENCY TRANSPORTATION SERVICE. The use of an ambulance, its
equipment and personnel to provide medical care and transportation of a patient
who is in need of immediate medical treatment in order to prevent loss of life
or further aggravation or physiological or psychological illness or injury.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN or EMT. An individual who has completed a
training program in emergency medical care at least equal to the National
Standard Training Program for Emergency Medical Technicians, as defined by the
United States Department of Transportation, and has been certified as an
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN by the Department.
   FIRST RESPONDER. An organization with personnel trained in emergency medical
care that is dispatched to the scene of a medical emergency for the primary
purpose of providing emergency medical assistance to a patient until the
ambulance and additional medical aid arrives.
   FRANCHISE. A permit issued by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board
and approved by Pasquotank and Camden Counties to a person(s) or corporation
for the operation of an ambulance service.
   FRANCHISEE. Any person having been issued a franchise by the Pasquotank-
Camden Ambulance Service for the operation of an ambulance service.
   LICENSE. Any driver’s license or permit to operate a motor vehicle issued
under or granted by the laws of the state.
   NONEMERGENCY TRANSPORTATION SERVICES. The operation of an ambulance for any
purpose other than transporting emergency patients.
   OPERATOR. A person in actual physical control of an ambulance which is in
motion or which has the engine running.
   OWNER. Any person or entity who owns an ambulance.
   PATIENT. An individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless such that the need for some medical assistance might
be anticipated while being transported to or from a medical facility.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or groups of individuals acting together for a common purpose and/or
organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the
United States.
   RESCUE. Situations wherein the victim cannot escape an area through the
normal exit or under his or her own power.
   SECONDARY AMBULANCE PROVIDER. The system of personnel and equipment meeting
the same criteria as a primary ambulance provider, but not normally dispatched
on first call response.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.02 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person either as owner, agent or otherwise shall furnish, operate,
conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in, or profess to be
engaged in, the business or service of emergency and/or non-emergency
transportation of patients within the counties unless the person holds a valid
permit for each ambulance used in the business or service issued by the State
Department of Human Resources, Office of Emergency Medical Services, and has
been granted a franchise for the operation of the business or service by the
Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board and the respective Boards of County
Commissioners of Pasquotank and Camden pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall drive an ambulance, attend a patient in one or permit
one to be operated when transporting a patient within the counties unless he or
she holds a currently valid certificate as an ambulance attendant, emergency
medical technician, EMT-Intermediate or EMT-Paramedic issued by the North
Carolina Department of Human Resources, Office of Emergency Medical Services.
   (C)   No franchise shall be required for:
      (1)   Any entity rendering assistance to a franchised ambulance service
in the case of a major catastrophe, mutual aid or emergency with which the
services franchised by the counties;
      (2)   Any entity operated from a location or headquarters outside of the
counties in order to transport patients who are picked up beyond the limits of
the counties to facilities located within the counties, or to pick up patients
within the counties for transporting to locations outside Pasquotank or Camden;
or
      (3)   Ambulance owned and operated by an agency of the United States
Government and the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a franchise to operate ambulances in the counties
shall be made by the ambulance provider upon the forms as may be prepared or
prescribed by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board.
   (B)   The forms shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the ambulance provider and of the owner of
the ambulances;
      (2)   The trade or other fictitious names, if any, under which the
applicant does business, along with a certified copy of an assumed name
certificate stating the name or articles of incorporation stating the name;
      (3)   A resume of the training and experience of the applicant in the
transportation and care of patients;
      (4)   A full description of the type and level of service to be provided
including the location of the place or places from which it is intended to
operate, the manner in which the public will be able to obtain assistance and
how the vehicles will be dispatched; (An audited financial statement of the
applicant as the same pertains to the operations in the counties, the financial
statement to be in the form and in the detail as may be required by the
county.)
      (5)   A description of the applicant’s capability to provide for the
district covered by the franchise applied for and for an accurate estimate of
the minimum and maximum times for a response to calls within the district; and
      (6)   Any information the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board shall
deem reasonable and necessary for a fair determination of the capability of the
applicant to provide ambulance services in the counties in accordance with the
requirements of state laws and the provisions of this regulation.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.04 GRANTING FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Prior to accepting applications for the operation of an ambulance
service, the Pasquotank- Camden Ambulance Service Board may designate specific
service areas as franchise districts. The districts will be established during
criteria that includes geographic size, road access, the location of existing
medical transportation, service, population and response time. The Pasquotank-
Camden Ambulance Service Board shall have the authority to redistrict or
rearrange existing districts at any time at their discretion.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a franchise, the Pasquotank-Camden
Ambulance Service Board shall schedule a time and place for hearing the
applicant. Within 34 days after hearing, the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance
Service Board shall cause an investigation as it may deem necessary to be made
of the applicant and his or her proposed operations.
   (C)   A franchise may be granted by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service
Board and the Counties of Pasquotank and Camden if they find that:
      (1)   The applicant shows a reasonable effort to meet state standards and
standards outlined in the franchise ordinance;
      (2)   The proposed service will fit within the existing service so as not
to adversely affect the level of service or operations of other franchisees to
render service; and
      (3)   A need exists for the proposed service in order to improve the
level of ambulance services available to the residents of the county and that
this is a reasonable and cost effective manner of meeting the need.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.05 TERMS.
   (A)   The Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board may issue a franchise
hereunder to an ambulance provider, to be valid for a term to be determined by
the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board, provided that either party as
its option, may terminate the franchise upon 50 days prior written notice to
the other party. After a notice of service termination is given, the ambulance
provider may reapply for a franchise if continued service is desired.
   (B)   Upon suspension, revocation or termination of a franchise granted
hereunder, the franchised ambulance service immediately shall cease operations.
Upon suspension, revocation or termination of a driver’s license or attendant’s
certificate or emergency medical technician certificate, the persons shall
cease to drive an ambulance or provide medical care in conjunction with an
ambulance service or attend an ambulance. The franchise shall not permit an
individual to drive an ambulance or provide medical care in conjunction with
the ambulance service.
   (C)   Each franchised ambulance service shall comply at all times with the
requirements of this chapter, the franchise granted hereunder and all
applicable state and local laws relating to health, sanitation, safety,
equipment and ambulance design and all other laws and ordinances.
   (D)   Prior approval of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board shall
be required where ownership or control of more than 10% of the right of control
of franchises acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none
of whom own or control 10% or more of the right of control, singularly or
collectively, at the date of the franchise by its acceptance of the franchise.
The franchisee specifically agrees that any acquisition occurring without prior
approval of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board shall constitute a
violation of the franchise by the franchisee and shall be cause for termination
at the option of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board.
   (E)   Any change of ownership of a franchised ambulance service without the
approval of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board shall terminate the
franchise and shall require a new application and a new franchise and
conformance with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original
franchising.
   (F)   No franchise may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred
without the approval of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board and a
finding of conformance with all requirements of this chapter as upon original
franchising. Each franchised ambulance service, its equipment and the premises
designated in the application and all records relating to its maintenance and
operation, as such, shall be open to inspection by the state, the county or
their designated representatives.
   (G)   A franchise may not be defaced, removed or obliterated.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.06 DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS.
   Standards for drivers and attendants as developed by the State Medical Care
Commission as requirement for certification of ambulance attendants and
emergency medical technicians, pursuant to G.S. §§ 131E-155 through 131E-161
and G.S. Ch. 143 Art. 56, shall be applied and the same are incorporated herein
by reference.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.07 VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   Vehicles and equipment standards as developed by the State Medical Care
Commission, pursuant to G.S. §§ 131E-155 through 131E-161 and G.S. Ch. 143 Art.
56, shall be applied and the same are incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.08 COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Each ambulance vehicle shall be equipped with an operational
two-way radio capable of establishing good quality voice communications from
within the geographic confines of Pasquotank and Camden Counties to the
hospital emergency department in Pasquotank County.
      (2)   Each ambulance vehicle shall be equipped with an operational two-
way radio capable of establishing good quality voice communications within the
ambulance   dispatching agency within the counties and within the geographic
confines of Pasquotank and Camden Counties.
   (B)   (1)   Each ambulance provider shall maintain current authorizations or
Federal Communication Commission licenses for all frequencies and radio
transmitters operated by that provider.
      (2)   Copies of all authorizations and licenses shall be furnished and
available for inspection per Federal Communication Commission’s rules and
regulations.
   (C)   Each base of operations must have at least one open-telephone line.
Telephone numbers must be registered with each law enforcement agency and
communications centers in Pasquotank and Camden Counties.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.09 INSURANCE.
   (A)   No ambulance franchise shall be issued under this chapter nor shall
the franchise be valid after issuance unless the franchisee has at all times in
force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the state, for each and every ambulance owned and or operated by
or for the ambulance service providing for the payment of damages:
      (1)   In the sum of $500,000 for injury to or death of individuals in
accidents resulting from any cause for which the owned of the vehicle would be
liable on account of liability imposed on him or her by law, regardless of
whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his or her agency; and
      (2)   In the sum of $50,000 for the loss of or damage to the property of
another, including personal property under like circumstances, in sums as may
be required by the state or as approved by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance
Service Board.
   (B)   The terms and provisions of this section shall not apply to any
ambulances owned and controlled by Pasquotank and Camden Counties that are
operated by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.10 RECORDS.
   Each franchisee shall maintain the following records.
   (A)   Record of dispatch. This record shall show time call was received,
time ambulance was dispatched, time ambulance arrived on scene, time ambulance
arrived at destination, time ambulance in service and time ambulance returned
to base.
   (B)   Trip record. The trip record shall state all information required in
division (A) above in addition to information on a form approved by the county.
The trip record shall be so designed as to provide the patient with a copy
thereof containing all required information. A copy of the trip record may
serve as a receipt for any charges paid.
   (C)   Daily report log. This log shall be maintained for the purpose of
identifying more than one person transported in any one day.
   (D)   Daily driver and attendant checklist and inspection report. This
report shall list contents and description of operations for each vehicle,
signed by the individual verifying vehicle operations and equipment.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.11 RATES AND CHARGES.
   Each franchisee shall submit a schedule of rates to the Pasquotank-Camden
Ambulance Service Board for approval and all charges made by the Pasquotank-
Camden Ambulance Service Board, or the fact that no charges are made, shall be
approved by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board shall be the enforcing
agency for the regulations contained in this chapter. The Ambulance Service
Board will:
      (1)   Receive all franchise proposals from potential providers;
      (2)   Study each proposal for conformance to this chapter;
      (3)   With the approval of the Ambulance Service Board, recommend to the
Board of Commissioners the award of the franchise(s) to the applicants
submitting the best proposal(s);
      (4)   Inspect the premises, vehicles, equipment and personnel of
franchises to assure compliance to this chapter and perform any other
inspections that may be required;
      (5)   With the approval of the Ambulance Service Board, recommend to the
Board of Commissioners of Pasquotank and Camden Counties the temporary or
permanent suspension of a franchise in the event of noncompliance with the
franchise terms of this chapter and recommend the imposition of misdemeanor or
civil penalties as provided therein;
      (6)   Receive monthly reports from ambulance services and consolidate the
same into a quarterly summary for review by the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance
Service Board and the Counties of Pasquotank and Camden;
      (7)   Receive complaints from the public, other enforcing agencies and
ambulance services regarding franchise infractions; review the complaint with
the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board and obtain corrective action with
the approval of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board;
      (8)   With the approval of the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board,
recommend improvements to Pasquotank and Camden Counties which will ensure
medical transportation;
      (9)   Maintain all records required by this chapter and the Pasquotank-
Camden Ambulance Service Board; and
      (10) Perform the above functions as may be requested by any municipality
within the Counties of Pasquotank and Camden.
   (B)   The Counties of Pasquotank and Camden may inspect a franchisee’s
records, premises and equipment at any time in order to ensure compliance with
this chapter and any franchise granted hereunder.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.13 AMBULANCE SERVICE BOARD CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board
whose membership shall be comprised of three members, two to be appointed by
Pasquotank County and one member appointed by the Camden County Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   The Pasquotank-Camden Ambulance Service Board shall have the
responsibility and duty of advising on matters relating to the enforcement of
this chapter as specified in division (A) above and shall develop and recommend
for approval by the Board of County Commissioners of Pasquotank and Camden
Counties standards of care, policies, procedures and actions which will
maintain and improve the quality of emergency medical services for the
residents of Pasquotank and Camden Counties.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
§ 112.14 AMENDMENTS.
   The Board of Commissioners of the Counties of Pasquotank and Camden may,
through appropriate actions, amend or expand this chapter to include other
emergency departments or agencies as deemed necessary.
(Ord. passed 2-4-1985)
CHAPTER 113: MATERIALS INSTALLATION
Section
   
113.01   Authority
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Applications
   
113.04   Procedure for issuance
   
113.05   Termination and renewal
   
113.06   Suspension; revocation and appeal
   
113.07   Change of location
   
113.08   Permit required; fees
   
113.09   Bond required
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Ch. 703 of the North Carolina Session
Laws of 1977 and G.S. § 153A-134.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 703 of the 1977 North Carolina Session Laws was originally codified
as §§ 143-151.26 through 143-151.36 of the General Statutes and subsequently
repealed by Chapter 393 of the 1999 North Carolina Session Laws. Section 5 of
the repealing law, however, provides that structures built before its effective
date shall not be affected by any changes made by the repeal.
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   On and after January 1, 1978, no person, firm or corporation may, for a
consideration, install, alter or restore, within any unincorporated part of the
county and within any city which adopts this chapter pursuant to the authority
granted in G.S. § 153A-122, any insulation or other materials or energy
utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the state’s building code
requirements for insulation and energy utilization standards who is not either:
   (A)   Licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under G.S. Ch. 87;
   (B)   Working under the supervision of a registered architect or
professional engineer;
   (C)   An owner working upon his or her own building; or
   (D)   Licensed under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATIONS.
   Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall submit an
application for the license to the Assistant Tax Supervisor conforming to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Form of application. Each application shall be a written statement
upon forms provided by the Assistant Tax Supervisor.
   (B)   Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name and home address of the applicant, if an individual, or home
office address, if a corporation of partnership;
      (2)   Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership;
      (3)   Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a
corporation;
      (4)   Place, if there the proposed business is to be located;
      (5)   Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts involving
dishonesty, fraud or deceit by the applicant or any employee, partner, officer
or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other state or
jurisdiction;
      (6)   Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant authorizing activities
of the type regulated by this chapter or other activities involving
construction, alteration or modification of buildings and structures;
      (7)   Information as to the circumstances in which any local, state or
federal government or agency has refused, suspended or revoked a license of the
type described in division (B)(6) above to applicant or any employee, partner,
officer or director of the applicant.
   (C)   License fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a license fee
in the amount of $20 for the license, the amount to be for the fiscal year and
prorated by quarters to the end of the year.
   (D)   False statements. False statements on any application for a license
shall be grounds for immediate revocation or denial of the license.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
§ 113.04 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Review by county officers. Each application received by the Tax
Supervisor shall be promptly forwarded to all county departments designated by
the County Manager for review. The officers shall promptly make any comments
and recommendations pertaining to the application and forward them to the
County Manager.
   (B)   Licensing agency. The application and any comments and recommendations
relating thereto shall be considered by the County Manager which shall then
issue or deny the license pursuant to the following standards.
   (C)   Standards. The County Manager shall issue the license unless he or she
shall find that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer or director of
the applicant:
      (1)   Has been convicted within the last three years of a felony or an
act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, whether in this or any other state
or jurisdiction;
      (2)   Has been refused a license to do the type of work authorized herein
or has had a license suspended or revoked by any local, state or federal
government or agency and the government or agency has not subsequently granted
or restored the license;
      (3)   Has knowingly made a false statement in the application; and/or
      (4)   Has failed to post the bond or other security required by §
113.09.
   (D)   Appeal from denial. Any applicant whose license is denied may appeal
the denial to the County Board of Commissioners. After reasonable notice to the
applicant, the Board shall afford the applicant an opportunity to show why its
license should not be denied.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
§ 113.05 TERMINATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal
year for which issued. Renewal of the licenses shall be pursuant to the same
procedures and requirements set forth for initial issuance.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
§ 113.06 SUSPENSION; REVOCATION AND APPEAL.
   (A)   The County Manager may suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder
any time upon a showing that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer or
director of the applicant has:
      (1)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application for a license;
      (2)   Violated the state’s building code requirements as to insulation or
energy utilization equipment or materials, whether in this or any other
jurisdiction; or
      (3)   Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with
respect to any contract entered into for work requiring this license.
   (B)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal the
suspension or revocation to the County Board of Commissioners. After reasonable
notice to the licensee, the Board shall afford the licensee an opportunity to
show why its license should not be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
§ 113.07 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided a ten-day
notice thereof is given to the County Manager and operation at the new location
does not violate any applicable state or local law, ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
§ 113.08 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.
   On and after January 1, 1978, no person, firm or corporation licensed under
this chapter may for a consideration install, alter or restore any insulation
or other materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet
the state’s building code requirements for insulation and energy utilization
without first securing a permit from the Assistant Tax Supervisor for each item
of work. There shall be a permit fee of $15 for each permit issued.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.09 BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before a license shall be issued to any applicant, the applicant shall
post a bond with the county in the amount of $1,000. In lieu of posting a bond,
the applicant may deposit a cashier’s check in the same amount.
   (B)   The security required by division (A) above shall be available to
indemnify any person for any damage which may accrue by reason of the
applicant’s failure properly to provide or install insulation, energy
utilization equipment or other materials designed or intended to meet the
state’s building code standards for insulation and energy utilization.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to all the applicable punishment, penalties and equitable
relief provided for by Ch. 703 of North Carolina Session Laws of 1977, and G.S.
§ 153A-123.
(Ord. passed 12-19-1977)
CHAPTER 114: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
114.01   Intent
   
114.02   Permit required
   
114.03   Permit applications
   
114.04   Procedures for considering applications
   
114.05   Permit renewal
   
114.06   Appeals
   
114.07   Revocation of permit
   
114.08   Exemptions
   
114.09    Licenses or permits; refusal to issue, suspension, revocation;
notice, hearing
   
114.10   Criminal background checks
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the door-to-door offering for
sale and selling of goods, wares, merchandise, food, periodicals and services
and the solicitation of orders therefor in residential areas of the county, and
to thereby promote the public safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for
sale or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, food, periodicals or
services by going from door-to-door (“peddle” or “solicit”) or to beg or
panhandle, within the county without having first secured a peddler/solicitor’s
permit from the county as provided for in this chapter, unless it is done with
the prior request or invitation of the residents or occupants of the premises
visited.
   (B)   Additionally, it is unlawful to peddle, solicit, beg or panhandle
unless the following requirements are met:
      (1)   Such peddling, soliciting, begging or panhandling shall be
permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during Eastern
Daylight Time and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during Eastern Standard Time.
      (2)   The peddler/solicitor permit issued for that person shall be
carried and displayed at all times while conducting such solicitations in such
a manner as to be clearly visible to a reasonable person of adequate vision.
      (3)   All other permits or licenses required by law shall have been
obtained.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for peddler/solicitor permits under this section shall be
submitted to the Sheriff’s Department during normal business hours (Monday
through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time) on a form provided by the
Sheriff’s Department, under oath, and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The full name of the applicant;
      (2)   The permanent residence address of the applicant;
      (3)   The applicant’s temporary address in or in the vicinity of the
county, if applicable;
      (4)   The name and address of the applicant’s employer or the
organization with which the applicant is associated in connection with the
begging, panhandling, sale activity or solicitation of orders;
      (5)   The type(s) of donations, goods, wares, merchandise, food,
periodicals and services to be requested, sold or offered for sale;
      (6)   The period for which the application is sought, which shall not
exceed 60 consecutive calendar days; provided that the permit may be renewed
for 60-day periods without limit, upon proper application therefor;
      (7)   A record of any and all crimes of which the applicant has been
convicted or has pleaded no contest in the ten years preceding the submittal of
the application;
      (8)   The age, height, weight and any other additional information which
the county may reasonably require for identification, including a copy of the
document(s) used by the applicant to verify personal identification (e.g.,
driver’s license, passport, picture I.D.); and
      (9)   A complete listing of and information concerning all other permits
or licenses, such as privilege licenses, which were obtained by the applicant.
   (B)   If an application is filed by an employer, there shall also be filed
separate applications for each peddler, solicitor, beggar and panhandler,
giving the information set forth above for each peddler, solicitor, beggar and
panhandler and signed and sworn to by each peddler/solicitor, and a separate
permit shall be issued for each applicant.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.04 PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERING APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Sheriff or designee
(hereafter “Sheriff”) shall make or cause to be made such investigation as
reasonably necessary to verify the information in the application and to assure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall issue a permit unless
the applicant:
      (1)   Has not submitted a completed application;
      (2)   Is not permitted by law to engage in such activity due to age;
      (3)   Has been convicted of, or has pleaded no contest to, a felony
charge within the ten years preceding the submittal of the application;
      (4)   Has been, within the previous five years, convicted of, or pleaded
no contest to, a misdemeanor charge involving theft, fraud, forgery, uttering
or other crimes of like nature or any crime involving moral turpitude;
      (5)   Does not have valid driving privileges in the state in those cases
where the applicant will be operating a vehicle in the course and scope of the
peddling, soliciting, begging or panhandling; or
      (6)   Has not obtained any necessary licenses.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall approve or deny an application and issue a permit as
soon as possible and, except in the case of extraordinary circumstances, as
when a number of applications are submitted within a short period of time,
should act within five business days of receipt of the completed application.
Such issued permit shall be nontransferable.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.05 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   A peddler/solicitor permit may be renewed for an unlimited number of 60-day
periods, provided an application for renewal is made on such form as provided
by the Sheriff’s Department no later than the expiration date on the current
valid permit. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new
applications. The Sheriff shall review each application for renewal to
determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. If the Sheriff’s Department finds that the application meets the above
requirements, the renewal permit shall be issued.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.06 APPEALS.
   The appeal of a refusal to issue a permit or the revocation of a permit
shall be made to the County Manager by filing a written notice of appeal,
specifying with particularity the grounds upon which the appeal is made, no
later than ten days from the date of the refusal to issue a permit or the
revocation of a permit. The County Manager or designee (“County Manager”) shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, shall give due notice to
all parties, and shall render a decision within a reasonable time. The order or
decision of County Manager shall be the final county action for the purpose of
judicial review.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Permits issued under this chapter may be revoked in accordance with §
114.09. Additional grounds for revocation of a permit include, where evidence
is presented, that the applicant has been arrested for a felony or a
misdemeanor involving theft, fraud, forgery, moral turpitude, criminal trespass
or a threat to the public safety during the peddling/solicitation period, or
has otherwise violated the provisions of this chapter. A permit which has been
revoked shall be immediately surrendered to the Sheriff’s Department. Appeals
of revocations may be made pursuant to the same process as for denied permits.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   The delivery of goods or services which have been ordered before
delivery;
   (B)   The circulation of petitions for signature or lawful distribution of
advertising materials, flyers or materials expressing views on political,
social or religious matters;
   (C)   The lawful promotion or expression of views concerning political,
social, religious and other like matters;
   (D)   The sale or offering for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, food,
periodicals or services by bona fide members or representatives of charitable,
religious, civic or fraternal organizations who receive no compensation of any
kind for their services, and such sale or offering by children under the age of
18 years who are students in a public or private school for school activities;
   (E)   The solicitation of contributions or pledges thereof for bona fide
nonprofit organizations;
   (F)   The sale or delivery of goods to business establishments; and
   (G)   The sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk, dairy products,
vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale
of such commodities named herein is now authorized by law.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.09 LICENSES OR PERMITS; REFUSAL TO ISSUE, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION; NOTICE,
HEARING.
   (A)   The county may refuse to issue a license or permit, or the licenses or
permits issued pursuant to this chapter, unless otherwise provided hereunder,
may be suspended or revoked by the County Manager or other authorized official,
department, board or agency where applicable, after notice and hearing for any
of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentations or false statements contained in the
application for permit or license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise and services;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter and/or any ordinance of the county;
      (4)   Conviction of the applicant, licensee or permittee of any crime or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a violation of any act of this state,
or any law of the United States having a reasonable relationship to the purpose
and scope of the permit or license; and/or
      (5)   Conducting the activity under this chapter and/or any ordinance of
the county in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the public.
   (B)   Notice of hearing for the suspension or revocation of a license or
permit shall be in writing given by the Clerk to the Board of Commissioners,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place
of the hearing. Service of such notice shall be made either by personal service
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or
permittee at the last known address, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
   (C)   In case of refusal to issue a permit or license, or the suspension or
revocation of a license or permit as herein provided, no portion of the
application, license or permit fee shall be returned to the applicant, licensee
or permittee unless otherwise provided in this chapter and/or any ordinance of
the county.
   (D)   Any suspension or revocation hereunder shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty from being enforced.
   (E)   The order of the County Manager or other authorized official,
department, board or agency where applicable, shall be the final county action
for the purpose of judicial review.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010)
§ 114.10 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS.
   (A)   In order to protect the citizens of the county and their properties,
the procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and
criminal history checks on all applicants for “peddler/solicitor” permits.
   (B)   Subject to division (B)(3) below, an application for a permit with the
county may be denied for those persons convicted of any crime against a person,
or crimes against property where intent is an element, or any drug or gambling
related offense.
      (1)   The Sheriff, or designee, may conduct an investigation of any
applicant for a “peddler/solicitor” permit and it shall be a precondition prior
to issuance of the permit that an applicant for such permit shall, upon
request, provide fingerprints and all other necessary personal identification
including a social security number and drivers license, if available, so that
the Sheriff, or designee, may cause a thorough search to be made of the local
and state criminal records to determine if the applicant has a history of
criminal convictions or the crimes enumerated above by use of the Division of
Criminal Information Network (DCI).
      (2)   The Sheriff, or designee, shall provide the findings from the use
of the DCI to the County Manager, or designee, only in the event an appeal is
made to the County Manager for refusal to issue a permit or the revocation of a
permit, and provided that all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of
Investigations Division of Criminal Information have been executed.
      (3)   An evaluation of any crime for purposes of the “peddler/solicitor”
permit application will take into account the nature and the circumstances of
the offense and the time frame of the offense as it relates to the request for
a permit.
      (4)   Prior to denial or termination of the “peddler/solicitor” permit
based upon criminal history record information (CHRI), the Sheriff’s Department
shall verify the existence of a record by either obtaining a certified public
record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the individual to the criminal
information and identification section for verification that the CHRI record
belongs to the individual.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
    Any violation of §§
114.01 through
114.09 is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4, punishable by a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisonment. For a continuing offense, each day's violation is a separate
offense. In addition to the penalties previously stated a violation of this
chapter may be enforced by any one or more of the remedies authorized by G.S. §
153A-123.
(Ord. 2010-1, passed 2-15-2010; Ord. passed 11-21-2022)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Unreasonable noise
   
130.02   Reckless use of firearms
   
130.03   Fishing prohibitions
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 UNREASONABLE NOISE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful in the county for any person to create or
assist in creating, permit, continue or permit the continuance of any sound
causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to reasonable persons
of ordinary sensibilities. Noise of the character, intensity or duration as to
be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, noise created
due to the operation of a bona fide farm is exempt from regulation under this
section. For purposes of this section, a bona fide farm is any tract or tracts
of land, one tract composed of at least ten acres, on which is actively engaged
the commercial production of growing of crops, plants, livestock or poultry.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of division (A) above, but the enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal; the creation by
means of any signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of the device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than police,
fire or other emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, amplifier, television, tape
deck, tape recorder or musical instrument in a manner or with volume as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person or persons in any
dwelling, hotel, motel or other type of residence;
      (4)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle in a manner
as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise, or
in a manner as to cause squealing or screeching of tires, or in a manner as to
cause the tires to propel rocks, gravel or sand;
      (5)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary
internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
      (6)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates
and containers;
      (7)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (8)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
      (9)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, sale or display of merchandise;
      (10)   The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building or other structure in a residential or business district
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except by permit from
the building inspector when, in his or her opinion, the work will not create
objectionable noise; (Upon complaint in writing of the occupant of property
near the location of the work, the Building Inspector shall immediately revoke
the permit and the work shall be immediately discontinued. The Building
Inspector may permit emergency work in the preservation of public health or
safety at any time. Emergency work shall be deemed to be work necessary to
restore property to a safe condition, work required to protect, provide or
prevent persons or property from danger and potential danger; or work by
private or public utilities when restoring utility service.)
      (11)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling
station or other business in any district zoned residential so as to cause loud
or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.;
      (12)   The creating of any unusually load or disturbing noise, including,
but not limited to, loud and boisterous talking or yelling by an individual or
by groups of persons on public streets, sidewalks, public or private parking
lots or vehicular areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which
noises tend to disturb the rest and tranquility of persons living or residing
in the nearby area;
      (13)   No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, on any
premise, owned, leased, occupied or controlled by the person, any animal
otherwise permitted to be kept which, by habitual or frequent sounds, crying,
howling, barking, squawking, meowing or other noise, shall disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of any person; and
      (14)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning or court, while the same are in session.
   (C)   The following are exempt from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Sound emanating from scheduled outdoors athletic events;
      (2)   Construction operations from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily for which
building permits have been issued or construction operations not requiring
permits; providing all equipment is operated in accord with the manufacturer’s
specifications and with all standard equipment manufacturer’s mufflers and
noise reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition;
      (3)   Noise of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief
valves, and all church bells; (For purposes of this division (C)(3), the term
“church bells” shall not include electronic devices or artificial sound
reproduction systems intended to sound like church bells.)
      (4)   Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle;
      (5)   Noise resulting from parades, lawful picketing or other public
demonstrations protected by the U.S. Constitution or federal law, provided the
activity is of a temporary duration lasting no longer than two hours during any
24-hour period;
      (6)   Unamplified and amplified sound at street fairs conducted,
sponsored or sanctioned by the county;
      (7)   Noise from noisemakers and fireworks on holidays recognized by the
state or country or at times allowed under a pyrotechnics permit issued
pursuant to G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 54;
      (8)   Unamplified and amplified sound at community concerts conducted,
sponsored or sanctioned by the county;
      (9)   Practice sessions or performances by marching bands; and
      (10)   Noise from trains and associated railroad rolling stock when
operated in proper repair and manner.
   (D)   (1)   The complaints of two or more persons, at least one of whom
resides in a different home from the other complaining person or persons, or
the complaint of one or more persons, when combined with the complaint of a
duly authorized law enforcement officer, shall be prima facie evidence that the
sound is a loud and annoying, frightening, loud and disturbing, unreasonably
loud or unnecessary noise.
      (2)   The complaint of a duly authorized law enforcement officer, alone,
shall be prima facie evidence that the sound is a loud and annoying,
frightening, loud and disturbing, unreasonably loud or unnecessary noise.
(Ord. passed 6-21-1999) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 RECKLESS USE OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Any person who utilizes a firearm in the county carelessly and
heedlessly, in willful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others,
shall be guilty of reckless use of a firearm. This shall include, but not be
limited to, using a firearm that poses a hazard to any person or property, or
involves discharging a firearm such that a projectile crosses the property of
another person without his or her permission.
   (B)   Any person who utilizes a firearm in the county without due caution
and circumspection and in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger,
any person or property shall be guilty of the reckless use of a firearm.
(Ord. passed 7-24-1989) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 FISHING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The Board determines and finds as a fact that fishing from or on
bridges on state highways over streams in the county is hazardous and creates
dangers to the life and limb and safety of the persons engaged in the fishing
and to the traveling public.
   (B)   Fishing is hereby prohibited from or on the following described and
designated bridges on highways over rivers and other streams within the county.
      (1)   U.S. 17, Pasquotank River, Bridge No. 17-11-20, Morgan’s Corner
area; and
      (2)   S.R. #1140, Hall’s Creek, Bridge No. 24, Hall’s Creek area.
   (C)   No person shall fish from or on any of the bridges hereinbefore
designated and described.
   (D)   The State Department of Transportation is hereby authorized and
requested to erect on all of the bridges hereinbefore designated and described
and on the approaches thereto “NO FISHING FROM BRIDGE” signs to warn and give
public notice to all persons that fishing from or on the bridges is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1982) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §
130.01 shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor as provided by G.S.
§ 14-4, punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or by fine not less
than $75 and not more than $500, or both fined and imprisonment. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation.
      (2)   In addition, enforcement of this section may be by appropriate
equitable remedy, injunction or other of abatement issuing from a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123.
   (C)   Any violation of § 
130.02 is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. §14-4, punishable by a fine of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisonment. For a continuing offense, each day's violation is a separate
offense.
   (D)   Any violation of § 
130.03 is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. §14-4, punishable by a fine of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both fined and
imprisonment. For a continuing offense, each day's violation is a separate
offense.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1982; Ord. passed 7-24-1989; Ord. passed 6-21-1999; Ord.
passed 11-21-2022)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; HOUSING CODES
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
153.   COASTAL MANAGEMENT
      
154.   MANUFACTURED HOMES
      
155.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
156.   AIRPORT ZONING
      
157.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Acceptance of conveyance registration
Implementation of Zoning Vested Right
   
150.15   Purpose
   
150.16   Definitions
   
150.17   Establishment of zoning vested right
   
150.18   Approval procedures and approval authority
   
150.19   Duration
   
150.20   Termination
   
150.21   Limitations
   
150.22   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Zoning, see
Ch. 157
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ACCEPTANCE OF CONVEYANCE REGISTRATION.
   The Register of Deeds of the county shall not accept for registration any
conveyance of real property (other than a mortgage or deed of trust), unless
the instrument that conveys the real property has first been presented to the
Tax Supervisor and the Tax Supervisor has noted thereon that he or she has
obtained the information he or she desires from the conveyance and from the
person recording it by a stamp or facsimile that the Tax Supervisor shall cause
to be placed upon the instrument conveying the real property.
(Ord. 8, passed 1-3-1977)
IMPLEMENTATION OF ZONING VESTED RIGHT
§ 150.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to implement the provisions of G.S. §
153A-344.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established
upon the approval of a site specific development plan or a phased development
plan.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Board of County Commissioners, Board of Adjustment
or other board or official designated by ordinance or this chapter as being
authorized to grant the specific zoning or land use permit or approval that
constitutes a site specific development plan or a phased development plan.
   PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
      (1)   A plan which has been submitted to the county by a landowner for
phased development which shows the type and intensity of use for a specific
parcel or parcels with a lesser degree of certainty than the plan determined by
the county to be a site specific plan. The purpose of submitting the phased
development plan to the county is for purposes of obtaining one of the
following zoning or land use permits or approvals:
         (a)   Subdivision plan as regulated by §
155.061;
         (b)   Special use permit as regulated by §§
157.135 through
157.138;
         (c)   Multi-family dwellings as regulated by §
151.50; and
         (d)   Manufactured home rental community plan as regulated by §§
154.01 through
154.10.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a variance, a sketch plan or
any other document that fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type
and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property shall
constitute a phased development plan.
   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
      (1)   A plan of land development submitted to the county for purposes of
obtaining one of the following zoning or land use permits or approvals:
         (a)   Subdivision plan as regulated by §
155.075;
         (b)   Special use permit as regulated by §§
157.135 through
157.138;
         (c)   Multi-family dwellings as regulated by §
151.50; and
         (d)   Manufactured home rental community plan as regulated by §§
154.01 through
154.10.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a variance, a sketch plan
nor any other document that fails to describe with reasonable certainty the
type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall
constitute a site specific development plan.
   ZONING VESTED RIGHT. A right pursuant to G.S. § 153A-344.1 to undertake and
complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of
an approved site specific development plan or phased development plan.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.17 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING VESTED RIGHT.
   (A)   A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid
approval, or conditional approval, by the Board of County Commissioners or
Board of Adjustment, as applicable, of a site specific development plan or
phased development plan, following notice and public hearing.
   (B)   The approving authority may approve a site specific development plan
or phased development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) above, approval of a site
specific development plan or phased development plan with the condition that a
variance be obtained shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until
the necessary variance is obtained.
   (D)   A site specific development plan or phased development plan shall be
deemed approved upon the effective date of the approval authority’s action or
ordinance relating thereto.
   (E)   The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude the
application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not
affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or regulations
that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land-
use regulation by the county, including, but not limited to, building, fire,
plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. Otherwise, applicable new or amended
regulations shall become effective with respect to property that is subject to
a site specific development plan or phased development plan upon the expiration
or termination of the vested right in accordance with this subchapter.
   (F)   A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to and
run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific development
plan or phased development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall
be entitled to exercise such right while applicable.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.18 APPROVAL PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, an application for
site specific development plan or phased development plan approval shall be
processed in accordance with the procedures established by ordinance and shall
be considered by the designated approval authority for the specific type of
zoning or land use permit or approval for which application is made.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, if the authority
to issue a particular zoning or land use permit or approval has been delegated
by ordinance to a board, committee or administrative official other than the
Board of County Commissioners, Board of Adjustment or other planning agency
designated to perform any or all of the duties of a Board of Adjustment, in
order to obtain a zoning vested right, the applicant must request in writing at
the time of application that the application be considered and acted on by the
Board of County Commissioners, following notice and a public hearing as
provided in G.S. § 153A-323 and Ch. 160A, Art. 19.
   (C)   In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of
a site specific development plan or phased development plan, the applicant must
indicate at the time of application, on a form to be provided by the county,
that a zoning vested right is being sought.
   (D)   Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site specific
development plan or phased development plan shall contain the following
notation: “Approval of this plan establishes a zoning vested right under G.S. §
153A-344.1 unless terminated at an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall
be valid until (date).”
   (E)   Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific
development plan or phased development plan, nothing in this chapter shall
exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance
with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such
reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval.
   (F)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the revocation of the
original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms
and conditions of the approval or the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.19 DURATION.
   (A)   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this subchapter
shall remain vested for a period of three years. This vesting shall not be
extended by any amendments or modifications to a site specific development plan
or phased development plan unless expressly provided by the approval authority
at the time the amendment or modification is approved.
   (B)   Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of G.S.
§ 153A-358 and the revocation provisions of G.S. § 153A-362 shall apply, except
that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of
time while a zoning vested right under this subchapter is outstanding.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.20 TERMINATION.
   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this subchapter shall
terminate:
   (A)   At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings
and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed;
   (B)   With the written consent of the affected landowner;
   (C)   Upon findings by the Board of Commissioners, by ordinance after notice
and a public hearing, that natural or human-made hazards on or in the immediate
vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare if the project were to proceed as
contemplated in the site specific development plan or the phased development
plan;
   (D)   Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs,
expenses and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited
to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural,
planning, marketing, legal and other consultant’s fees incurred after approval
by the county, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid.
Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property
which is caused by such action;
   (E)   Upon findings by the Board of County Commissioners, by ordinance after
notice and a hearing, that the landowner or his or her representative
intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material
misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the approval
authority of the site specific development plan or the phased development plan;
or
   (F)   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or
regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific
development plan or the phased development plan, in which case the approval
authority may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in
state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after
notice and a hearing.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.21 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter is intended or shall be deemed to create any
vested right other than those established pursuant to G.S. § 153A-344.1.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
§ 150.22 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective October 1, 1991 and shall only apply to
site specific development plans or phased development plans approved on or
after October 1, 1991.
(Ord. passed 11-4-1991)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS; HOUSING CODES
Section
Minimum Housing Code
   
151.01   Finding; purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Dwelling fitness
   
151.04   Structural condition
   
151.05   Basic equipment and facilities
   
151.06   Ventilation
   
151.07   Space, use and location
   
151.08   Safe and sanitary maintenance
   
151.09   Pest and infestation control
   
151.10   Rooming houses; exceptions
   
151.11   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
   
151.12   Duties of Building Inspector
   
151.13   Procedures for enforcement; compliance
   
151.14   Conflict
Address Display
   
151.25   Purpose; intent
   
151.26   Definitions
   
151.27   Administration; application
   
151.28   Display of road address numbers
   
151.29   Numbers for future buildings
   
151.30   Enforcement
Multi-Family Dwellings
   
151.45   Title
   
151.46   Purpose
   
151.47   Authority
   
151.48   Jurisdiction
   
151.49   Definitions of terms
   
151.50   Procedure for securing approval
   
151.51   Design standards
   
151.52   Development with intent for sale
   
151.53   Administration
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Material Installation, see
Ch. 113
MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
§ 151.01 FINDING; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that
there exist in the county dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due to
other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, and dangerous
and detrimental to the health, safety and morals and otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the county.
   (B)   It is further found by the County Commissioners that there exist in
the county abandoned structures which constitute a health and safety hazard as
a result of the attraction of insects and rodents or which result in a
condition creating a fire hazard or which bring about dangerous conditions
constituting a threat to children or which bring about frequent use by vagrants
as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities.
   (C)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the county as authorized by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 6, it is the purpose of
this subchapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and
continued occupancy of all dwellings used for habitation and for the continued
existence of abandoned structures as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASEMENT. A portion of a building which is located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.
      CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or
wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
      DETERIORATED. A dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Inspector.
      DWELLING. Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing
as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a DWELLING. The word DWELLING,
wherever used herein, shall also be construed to mean any structure which has
not been occupied by the owner or the owners tenant for a period of 90
consecutive days.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the Inspector.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupant or to the public.
      INSPECTOR. A Building Inspector of the county or any agent of the
Inspector who is authorized by the Inspector.
      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
      OWNER. Any person who alone or jointly, or severally with owners:
         (a)   Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
         (b)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as OWNER or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he or she were the OWNER.
      PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units
(mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basin, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
      PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The County Housing Authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the county or the state
relating to health, fire building regulations or any other activities
concerning dwellings in the county.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
      ROWING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner of operator to three
or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father
or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage
and ashes, and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control of,
the owner or operator.
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
      UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Conditions exist in a dwelling which violate
or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or
more of the requirements established by this subchapter.
   (B)   Whenever the words “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “rooming house,”
“rooming unit,” or “premises” are used in this subchapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.03 DWELLING FITNESS.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held out for
use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standards of
fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of §§
151.05 through
151.08. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which
does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of §§
151.05 through
151.08.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 STRUCTURAL CONDITION.
   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or
other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall not be
rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which might
admit rodents.
   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports
shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall
be maintained in the condition that they will not fall or collapse.
   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be
provided.
   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall
be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable household
methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in a manner
so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various
spaces.
   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floor and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weather and watertight.
   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling or in a condition or location as to
constitute a fire hazard.
   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors on the
ground.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.05 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   Plumbing system.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply
approved by the District Health Department.
      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and adequate supply of both cold and hot
water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system
connected to a potable water supply.
      (3) All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the County Plumbing
Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working
order.
      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling
unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or
shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user.
      (5)   Divisions (A)(2) and (A)(4) above shall not apply to residential
properties for which approved septic systems cannot be installed by reason of
lot size or other reasons; further, as to residential properties which are
occupied as of the effective date of this subchapter and which as of the date
do not comply with the terms of this division (A); divisions (A)(2) and (A)(4)
above shall become effective as of the vacation of the present tenants, and the
property shall be brought into compliance with all provisions of this division
(A) prior to entrance of new tenants into the properties.
   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities
for providing heat in accordance with either divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) below.
      (1)   Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient
capacity so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit to which it is connected with a minimum
temperature of 70°F, measured at a point three feet above the floor during
ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Where a central electric heating system is not provided, each
dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces,
chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as
to heat all habitable rooms with a minimum temperature of 70°F, measured three
feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
   (C)   Electrical system.
      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights
and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles, connected in a manner as
determined by the county’s Electric Code. There shall be installed in every
bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each
habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall-type electric
convenience receptacles.
      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not
sufficient.
      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained
in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed in
accordance with the county’s Electrical Code.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.06 VENTILATION.
   (A)   (1)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of the
room.
      (2)   Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any
room and light obstructing structures are located less than five feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, a window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included
as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
      (3)   Whenever the only window in a room is a skylighted-type window in
the top of the room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at least
15% of the total floor area of the room.
   (B)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or another device as will adequately ventilate the room.
The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at
least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size
as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation.
   (C)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or
skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
rooms equipped with an approved ventilation system.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.07 SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.
   (A)   Room sizes.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in
each habitable room as required by the county’s Residential Building Code.
      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
      (3)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for
each occupant under 12 years of age.
   (B)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet.
   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of
habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling
unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The
floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four
and one-half feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area computing
the total area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
   (E)   Basement. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
      (2)   The total window areas, total openable window area and ceiling
height are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and/or
      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except where the window or
windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.08 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior
wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight and rodent proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording
privacy, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal
use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with
paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of
moisture or the weather.
   (B)   Interior floor, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar
door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent
proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair,
porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit the floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or
utility which is required under this subchapter shall be so constructed or
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in satisfactory working condition.
   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough
drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be
kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental
to health.
   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of
egress as required by the county’s Building Code.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.09 PEST AND INFESTATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes,
flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoor space shall have supplied and installed screens and a self-closing
device. Every window and other device with openings to outdoor space, used or
intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens
installed.
   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed or another
approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or
other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit
in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling
containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.10 ROOMING HOUSES; EXCEPTIONS.
   All of the provisions of this subchapter, and all of the minimum standards
and requirements of this subchapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses and
to every person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or lets to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided
in the following divisions.
   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved
water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each four rooms within a rooming house whenever the facilities are shared. All
facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall be
directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more than
one story removed from any of the persons sharing the facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water
at all times. The required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
   (C)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, ceilings and for
the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house; and he or
she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house
is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
   (D)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower required by division (A) above shall be located within
the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford privacy and are
separate from habitable rooms, and which are accessible from a common hall and
without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.11 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he or she occupies and controls.
   (C)   Rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in the supplied storage facilities. In all cases, the owner shall be
responsible for the availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.
   (D)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation of same.
   (E)   Care of facilities equipment and structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any
part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.12 DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   (1)   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the duties and powers
herein prescribed.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector:
         (a)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings
and dwelling units, located in the county, in order to determine which
dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the
purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to the
dwellings and dwelling units;
         (b)   To take action, together with other appropriate departments and
agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of
housing which is deteriorated;
         (c)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed; and
         (d)   To perform other duties as may be herein prescribed.
   (B)   The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions
of this subchapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
      (2)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections; provided, the entries shall be made in a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and employees
as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter.
   (C)   For the purpose of making inspection, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall
give the Inspector free access to the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit,
and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of
the dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for
the purpose of making the repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter or with any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.13 PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is
filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of
the county charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector, upon inspection, that any
dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall, if
his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charges, issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the
dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and containing a
notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony
at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing shall also
be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating to the
dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give evidence
relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts
of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Inspector.
      (2)   Procedure after hearing.
         (a)   After the notice and hearing, the Inspector shall state in
writing his or her determination whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit
for human habitation, and if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated.
         (b)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit
is deteriorated, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact
in support of the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon
the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, alter
and improve the dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards
of fitness established by this subchapter within a specified period of time,
not to exceed 90 days. The order may also direct and require the owner to
vacate and close the dwellings or dwelling unit until the repairs, alterations
and improvements have been made.
         (c)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling is dilapidated, he
or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact to support the
determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order directing and requiring the owner to either repair, alter and improve the
dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness
established by this subchapter, or else vacate and remove or demolish the same
within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days.
      (3)   Failure to comply with order.
         (a)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or
dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector to repair,
alter or improve the same within the time specified therein, or if the owner of
a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector to
vacate and close, and remove or demolish the same within the time specified
therein, the Inspector shall submit to the Board of County Commissioners at its
next regular meeting a resolution directing the County Attorney to petition the
Superior Court for an order directing the owner to comply with the order of the
Inspector, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).
         (b)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated
dwelling or dwelling unit, or of a dilapidated dwelling, to comply with an
order of the Inspector within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief
has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in the preceding
division (A)(3)(a), the Inspector shall submit to the Board of County
Commissioners an ordinance ordering the Inspector to cause the dwelling or
dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, improved or vacated and closed and
removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the Inspector, and
pending the removal or demolition, to placard the dwelling, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-443 and division (B) below.
      (4)   Appeals from orders of Inspector.
         (a)   1.   An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector may
be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal from the Inspector shall
be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the
order, and shall be taken by filing with the Inspector and with the Board of
Adjustments a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is based.
            2.   Upon filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the decision appealed from was made.
            3.   When an appeal is from a decision of the Inspector refusing to
allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, the appeal shall have the
effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless the
Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him
or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which
shall be furnished to appellant), a suspension of his or her requirement would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall
not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due
cause shown upon not less than one day’s written notice to the Inspector, by
the Board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-
446(f) and division (A)(5) below.
         (b)   1.   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney.
            2.   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make the decision and order
as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of four members of the
Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the
Inspector.
            3.   The Board shall have the power also in passing upon appeals,
in any case where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the
application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the
spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured,
and substantial justice done.
         (c)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.
      (5)   Petition of Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an
order issued by the Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board shall have
the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the
decision, to petition the superior court for a temporary injunction restraining
the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. §
160A-446(f).
   (B)   Methods of service of complaints and orders.
      (1)   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the
whereabouts of the persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall make
an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of the complaint or order upon the
person may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper, printed and published in the county.
      (2)   Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by
the complaint or order.
   (C)   In rep action by Inspector; placarding.
      (1)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply
with an order of the Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter, and upon adoption by the Board of County Commissioners of an
ordinance authorizing and directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5) and §
151.12(C), the Inspector shall proceed to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit
to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with the minimum standards of
fitness established by this subchapter, or to be vacated and closed and removed
or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Board of County
Commissioners and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling
or dwelling unit a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit
for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human
habitation is prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted
shall constitute a misdemeanor.
      (2)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds in the county wherein the property is located and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443
(5).
   (D)   Costs a lien on premises. As provided by G.S. § 160A-443(6), the
amount of the cost of the repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and
closing, or removal or demolition, caused to be made or done by the Inspector
pursuant to division (C) above shall be a lien against the real property upon
which the cost was incurred. The lien shall be filed, have the same priority
and be enforced and the costs collected as provided by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10.
   (E)   Alternative remedies. Neither this subchapter nor any of its
provisions shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary
action or otherwise, or to enforce this subchapter by criminal process as
authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and §
151.99 below, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not
prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in
other ordinances or laws.
   (F)   Board of Adjustments to hear appeals. All appeals which may be taken
from decisions or orders of the Inspector pursuant to §
151.13(A)(4) shall be heard and determined by the Board of Adjustments. As the
appeals body, the Board shall have power to fix the times and places of its
meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and
regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. The
Board shall perform the duties prescribed by §
151.13(A)(4) and shall keep an accurate journal of all its proceedings.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
§ 151.14 CONFLICT.
   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this subchapter is
found to be in conflict with any provisions of any other ordinance or code of
the county, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirements for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the county shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
ADDRESS DISPLAY
§ 151.25 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to provide a uniform system of
road and street addresses for all properties and buildings throughout the
county in order to facilitate provision of adequate public safety and emergency
response service and to minimize difficulty in locating properties and
buildings for public service agencies and the general public.
(Res. passed 5-21-1990)
§ 151.26 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADDRESS PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR. The official of the county charged with
the administration of this subchapter, including his or her authorized
representative.
      BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
shelter of persons, animals or equipment. When separated by division walls from
the ground up without openings, each portion of the BUILDING may be deemed a
separate BUILDING.
      DRIVEWAYS. A private way, beginning at the property line of a lot
abutting a public road, private road, easement or private right-of-way, giving
access from that public road, recorded easement, recorded private road or
private right-of-way and leading to building, use or structure on that lot.
      ROAD. A public or private one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or
egress. This definition includes secondary roads, but does not include
driveways.
      ROAD ADDRESS. The combination of numbers and road name assigned by the
county which identifies a particular building or lot.
   (B)   Except as specifically set forth in this section, the definitions in
§§
155.185 and
155.186 shall govern the meaning of words and phrases in this subchapter.
(Res. passed 5-21-1990)
§ 151.27 ADMINISTRATION; APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Address Program Administrator will be responsible for the
interpretation and administration of this subchapter, including:
      (1)   Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings;
      (2)   Maintaining address records of each property and building;
      (3)   Recommending change of existing addresses when necessary to
facilitate sequential house numbers along a road;
      (4)   Designating individual unit addresses within the multiple housing
units in conformity with this subchapter; and
      (5)   Assisting the public in complying with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply in all areas of the county not within the
city limits of Elizabeth City.
(Res. passed 5-21-1990)
§ 151.28 DISPLAY OF ROAD ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   Every property owner of improved property shall purchase and display
official address numbers. The following criteria must be used to properly
display the number:
      (1)   Address numbers must be a minimum of three inches in height so as
to be seen easily from the road;
      (2)   Numbers for multiple dwelling units and nonresidential buildings
shall be at least six inches in height and shall be placed on the front of the
building facing the road or on the end of the building nearest the road;
      (3)   Address numbers must be set on a background of a contrasting color;
      (4)   On a corner lot, the house number should face the street named in
the address;
      (5)   If a building is more than 75 feet from any road, the address
number shall be displayed on a sign attached to a fence, gate, lawn stake,
mailbox and the like, at the end of the road right-of-way; and
      (6)   Address numbers should be plain block numbers.
   (B)   The Address Program Administrator will have the right to authorize and
approve alternate methods of displaying house numbers which meet the intent of
this subchapter when strict adherence to these standards can not reasonably be
met.
(Res. passed 5-21-1990)
§ 151.29 NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS.
   All residential and business buildings erected after the adoption of this
subchapter shall be assigned a number in accordance with the property-numbering
map, prior to the issuance of a building permit by the Building Inspector.
Owners shall purchase and display the number as provided in §
151.28.
(Res. passed 5-21-1990)
§ 151.30 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued until an official house number has
been assigned for a lot. The record plat of any subdivision must show the
address for each lot created or recorded.
   (B)   Owners or occupants of buildings already constructed which do not
comply with this subchapter will be notified and requested to meet these
requirements within 60 days from the date of the notification. A warning notice
will be issued after 60 days if the requirements have not been met.
   (C)   If the owner or occupant does not comply voluntarily with this
subchapter within 30 days of delivery of a warning notice by registered or
certified mail or by hand delivery to the building in violation, enforcement
action pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123 may be initiated.
(Res. passed 5-21-1990)
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS
§ 151.45 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Multi-Family
Dwelling Subchapter of Pasquotank County, North Carolina.”
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.46 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate and guide residential
developments of multi-family dwelling units in the county.
   (B)   This subchapter is enacted to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the county and is designed to accomplish the
following specific objectives:
      (1)   To further the orderly layout of the above-mentioned developments;
      (2)   To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; and
      (3)   To assure facilities for transportation, parking, safe water
supply, sewer and solid waste disposal are provided to residents and users of
these developments.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.47 AUTHORITY.
   The county hereby exercises its authority to adopt and enforce this
subchapter under the provisions granted by G.S. §§ 153A-121 and 153A-122.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.48 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall govern the establishment, expansion, or addition to
multi-family dwelling units lying within the jurisdiction of the county,
excluding the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of any
municipality unless the governing body of any municipality by resolution agrees
to such regulations.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.49 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners.
   BUILDING SETBACK. The distance from a specified point within which no
structure shall be erected.
   BUILDING SITE. A parcel or plat of land of sufficient size to meet minimum
requirements for use, coverage and area, and used for the locations of a
building or a multi-family dwelling.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, firm or corporation who develops any land deemed to
be an apartment complex, duplex or condominium development as defined herein.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner for use by the public, a corporation
or person(s) of a strip of land for specific purposes (utility, drainage,
ingress-egress and the like).
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. County Building Inspector or his or her authorized
representative as appointed by the County Board of Commissioners to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter.
   HEALTH DIRECTOR. Pasquotank, Perquimans, Camden, Chowan Health Director or
his or her authorized representatives.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. Two or more single living units under the same roof
structure and connected by one or more common walls. This includes, but is not
limited to, apartments, duplexes, condominiums, triplexes, quadraplexes or
other similar buildings which are for sale or rent and intended for human
habitation.
   PLANNING BOARD. Refers to the Pasquotank County Planning Board.
   SHALL. Is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   SINGLE LIVING UNIT. Area occupied by a single-family for the purpose of
sleeping, eating and residing with at least one common wall to one or more
living units.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.50 PROCEDURE FOR SECURING APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval required. No development regulated by this subchapter within
the jurisdiction of the county shall be established, expanded, or altered
unless a plan has been submitted and approved by the Planning Board and a
letter of approval is issued by the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Application for plan approval.
      (1)   Prior to construction or expansion of a multi-family dwelling
development, the developer shall make application to the Enforcement Officer
for authorization to construct or expand such a development. Accompanying this
application shall be eight copies of the proposed plan. This application must
be received 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the County
Planning Board, if the application and proposed plan is to be reviewed by the
Planning Board at that time.
      (2)   A registered surveyor or engineer’s signature shall be required on
multi-family dwelling development plans which have more than three units. All
developments having over three single living units shall display the signature
of a registered surveyor or engineer. Any addition to an existing development
which brings the total number of single living units to ten or more shall
present a plan executed by a registered surveyor or engineer, which includes
the original development.
      (3)   The multi-family development plan shall be drawn at a scale of 100
feet to one inch and shall include the following:
         (a)   Name of the development, township name(s) and address(es) of the
owner(s) and the engineer or surveyor;
         (b)   Date, scale and north arrow;
         (c)   Vicinity map showing the location of the development at a scale
of no greater than one inch equal to two miles;
         (d)   Boundaries of the tract with bearings and distances;
         (e)   Names of adjoining property owners;
         (f)   Stormwater drainage plans and erosion and sediment control
measures;
         (g)   A site plan showing all existing and proposed streets and
driveways, parking areas, watercourses, open spaces and recreation areas,
easements, structures, outside artificial lights, solid waste containers and
drainage ditches;
         (h)   Location of utility systems for water, sewer, electricity and
gas; and
         (i)   Method of surfacing streets, driveways and parking areas to the
Department of Transportation’s specifications in effect at that time.
   (C)   Review of proposed plans by consulting agencies to the Planning Board.
      (1)   The following agencies shall review the multi-family development
plans and comment in writing from their comments of the area of interest
designated below before the plan is reviewed by the Planning Board:
         (a)   The District Engineer of the Department of Transportation,
Division of Highways, shall review the plan to determine if the proposed access
and public street designs conform to the standards of the State Department of
Transportation for subdivision roads.
         (b)   The District Health Director shall review the plan to determine
if the plan is in accordance with State Laws and Rules for Sanitary Sewage
Collection, Treatment and Disposal or any other rules and regulations adopted
by the District Health Department.
         (c)   The Albemarle Soil and Water Conservation District shall review
the plan for the adequacy of drainage and drainage easements and shall review
the plan to see that it conforms to the provisions as set forth in the Soil and
Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
         (d)   The County Building Inspector shall review the plan to determine
if the proposed electrical system is in accordance with the North Carolina
Electrical Code.
         (e)   The County Water System shall review all plans for water service
and all materials shall be installed in accordance with County Water System
specifications. All construction will be under supervision of County Water
System and in accordance with that system’s rules, regulations and policies.
      (2)   Each agency shall have a concurrent reviewing period of 25 days.
Should any agency find deficiencies in the proposed plan, the developer or his
or her agent shall be notified as to the deficiency.
   (D) Review of the proposed plan by the Planning Board.
      (1)   Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall review the proposed
plan to determine if it is in accordance with the standards of this subchapter.
The Board shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plan as
submitted. In the event of disapproval or conditional approval, the developer
or his or her agent shall be notified in writing of this decision by the
Planning Board and the steps necessary to gain approval.
      (2)   Exceptions. For multi-family developments involving three or fewer
single living units, the County Manager may review the proposed plan to
determine its conformity with the standards of this subchapter. All plans which
are reviewed by the County Manager shall have recourse to the Planning Board.
   (E)   Authorization for construction.
      (1)   After approval or conditional approval by the Planning Board, the
County Manager shall issue an authorization for site construction. This
authorization shall enable the execution of the development plan and shall not
be construed to authorize the recipient to offer single living units for each
phase of a development project.
      (2)   If the construction of the development is not begun within 12
months from the issuance date of this authorization, it shall be considered to
be null and void. The Planning Board may grant an extension of 12 additional
months if the developer appears before the Planning Board and shows just cause
for the time extension.
   (F)   Certificate of compliance. Upon completion of the development, the
developer shall inform the Enforcement Officer that all conditions of the
approved plan have been completed and will attach letters of approval from the
Health Director, Building Inspector and Fire Commission. A certificate of
compliance shall then be issued by the Enforcement Officer which entitles the
developer to rent, lease or sell the single-family units.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.51 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards shall be considered the minimum requirements of all
multi-family developments.
   (A)   General standards.
      (1)   Each multi-family dwelling unit shall be located on a well-drained
site and shall be graded to allow surface water to be removed from the site.
      (2)   In reference to sewage disposal, solid waste disposal, water supply
and general health standards, State Laws and Rules for Sanitary Sewage
Collection, Treatment and Disposal or any other rules and regulations adopted
by the District Health Department shall apply.
      (3)   Multi-family dwelling units shall not be located within the 100-
year flood area unless the requirements of
Chapter 152, adhered to by the county, are met.
      (4)   Land-disturbing activities and removal of vegetation should be
minimized to reduce soil erosion and stormwater runoff.
   (B)   Lot and building requirements.
      (1)   In developments where individual septic tank systems are used, the
layout of the multi-family dwelling units shall be designed in accordance with
standards and regulations of the State Commission of Health Services and the
Pasquotank, Perquimans, Camden, Chowan District Health Department.
      (2)   In developments where municipal or private sewer systems are
employed, multi-family developments shall be designed according to the
following schedule:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit                             Units Per Gross Acre
Single-family, attached - one story               8
Single-family, attached - two story               14
Single-family, attached - mixed one and two story 12
Garden apartment - two story                      16
 
      (3)   All multi-family dwelling units shall be located at a minimum of 40
feet from the right-of-way of any existing state maintained highway or road.
For units located on newly constructed internal streets, the minimum setback
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Thirty feet from collectors;
         (b)   Twenty five feet from local access streets; and
         (c)   Twenty feet from cul-de-sacs and private drives.
      (4)   All multi-family unit buildings shall be located a minimum of 20
feet from any other building within the development and ten feet from any
parking area or court. The minimum setbacks from property lines shall be 20
feet on the back of the building and ten feet on the side or end of the
building.
      (5)   The maximum building height shall be two stories or 35 feet.
      (6)   All structures shall be built in conformance with the State
Building Code.
   (C)   Streets and parking.
      (1)   Street construction. All newly constructed streets and driveways in
a multi-family development shall be constructed according to the current
Subdivision Roads: Minimum Construction Standards of the Division of Highways,
State Department of Transportation, with the following modifications.
         (a)   Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of 600 feet measured
from the corner to the center of the turning circle.
         (b)   There shall be no direct access from an individual dwelling unit
to a collector street.
      (2)   Private drives. Private drives are allowed to connect common
parking areas and groups of multi-family units to public streets. These drives
shall be constructed to the same standards as public streets and have a minimum
pavement width of 16 feet. Parking shall not be allowed except where parking
bays are provided. Dead ends are not allowed: a T-turnaround shall be provided
for drives of less, than 100 feet in length; a 70-foot diameter cul-de-sac is
required for longer drives.
      (3)   Street signs. It is the responsibility of the developer to install
street signs at the intersections of streets and on those named private drives
within his or her development.
      (4)   Parking areas. Each single living unit shall have off street
parking for two vehicles. All common parking areas shall be paved and
constructed to the same standards as streets. Additional parking for
recreational vehicles, boats and the like, may be required by the Planning
Board.
      (5)   Maintenance. For rental property, the maintenance of the streets
and parking areas shall be the responsibility of the owner. For sale property,
the maintenance of streets and common parking areas shall be the responsibility
of a property owner’s association.
   (D)   Utility requirements.
      (1)   Sanitation. Water supply, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal and
general maintenance shall meet the requirement of the District Health
Departments State Laws and Rules for Sanitary Sewage Collection, Treatment and
Disposal or any other rules and regulations adopted by the District Health
Department.
      (2)   Electrical service. All electrical service and connections shall
meet the standards of the North Carolina Electrical Code, as enforced by the
County Building Inspector.
      (3)   Area lighting. All streets and parking areas shall be illuminated
from sunset to sunrise with a minimum light of approximately 7,000 lumens (175
watts) spaced 350 feet apart.
   (E)   Sediment control, stormwater management, and drainage requirements.
      (1)   Standards. The standard for sediment control and stormwater
management shall be the County Soil Conservation Service and any applicable
state regulator adhered to by the county. Project site drainage requirements
shall be determined by the Albemarle Soil and Water Conservation District, and
where applicable, the District Health Department.
      (2)   Maintenance. For rental property, the maintenance of stormwater
management and drainage devices shall be the responsibility of the owner. For
sale property, the maintenance of these devices shall be the responsibility of
a property owner’s association.
   (F)   Fire safety.
      (1)   Where all water mains are six inches or larger shall have fire
hydrants no greater than 1,000 feet apart. All hydrants shall be standard type
with one four and one-half inch and two two and one-half inch openings and all
threads shall be national standard. The lowest opening of the hydrants shall be
12 inches above the ground level of the final grade. Hydrants shall meet
specifications of the County Water System.
      (2)   All multi-family dwellings shall have smoke detectors of the
approved type.
      (3)   All dwelling units within multi-family dwellings shall be separated
by fire resistant construction in accordance with the State Building Code.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.52 DEVELOPMENT WITH INTENT FOR SALE.
   In cases where multi-family developments are developed with the intent for
sale of single living units, the following additional requirements shall apply.
   (A)   A letter shall accompany the approval request stating that the units
will be offered for sale rather than as rental property.
   (B)   All collector and local streets shall be dedicated to public use and
paved within 30 days of the sale of the last unit or lot.
   (C)   A property owner’s association or other similar body shall be created.
It will be charged with the responsibility for maintenance of the common
property and it shall have the power to levy liens against individual property
owners. All property owners shall be members of this association. In large
scale development, more than one property owner’s association may be created.
   (D)   Condominiums must comply with G.S. Chapter 47A, Unit Ownership Act.
   (E)   Any subdivision of land shall conform to
Chapter 155 of this code.
   (F)   A final plan shall be submitted for approval by the Planning Board and
the County Board of Commissioners.
   (G)   Upon approval of the final plan, it shall be recorded with the County
Register of Deeds.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.53 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Inspections. The Enforcement Officer or his or her representative
shall make inspections of the development as may be necessary to determine that
these developments are being constructed and operated in accordance with these
regulations.
   (B)   Existing developments. Any multi-family development existing at the
time of the adoption of this subchapter shall be allowed to continue. Any
expansion or addition in the number of living units shall meet the requirements
of this subchapter.
   (C)   Procedure for granting special exceptions. Upon the written request
from the developer or property owner, the County Planning Board shall hear
requests for special exceptions to the requirements of this subchapter. Special
exceptions may be approved only upon a finding of practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardships, which result from conditions beyond the control of the
developer or the property owner. The following procedure will be used in
considering special exceptions.
      (1)   Request in writing from the developer stating reasons for special
exceptions shall be submitted to the Planning Board 30 days prior to its
regular meeting.
      (2)   The Planning Board will hold a public hearing on the request.
      (3)   The Planning Board shall approve the special exception if:
         (a)   Approval will not contradict the purposes of the subchapter;
         (b)   Approval will not lower the value of adjoining or abutting
property;
         (c)   Approval of the exception of modification will be based on an
applicable national standard; and
         (d)   Approval does not grant a special privilege to the owner or the
developer.
      (4)   If the Board denies the request, it shall enter its reasons in the
minutes.
      (5)   If the Board approves the request, it may attach special
conditions.
   (D)   Appeal.
      (1)   A developer shall have recourse to the County Board of
Commissioners for an appeal of a decision by the Planning Board or Enforcement
Officer in matters concerning authorization for construction, certification of
compliance and enforcement of this subchapter.
      (2)   The developer shall give written notice of this request for a
hearing to the County Manager at least 30 days before a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board of Commissioners.
      (3)   Appeal of the decision by the Board of Commissioners shall be to
Superior Court.
   (E)   Fees. The County Board of Commissioners may establish fees for the
purposes of enforcing this subchapter.
   (F)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Compliance with plan requirements. If, through inspection, it is
determined that a person constructing a multi-family development, has failed to
comply with this subchapter, a notice to comply shall be served upon that
person by certified mail. The notice shall inform that person that he or she
must cease construction until he or she complies with this subchapter. If that
person fails to cease construction and comply with this subchapter, he or she
shall be deemed in violation of this subchapter.
      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever the County Board of Commissioners has
reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to
violate this subchapter or any term, condition or provision of a multi-family
development plan, it may, either before or after the institution of any other
action or proceeding authorized by this subchapter, institute a civil action in
the name of the county for injunctive relief to restrain the violation or
threatened violation. The action shall be brought in the Superior Court of the
county. Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring or
is threatened, it shall enter such orders or judgements as are necessary to
abate the violation or to prevent the threatened violation. The institution of
an action for injunctive relief under this division (F)(2) shall not relieve
any party to such proceedings from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for
violations of this subchapter.
   (G)   Effect on other laws. Wherever the provision of any other laws,
ordinance or regulation imposes higher standards than are required by the
provisions of this subchapter, the provisions of such law, ordinance or
regulation shall govern. It is not intended that this subchapter interfere with
or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Where
this subchapter provides a higher standard than those required by existing
ordinances, regulations, easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of
this subchapter shall govern.
   (H)   Separability. Should any section or provision of these regulations be
held void or invalid by the courts for any reason, it shall not affect the
validity of any other section or provision hereof which is not itself held void
or invalid.
   (I)   Effective date. Upon adoption by the County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to
vacate and cease and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector
duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such
order, and each day that any failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which
an order has been issued pursuant to §
151.13(A), to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in the order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its
vacation and closing, and each day that the occupancy continues after the
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (2)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
   (C)   (1)   Civil penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions
of an approved plan in §§
151.45 through
151.53, shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $100. No penalty
shall be assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified
of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a
separate violation. The County Board of Commissioners shall determine the
amount of the civil penalty to be assessed under this division (C) and shall
make written demand for payment upon the person under the violation and shall
set forth in detail a description of the violation for which the penalty has
been imposed. If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within
60 days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the
County Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the county in
appropriate division of the General Courts of Justice for recovery of the
penalty. Any sums recovered shall be used to carry out the purposes and
requirements of §§
151.45 through
151.53.
      (2)   Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates
§§
151.45 through
151.53 or who knowingly or willfully initiates or continues construction of a
multi-family development except in accordance with the terms, conditions and
provisions of an approved plan, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or by a fine not to exceed $5,000, or by
both, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 12-16-1985; Ord. passed 5-15-1989)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
   
152.001   Statutory authorization
   
152.002   Findings of fact
   
152.003   Statement of purpose
   
152.004   Objectives
Definitions
   
152.015   Definitions
General Provisions
   
152.030   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
152.031   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
152.032   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
152.033   Compliance
   
152.034   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.035   Interpretation
   
152.036   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
152.050   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
152.051   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
152.052   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.053   Corrective procedures
   
152.054   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.065   General standards
   
152.066   Specific standards
   
152.067   Subdivisions, manufactured home parks and major developments
   
152.068   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
152.069   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
Legal Status Provisions
   
152.080   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
152.081   Effect upon outstanding building permits
   
152.082   Effective date
 
   
152.999   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
§ 152.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has, in G.S. Ch. 143, Art.
21, Pt. 6; G.S. Ch. 153A Art. 18, Pts. 3 and 4; and G.S. Ch. 153A, Art. 6, Pt.
121, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners does ordain as follows:
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the county are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.004 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and bridges)
that are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas; and
   (G)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in
a special flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
DEFINITIONS
§ 152.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure which is located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination as published in the Flood
Insurance Study of the water surface elevations of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISPOSAL. Defined as in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6).
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its reference level
raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is pre-
FIRM.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to, and shall be used in conjunction with, the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazard areas, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood insurance risk zones and other flood data in a community issued by FEMA.
The FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and
Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power which control development in
flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, or structures with their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, such as a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. A facility for the collection, storage,
processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste as
defined in G.S. Ch. 130A, Art. 9.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or directly
by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, patio or
slab immediately next to the building or deck support after completion of the
building. For Zone A, use the natural grade elevation prior to construction.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The subfloor, top of slab or grade of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR provided that
such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land, established by
independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of
building (actual cash value) or adjusted assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as
corrected in 1988 or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the original version of this chapter and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR DEVELOPMENT. Any legally existing building or
development which fails to comply with the current provisions of this chapter.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development which started on or after
December 4, 1985.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development which started before December 4,
1985.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND/OR NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Not designed for use as a permanent or primary dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The portion of a structure or other development that must
be compared to the regulatory flood protection elevation to determine
regulatory compliance. For structures within special flood hazard areas
designated as Zones A and AE, the REFERENCE LEVEL is the top of the lowest
floor or bottom of lowest attendant utility including ductwork, whichever is
lower. Examples below if the BFE is six feet and the ground elevation is four
feet above mean sea level:
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
      (1)   The elevation to which all structures and other development located
within the special flood hazard areas must be elevated, or flood-proofed if
non-residential.
      (2)   Within areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been
determined, this elevation shall be the BFE. In areas where no BFE has been
established, all structures and other development must be elevated or flood-
proofed, if non-residential, to two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RETROFITTING. Measures, such as flood-proofing, elevation, construction of
small levees and other modifications, taken on an existing building or its yard
to protect it from flood damage.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Property used for the storage, collection and/or recycling of
any type of equipment whatsoever including, but not limited to, vehicles,
appliances and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. Defined as in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36).
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in §
152.031.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of
piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure taking place during any one-year
period whereby the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
      (2)   This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
         (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in §§
152.050 through
152.069 is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.030 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
planning jurisdiction of the county.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.031 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), for the county dated October 5, 2004, which are adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The special flood hazard areas also include those defined through
standard engineering analysis for private developments or by governmental
agencies, but which have not yet been incorporated in the FIRM. This includes,
but is not limited to:
      (1)   Detailed flood data generated as a requirement of §
152.052(J) and (K);
      (2)   Preliminary FIRMs, where more stringent than the effective FIRM; or
      (3)   Post-disaster Flood Recovery Maps.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.032 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas as determined in §
152.031.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.033 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.034 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and an
ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.035 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.036 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard
areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
   (C)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the county, or
by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.050 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The County Planner, hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain
Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer the provisions of this
chapter. The County Building Inspector is hereby appointed to implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.051 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area of
development/ disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities and
other proposed development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
152.031 or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
152.031;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
152.031;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
152.031,
152.052(J) and (K), or §§
152.066(E),
152.067, and
152.068;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   Upon request, preparation of the plot plan by, or under the
direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same (i.e., property partially in special flood hazard area).
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be flood-proofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or flood-proofed.
      (3)   If flood-proofing, a flood-proofing certificate and back-up plans
from a registered professional engineer or architect certifying that the non-
residential flood-proofed development will meet the flood-proofing criteria in
§
152.066(B);
      (4)   A foundation plan drawn to scale which shall include details of the
proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are met.
These details include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid
foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on
columns/piers); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters
in accordance with §
152.066(D) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed space below the regulatory flood
protection elevation;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Copy of all other local, state and federal permits required prior
to floodplain development permit issuance (i.e., wetlands, erosion and
sedimentation control, riparian buffers, mining and the like);
      (8)   If floodplain development permit is issued for placement of
recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, documentation to ensure §
152.066(F) and (G) are met; and
      (9)   If a watercourse is proposed to be altered and/or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an
engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of
the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
   (B)   Floodplain development permit data requirements. The following
information shall be provided at a minimum on the floodplain development permit
to ensure compliance with this chapter.
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit issuance;
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development per available data specified in §
152.031;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with time lines;
      (6)   State that no fill material shall encroach into the floodway or
non-encroachment area of any watercourse, if applicable;
      (7)   If in an A or AE Zone, specify the minimum foundation opening
requirements; and
      (8)   State limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable)
(i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only).
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or flood-proofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the reference
level, or flood-proofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. Elevation
certification shall be prepared by, or under direct supervision of, a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.
      (2)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or flood-
proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required after construction is
completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall
be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of final as-built construction of the elevation or flood-proofed
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. Said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When
flood-proofing is utilized, said certification shall be prepared by, or under
the direct supervision of, a professional engineer or architect and certified
by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make said corrections required shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within an A or AE Zone and the
elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineered foundation
certification is required per §
152.066(C).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on
the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream;
and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   The following structures, if located within A or AB Zones, are
exempt from the elevation/flood-proofing certification requirements specified
in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
152.066(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
152.066(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
152.066(H).
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.052 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits (i.e.,
wetlands, erosion and sedimentation control, CAMA, riparian buffers, mining and
the like) may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
floodplain development permit;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime Control
and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
   (E)   Prevent encroachments within floodways and non-encroachment areas
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
152.069;
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) of all attendant utilities of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
152.051(C);
   (G)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the new or substantially improved structures and all utilities have been flood-
proofed, in accordance with §
152.051(C);
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities, in accordance with §
152.051(C);
   (I)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with §§
152.051(C) and 152.066(B);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the
necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this chapter;
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with §
152.031, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data and/or non-encroachment area data available from
a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to §
152.067(D), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway nor
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with §
152.031, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data, and/or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state or other source in order
to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   When the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard
areas conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site,
the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment
(LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA will be
maintained by the Floodplain Administrator in the floodplain development permit
file;
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection;
   (O)   As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses,
the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may
be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions
of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power,
the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community
at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement
action;
   (P)   Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed,
reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation of this chapter, the Floodplain
Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order
shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work
order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for
the stoppage and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed.
Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (Q)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the
floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating
the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal
or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false
statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain
development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or
local law may also be revoked;
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action; and
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
152.053.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.053 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law pertaining to
his or her property.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   The building or property is in violation of this chapter;
      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue such
order to alter, vacate or demolish the building; or to remove fill as appears
appropriate.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall make
an order in writing to the owner requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   (D) Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal
has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.054 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the
“Appeal Board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependant facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
152.015; and
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
stated in this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
   (G)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or non-
encroachment area if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
   (H)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (4)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built, and a written statement that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced reference level elevation. Such notification shall
be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
      (5)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the state upon request.
   (I)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas; provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community;
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area;
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or flood-proofed
to at least the regulatory flood protection level;
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws; and
      (5)   The county has notified the Secretary of the State Department of
Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least
30 days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.065 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)    All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener
units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric meter panels/boxes, utility/
cable boxes, appliances (e.g., washers, dryers, refrigerator and the like), hot
water heaters and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area or stream setback, provided that the bulk of the building or structure
below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-
encroachment area or stream setback is not increased and provided that such
repair, reconstruction or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management
facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities shall not be
permitted in special flood hazard areas, except by variance as specified in §
152.064(I). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or waste water
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or flood-proofed to at least the
regulatory flood protection elevation and certified according to §
152.051(C).
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.066 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
152.031 or
152.052(J) and (K), the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Structures located in A and AE Zones may
be flood-proofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of
elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required flood
protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water, using structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards
of this division (B) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
official as set forth in §
152.051(C).
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the
reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in
accordance with the State Regulations for Manufactured Homes, 2004 edition and
any revision thereto adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S.
§ 143-143.15, or a certified engineered foundation. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in
height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All foundation enclosures or skirting shall be in accordance with
division (D) below.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with, and approved by, the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas that are below the
regulatory flood protection elevation shall not be designed to be used for
human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of
vehicles, building access or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in
connection with the premises; be constructed entirely of flood resistant
materials below the regulatory flood protection level in A and AE Zones and
meet the following design criteria:
      (1)   Measures for complying with this requirement shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood waters. To meet this requirement, the
foundation must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings must be at least one square
inch for each square foot of each enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must
have openings on exterior walls to allow flood waters to directly enter;
         (d)   The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one
foot above the adjacent grade; and
         (e)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other opening
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters
in both directions.
      (2)   Foundation enclosures:
         (a)   Vinyl or sheet metal skirting is not considered an enclosure for
regulatory and flood insurance rating purposes. Therefore such skirting does
not require hydrostatic openings as outlined above; and
         (b)   Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status,
is considered an enclosure and requires hydrostatic openings as outlined above
to comply with this chapter.
      (3)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such
enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except
to enclose storage areas.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures whereas the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure:
         (a)   Are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure. (Conversion of a garage to
living space could not be below the floor level of the main structure and
mechanical units would have to be elevated to at least the floor level of the
structure.); and
         (b)   Are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure shall require only the addition to comply with the standards
for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures whereas the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure:
         (a)   Are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; and
         (b)   Are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Where a fire wall or independent perimeter load-bearing wall is
provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall
be considered a separate building and only the addition must comply with the
standards for new construction.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed on sites within a
special flood hazard area shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and has no permanently attached additions); or
      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring
and elevation requirements of §§
152.051,
152.065 and division (C) above.
   (G)   Temporary structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit for a temporary structure, the following requirements must
be met:
      (1)   Applicants must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for
the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane or flash flood
warning notification. The plan must include the following information:
         (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted;
         (b)   The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
         (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
         (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a
trucking company to ensure the availability of removal equipment when needed;
and
         (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area to which the temporary structure will be moved.
      (2)   The above information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval.
   (H)   Accessory structures. 
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages and the like)
are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria
shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood
waters;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
§
152.065(A);
         (e)   All service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be installed in accordance with §
152.065(D); and
         (f)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with
division (D)(1) above.
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet
does not require an elevation or flood-proofing certificate. Elevation or
flood-proofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures
in accordance with §
152.051(C).
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.067 SUBDIVISIONS, MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS.
   All subdivision, manufactured home park and major development proposals
located within special flood hazard areas shall:
   (A)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
   (B)   Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
   (C)   Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
and
   (D)   Provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than
five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood
elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference per §
152.031 to be utilized in implementing this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.068 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.031, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, the
following provisions shall apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development, shall be permitted within a distance of 20
feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream,
whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal,
state or other source, the reference level, including basement, shall be
elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.069 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.031 are areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas. The
floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of flood waters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions shall apply to all development within such
areas.
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments, shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 152.080 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   This chapter, in part, comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted January 3, 1976, as
amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance enacted on January 3, 1976, as amended, which are not reenacted
herein are repealed.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.081 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING BUILDING PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof for
which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to passage of this
chapter or any revision thereto, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.082 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on February 21, 2011.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine in the amount of $75 or a
maximum 30 days imprisonment as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50 for each day the
violation continues. If the offender fails to pay this penalty within 15 days
after being cited for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the county
in a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (C)   Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 3-25-2011)
CHAPTER 153: COASTAL MANAGEMENT
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Jurisdiction
   
153.03   Designated local official
   
153.04   Minor development permits
   
153.05   CAMA minor development permits
   
153.06   Appeal of disposition
   
153.07   Injunctive relief; notice
   
153.08   Amendments
   
153.09   Failure to enforce or administer
   
153.10   Statutory authorization
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of the implementation and enforcement plan are to establish:
   (A)   Procedures to be followed in issuing minor development permits in AECs
within the jurisdiction, including methods of coordinating with other local
permits;
   (B)   Scope and coverage of the program, including the geographic extent of
jurisdiction of the local management program;
   (C)   Responsibilities and capabilities of permit-letting agencies,
including a description of the criteria to be used in choosing the permit
officer;
   (D)   Methods of identifying and taking into account projects and impacts of
regional, state and national concern, where applicable; and
   (E)   Procedures to ensure that the program is consistent with the approved
land use plan for the involved jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.02 JURISDICTION.
   The issuance of minor development permits required by the CAMA, the Coastal
Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., shall be administered and
enforced in those AECs which are located within the boundaries of the county
and which are not within the corporate boundaries or the extraterritorial area
of Elizabeth City.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.03 DESIGNATED LOCAL OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Creation. The designated local official shall be the permit officer
and that position is hereby created.
   (B)   Qualifications. The permit officer shall be required to successfully
complete a course of study within the first 12 months of employment consisting
of no more than two weeks duration that shall be developed by the Department of
Natural and Economic Resources in cooperation with one or more of the state’s
institutions of higher education.
   (C)   Appointment. The Assistant Tax Supervisor shall serve as the permit
officer.
   (D)   Duties, generally. The permit officer shall administer and enforce in
duly designated AECs, the CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§
113A-100 et seq., the minor development permit process as herein established,
all applicable local ordinances and all other guidelines and standards
established by the Commission and the County Commissioners pursuant to the
CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. The
permit officer shall be available both in an advisory capacity and as a liaison
between major permit applicants and the Commission for the purpose of
facilitating efficient disposition of major permit applications. The permit
officer shall assist in identifying and assessing projects of greater than
local concern (e.g., projects of regional, state and national concern). The
permit officer shall also be responsible for implementing any procedures
recommended by the County Commissioners for the purpose of coordinating the
CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., minor
development permit with other locally required permits. The locally required
permits and approvals include, but are not limited to, plumbing permits,
electric permits, building permits, septic tank permits and flood insurance
permits.
   (E)   Records.
      (1)   The permit officer shall prepare for the County Board of
Commissioners, the Coastal Resources Commission and the Secretary of the
Department of Natural and Economic Resources, a quarterly summary of all permit
applications received and their disposition.
      (2)   He or she shall keep correct and comprehensive records of all
transactions related to minor development permit requests (applications,
grants, denials, other dispositions) and shall maintain the records so long as
any part of the structure or entity to which it relates remains in existence,
or in the case of denials or other instances, for a period of ten years.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.04 MINOR DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Designation of AECs requiring minor permits. The following permit-
letting requirements and information in regard to AECs shall be available for
review and inspection in the Tax Supervisor’s office:
      (1)   Inscription of all AECs within the county jurisdiction that is
sufficiently clear to provide notice to all property owners within those AECs
that a permit must be secured before any development may proceed on the
property;
      (2)   A copy of the standards for development adopted by the Commission
for each type of AEC found in the jurisdiction and the statutory grounds on
which a permit application may be denied or conditional;
      (3)   The statutory definition of development, as provided in the CAMA,
the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. § 113A-103(5)(a) through (c);
      (4)   A copy of the approval permit application form for both major and
minor development in AECs;
      (5)   The name and office address of the permit officer; and
      (6)   A copy of this plan.
   (B)   Application. An application for a permit for minor development shall
consist of filing with the Secretary of DNER and the permit officer:
      (1)   A completed application using the applicable form adopted and
approved by the Commission; and
      (2)   A single check or money order payable to the county in the amount
of $10. Monies so collected may only be used in the administration of the
permit program, specifically including the cost of required public notices and
hearings.
   (C)   Disposition.
      (1)   The permit officer shall determine from the application what other
local permits are required for the development. He or she shall inform the
applicant of these other permit requirements and aid him or her in properly
applying for the permits.
      (2)   Permit applications shall be numbered serially using a six-digit
numbering system. The first two digits will indicate the year in which the
application is made, and the last four digits will run serially in the order in
which the applications are received. (For example, the first permit
applications were in 1978, and were numbered 78-0001, 78-0002, 78-0003 and the
like.)
      (3)   Disposition of the application shall take place within 30 days
unless the permit officer gives written notice by registered mail of one
additional 30-day extension as necessary for proper evaluation of the
application. The permit officer shall maintain a record of all evidence and all
matters relevant to each minor development permit application. The relevant
information shall include, but not be limited to, applications, correspondence,
public notices, responses to public notices and a copy of the final
disposition.
      (4)   Statutory grounds upon which the permit officer bases the denial,
conditioned grant or return of application shall be set out in writing. One
copy shall be maintained by the permit officer and one copy shall be given to
the applicant, either in person or by registered mail.
   (D)   Return of application.
      (1)   The permit officer shall return incomplete, insufficient or
unauthorized applications within a reasonable time. The 30-day period for
consideration of the application shall begin to run upon receipt. The time
period will continue to run in the case of an incomplete or insufficient
application until the permit officer returns it with reasons for the rejection
in writing to the applicant for correction of deficiencies. The time period
will begin to run again when a corrected application is returned to the permit
officer.
      (2)   Any application received requesting a permit for an activity which
constitutes major development shall be returned by the permit officer with
appropriate instructions for submitting the application to the Commission.
   (E)   Grant. A minor development permit shall be granted only if
consideration of the application results in none of the appropriate findings
listed in G.S. § 113A-120.
   (F)   Conditioned approval. The approval of a minor development permit may
be conditioned upon the acceptance by the applicant of certain reasonable
conditions as set out by the permit officer to protect the public interest with
respect to the appropriate findings listed in division (E) above. The applicant
must sign the conditioned grant of approval as an acceptance of the amendments
of the proposed project plans in a manner consistent with the conditions set
out by the permit officer before the permit shall become effective.
   (G)   Passive approval. Failure of the permit officer to approve or deny a
properly completed and filed application, or to give notice of an extension
beyond the initial 30-day disposition period shall result in a passive grant. A
passive approval shall have the full force and effect of an unconditioned
approval.
   (H)   Display of permit. The property owner shall cause the properly granted
minor development permit to be displayed in full view on the site of the
development. This requirement shall apply to every permit no matter how it is
granted. It is therefore necessary that the property owner acquire a permit
received by passive approval for purposes of posting on the site before
proceeding with the development.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.05 CAMA MINOR DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Changeover date. The system to implement CAMA, the Coastal Area
Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., minor development permits shall
begin on the date designated by the Secretary of the Department of Natural and
Economic Resources as the “changeover” date.
   (B)   Existing permits. All other local permits and inspections required
prior to the institution of CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S.
§§ 113A-100 et seq., minor development permits shall continue to be required
and shall be issued and considered in coordination with CAMA, the Coastal Area
Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., permits. Existing permits
include, but are not limited to, plumbing permits, electrical permits, building
permits, septic tank permits and flood insurance permits.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.06 APPEAL OF DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Any person directly affected by the decision of the permit officer,
including the Secretary of the Department of Natural and Economic Resources,
may, within 20 days after notice of the permit officer’s disposition, request a
hearing before the Coastal Resources Commission. The hearing before the
Commission shall be a quasi-judicial hearing conducted in accordance with the
requirements of the CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-
100 et seq., any applicable rules and regulations adopted by the Commission and
any other state laws applicable to the procedures.
   (B)   Upon receiving notice from the Commission of an appeal, the permit
officer shall promptly forward to the Commission the entire record compiled in
relation to the minor permit disposition that is the subject of the appeal.
   (C)   No action for which a minor development permit is required shall be
taken while appeal of the permit officer’s disposition of that permit request
is pending.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.07 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon violation of the provisions adopted by the County Commissioners
pursuant to the CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100
et seq., relating to the issuance of minor development permits, the permit
officer may, either before or after the institution of proceedings for the
collection of any penalty imposed by CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act,
being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., for the violation, institute a civil action in
the General Court of Justice in the name of the county upon the relation of the
permit officer for injunctive relief to restrain the violation and for other or
further relief in the premises as the court shall deem proper. Neither the
institution of the action nor any of the proceedings thereon shall relieve any
party to the proceedings from any penalty prescribed by CAMA, the Coastal Area
Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., for any violation of same.
   (B)   The permit officer shall notify the Secretary of Natural and Economic
Resources of any civil action undertaken by or against the officer under the
CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.08 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Notice; public hearing. Amendment of the implementation and
enforcement program shall be in accordance with the notice and public hearing
requirements set forth in the CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S.
§§ 113A-100 et seq., and the Commission’s “Criteria for Local Implementation
and Enforcement Plans” pertaining to the adoption of the original program.
   (B)   Request to waive formal requirements. Whenever a proposed amendment is
deemed sufficiently insignificant by the county, the county may petition the
Commission for a waiver of formal hearing and notice requirements.
   (C)   Commission approval. Upon acceptance of any amendment by the county,
the amendment shall be submitted to the Commission for approval. Upon
Commission approval, the amendment shall be adopted as a part of the ordinances
implementing this plan.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.09 FAILURE TO ENFORCE OR ADMINISTER.
   (A)   Procedure. Upon receipt of notification from the Commission of
deficiencies in administration and enforcement of the local implementation and
enforcement plan, the permit officer and County Commissioners shall conduct an
investigation and prepare an appropriate response to the alleged deficiencies
set forth in the Commission’s notice.
   (B)   Notification to the Commission.
      (1)   If the Commission’s charges are found to be valid within 30 days of
notification by the Commission, the County Commissioners and permit officer
shall inform the Commission of the findings of the investigation, shall assert
the willingness and ability to modify the situation resulting in the violation
and shall state the means by which the permit officer and County Commissioners
intend to avoid similar violations in the future.
      (2)   If the County Commissioners and the permit officer find the
Commission’s charges to be without grounds, they shall so inform the
Commission. If the CRC disagrees with that finding, the County Commissioners
may, at that time, request a hearing before the Commission or take other
appropriate action within 90 days after receipt of the Commission’s
notification of the violation to come to some mutually acceptable solution with
the Commission.
      (3)   If no mutually acceptable solution has been achieved within the 90-
day period, the County Commissioners and permit officer shall automatically
relinquish authority to issue permits for minor development.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.10 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Pursuant to G.S. §§ 113A-112 and 113A-121, the Coastal Area Management Act
authorizes a city or county to adopt an implementation and enforcement plan.
The Board of Commissioners hereby adopts this implementation and enforcement
plan.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person adjudged guilty of knowingly and willfully undertaking any
development requiring a minor development permit without acquiring a permit, or
of conduct exceeding the authority of a permit granted, or of failure to
observe the agreed modifications of a conditioned grant, or of violation of any
other applicable regulations adopted by the county or the Commission pursuant
to the CAMA, the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq.,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for each violation shall be liable for a
penalty of not less than $100, nor more than $1,000 or shall be imprisoned for
not more than 60 days, or both. In addition, if any person continues or further
commits any of the above violations after written notice from the permit
officer, the court may determine that each day during which the violation
continues or is repeated constitutes a separate violation subject to the
foregoing penalties.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1977)
CHAPTER 154: MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
Manufactured Homes Rental Community
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Authority
   
154.03   Jurisdiction
   
154.04   Definitions
   
154.05   Approval of rental community; expansions
   
154.06   Operating permit
   
154.07   Design standards for rental communities
   
154.08   Management and occupants; responsibilities
   
154.09   Administration
   
154.10   Applicable certificates
Allowable Manufactured/Mobile Home Units
   
154.20   Purpose
   
154.21   Authority
   
154.22   Jurisdiction
   
154.23   Definitions
   
154.24   Permitted structures
 
   
154.99   Penalty
MANUFACTURED HOMES RENTAL COMMUNITY
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to regulate and control the design and
minimum standards of any new planned manufactured home rental community in
order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the county.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.02 AUTHORITY.
   The county hereby exercises its authority to make and adopt manufactured
home rental community regulations under the provisions pursuant to G.S. § 153A-
121.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.03 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   On and after the effective date, these regulations shall govern every
new manufactured home rental community or any additions to a manufactured home
rental community lying within the county outside the jurisdiction of any
municipality and territory; within the jurisdiction of any municipality whose
governing body by resolution agrees to the regulations. Manufactured home
rental communities existing at the time of the adoption of this subchapter
shall be allowed to continue, but shall not be allowed to expand or increase
through (including, but not limited to) acquisition of additional land or
development of any manufactured home site or placement of any additional
manufactured home in the manufactured home rental community unless the
expansion fully meets the requirements set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   If a manufactured home rental community, existing before the adoption
date of this subchapter that received a certificate of compliance under the old
mobile home park ordinance which was adopted on September 2, 1980, should lose
that certificate of compliance for failure to operate the manufactured home
rental community in compliance of the requirements and terms of the old mobile
home park ordinance, then it shall be subject to the regulations and
requirements of this subchapter in the reapplication for its certificate of
compliance.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Terms not
herein defined shall have their customary definitions where not inconsistent
with the context. The term “shall” is mandatory and words used in the singular
include the plural and those in the present include the future tense.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The enforcement officer of these regulations, who shall be
the County Manager or his or her representative.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The District Health Department.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family dwelling fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installing or assembling on the building site
bearing a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with federal
manufactured housing and construction and safety standards.
   MANUFACTURED HOME RENTAL COMMUNITY. Any site or tract upon which two or more
manufactured homes are occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless
of whether or not a charge is made for privilege of location of manufactured
home upon the site or tract for occupying any manufactured homes. Excepting,
however, for the purposes of this chapter, the following uses of a manufactured
home shall not be considered in determining whether or not a tract of land is
classified as a MANUFACTURED HOME RENTAL COMMUNITY. Any manufactured home
occupied as a residence and located on the same lot with the parents or
children of the land owner. However, if a manufactured home is placed on a lot
with an existing residential structure under this section of the chapter, the
owner must meet all District Health Department regulations, and the location of
the manufactured home on the property is subject to approval by the Planning
Board. The burden of proof of relation lies with the homeowner to supply
adequate proof to the Planning Director or to the County Planning Board. The
manufactured home or manufactured home space shall not be leased when ceased to
be used as defined above. MANUFACTURED HOME RENTAL COMMUNITIES in which the
lots are not rented but sold will be subject to the provisions outlined in the
subdivision regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a manufactured home rental
community designated for the accommodation of not more than one manufactured
home.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure designed to be used as a year-round
residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal
Manufactured Housing Standards Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.,
which became effective June 15, 1976.
   TRACT. A piece of land whose boundaries have been described or delineated by
a legal instrument or map recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A building, housing facilities such as recreation,
maintenance, laundry or office structures, necessary to the successful
development and management of a manufactured home rental community.
   OPERATING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Inspector of this subchapter after
the manufactured home rental community has been completed and developed as
required by the standards of this subchapter.
   OPEN SPACE. An area generally lacking in human-made structures and reserved
for enjoyment in its unaltered state.
   WATERFRONT LOTS. Lots which adjoin rivers, large creeks or similar water
areas as determined by the County Commissioners.
   RECREATION, PARK AND OPEN SPACE. Land reserved for the purpose of providing
activities that are diversionary in character and aids in promoting
environment, pleasure, relaxation, instruction and other physical, mental and
cultural development and leisure time experiences.
   WATER’S EDGE. The edge of rivers, large creeks or similar water areas as
determined by the County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.05 APPROVAL OF RENTAL COMMUNITY; EXPANSIONS.
   (A)   No person shall begin construction of any new manufactured home rental
community until a plat has been properly presented and approved by the Board of
Commissioners. No manufactured home may be occupied within a manufactured home
rental community until a certificate of compliance has been issued.
   (B)   To obtain plat approval, the developer shall follow these steps.
      (1)   It is recommended that the developer meet with the Planning Board
to discuss his or her plans and ideas pertaining to the new manufactured home
rental community.
      (2)   Manufactured home rental community development plan.
         (a)   The developer shall submit eight copies of the development plan
and any supplementary material to the Subdivision Review Officer at least 15
days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting at which the
development plan is to be considered.
         (b)   The Planning Board Chairperson or Subdivision Review Officer
shall inspect the site. The developer may be asked to accompany the inspection
group.
         (c)   The plan shall be checked against the design standards and
development plan requirements by the Planning Board. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer to ensure the following agencies are given the
opportunity to review and make recommendations on the development plan:
            1.   The District Health Department as to proposed waste water
disposal systems, insect and rodent control measures, and any other systems or
methods related to the jurisdiction of the Health Department;
            2.   An official of the public water system that will provide
service to the park;
            3.   The Elizabeth City Fire Marshal or equivalent representative
as appointed by the County Board of Commissioners to assure the manufactured
home rental community fire protection system complies with the rules and
regulations of the county and the state;
            4.   If the proposed manufactured home rental community contains
waterfront access lots or property and/or canals are to be excavated, the Army
Corps of Engineers will be contacted and the CAMA (Coastal Area Management Act)
permit officer;
            5.   District Engineer for the Department of Transportation to
ensure proposed roadway alignment and construction are designed to state
standards; and
            6.   The developer shall submit copies of the plan and any
accompanying material to other officials and agencies concerned with new
development including, but not limited to:
               a.   Other agencies and officials as the Planning Board and/or
Board of Commissioners may deem, from time to time, necessary or desirable;
               b.   The Land Quality Section, Division of Land Resources, as to
sedimentation and erosion control for review and recommendation;
               c.   The Division of Coastal Management as to location of any
areas of environmental concern that may be located on the proposed manufactured
home rental community property;
               d.   The Division of Environmental Management as to the
applicability of stormwater drainage; and
               e.   It is recommended that any manufactured home rental
community with five lots or more be submitted to the U.S. Post Office for
possible inclusion in the Community Mail Box Program.
         (d)   Comments from these reviewing agencies must be made available to
the Planning Board before a preliminary plan may be approved, unless this
requirement is specifically waived by the Planning Board.
      (3)   The Planning Board shall approve, approve conditionally, or
disapprove the plan.
         (a)   If approved conditionally, the conditions and reasons thereof
shall be stated and, if necessary, the Planning Board may require the developer
to submit a revised plat.
         (b)   If the development plan is approved, approval shall be indicated
on the appropriate certificate on the plan and the plan shall be forwarded to
the Board of Commissioners for final approval.
      (4)   The Board of Commissioners shall take action on the development
plan at its first meeting following the approval of the plan by the Planning
Board. The Board of Commissioners shall approve, approve conditionally, or
disapprove the plan. Approval of the plan is authorization for the developer to
proceed with the construction of the manufactured home rental community.
      (5)   No development plan shall be approved until the certificates
required by this subchapter to appear on the plan have been properly filled out
and signed and an inspection fee of $5 per space, or a minimum of $75
(whichever is greater) has been paid to the county.
      (6)   The plan shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer and
shall be drawn at a scale of 50, 100 or 200 feet to one inch and shall contain
or be accompanied by the following:
         (a)   The lines of all streets and roads;
         (b)   Lot lines and lot numbers;
         (c)   Minimum building setback lines;
         (d)   Reservations, easements, alleys and any areas to be dedicated to
public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their
purpose and any limitations;
         (e)   Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the
ground, the location, bearing and length of every street, lot line, boundary
line, block line and building line, whether curved or straight, and including
true north point; (This should include the radius, center angle and tangent
distance for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that
are not the boundary of curved streets.)
         (f)   All dimensions should be to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and
angles to the nearest minute;
         (g)   Accurate location and description of permanent monuments and
stakes;
         (h)   The proposed utility system:
            1.   Water;
            2.   Gas;
            3.   Sewers;
            4.   Storm drainage; and
            5.   Electric utilities.
         (i)   The names and location of adjoining subdivisions and streets,
and the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property;
         (j)   Title, date, name and location of manufactured home rental
community graphic scale and north point (indicate if true north, magnetic north
or state’s Grid System is used);
         (k)   Name of owner, surveyor or land planner;
         (l)   Sketch vicinity map showing relationship between manufactured
home rental community and surrounding area;
         (m)   Recreation and parking area;
         (n)   Location and intensity of area lights and typical connections to
manufactured homes;
         (o)   The water supply, sanitary sewage disposal and storm drainage
systems;
         (p)   All manufactured home rental communities must be serviced by an
approved public water system;
         (q)   Name of public water system serving the park;
         (r)   Surface water drainage plans;
         (s)   The location of fire hydrants; and
         (t)   Certificate of ownership, signed; certificate of accuracy of
mapping, signed; certificate of approved water and sewage, signed; certificate
of approved light and electrical system, signed; certificate of approved fire
protection system, signed; certificate of Planning Board approval, signed;
certificate of approved streets by Department of Transportation, signed; and
certificate of County Board of Commissioners approval, signed.
      (7)   Upon completion of the preceding requirements, the developer may
begin construction of the manufactured home rental community.
      (8)   Any new addition of manufactured home spaces to a manufactured home
rental community shall be submitted as a new plat and meet the procedures and
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.06 OPERATING PERMIT.
   After the construction and development of any new manufactured home rental
community has been completed, the Planning Director shall issue an operating
permit to the owner or developer, which is authorization for operation of the
park. The permit will be issued only after the Planning Director is satisfied
that the park has been completed as approved in the plan. The operating permit
will be valid for two years after it is issued. Prior to the expiration date of
the permit, the developer must pay an inspection fee of $3 per lot or $50 per
manufactured home rental community, whichever is greater, up to a maximum of
$100 per manufactured home rental community to have the park inspected by the
Planning Director. If violations of this subchapter are found, the developer
will be required to correct those violations before a new operating permit
could be issued. Operating permits must be renewed annually. No new building
permits will be issued for the manufactured home rental community if the park
is found to be operating in violation of the requirements and terms of the
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.07 DESIGN STANDARDS FOR RENTAL COMMUNITIES.
   (A)   Interior drives and walkways. All new manufactured home spaces must
abut upon a paved road that is built to meet the DOT road standards. Roads with
right-of-way less than 45 feet in width shall not be permitted. All interior
streets, drives, walkways and parking spaces within the community shall be
constructed and maintained by the owner.
   (B)   Street signs and street names.
      (1)   The county will install and maintain street signs at the expense of
the developer. The developer shall be required to have street signs installed
at the intersections of all interior streets or drives and on those named
private drives within the development. Signs will be in accordance with the
specifications as determined by the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Street names for all manufactured home rental communities shall be
subject to approval of the Planning Board. New street names shall not duplicate
or be similar to existing street names and existing street names shall be
projected wherever possible.
   (C)   Off-drive parking.
      (1)   Parking at a ratio of two cars per manufactured home shall be
provided off street on a paved parking space of 20 feet by 20 feet which shall
not be located on an existing or future state right-of-way and which shall be
connected to the street by a driveway which is a minimum of ten feet wide.
Concrete or asphalt may be used to construct parking spaces.
      (2)   If concrete is used, it must be installed at least four inches
thick with 3,000 psi concrete. Stricter standards may be required by the County
Building Inspector.
      (3)   If asphalt is used to construct parking spaces, the following
combination of base course and pavement surface may be used:
Base Course Pavement Surface
Base Course                Pavement Surface
7-inch STBC, Type A or C   2-inch SA or I-2
9-inch STBC, Type A or C   1-1/2-inch SA or I-2
8-inch ABC or STBC, Type B BST, 1-inch SA or I-2
6-inch ABC or STBC, Type B 1-1/2-inch SA or I-2
3-inch BCBC, Type HB       1-1/2-inch SA or I-2
3-1/2-inch BCBC, Type HB   1-inch SA or I-2
Notes to table:
SA - Bituminous Concrete Surface Course, Type F-1 (Sand Asphalt)
ABC - Aggregate Base Course, No. 7 Stone
STBC - Sail Type Base Course
BST - Bituminous Surface Treatment
I-2 - Bituminous Concrete Surface Course, Type I-2; I-1 may be used in lieu of
I-2
BCBC - Bituminous Concrete Base Course, Type H-B (Black Base)
 
   (D)   Required manufactured home space area.
      (1)   Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. Each lot must
have a minimum road or street frontage of 50 feet and a minimum width of 100
feet at the building setback line for lots with septic tanks and a minimum
width of 80 feet at the building setback line for lots that are served by a
sewage system that is owned or operated by the county or a municipality.
      (2)   Manufactured home spaces served by a community water system and by
a sewer system that is owned or operated by the county or a municipality shall
have a minimum lot size of 10,500 square feet.
      (3)   Manufactured home spaces served by a community water system and by
septic tanks shall have a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet of usable
area. The actual size of the lot shall be determined by the District Health
Department. The minimum building setback from the property line shall be as
follows:
 
Building Setback Lines
From the front lot line                        30 feet
From the side lot line                         10 feet
From the rear lot line                         25 feet
From the side lot line on corner lots          20 feet
From the front lot line on major thoroughfares 40 feet
From water’s edge                            50 feet
 
   (E)   Recreation, parks and open space provision.
      (1)   Every person or corporation who develops a manufactured home rental
community consisting of 25 or more spaces shall be required to reserve a
portion of the land for the purpose of park, recreation and open space sites.
      (2)   The minimum amount of land that shall be reserved for recreation,
park or open space in all manufactured home rental communities with any lot
sizes less than 25,000 square feet shall be at least one-half acre for each 25
homes within a manufactured home rental community or 5% of the gross acreage,
whichever is greatest. If the size of all lots within the manufactured home
rental community are 25,000 square feet or greater, no recreation area will be
required. The recreation, park or open space area must be maintained by the
developer.
      (3)   CAMA (Coastal Area Management Act) wetlands (as defined in North
Carolina Administrative Code and as interpreted by the Division of Coastal
Management 7K.0101) may not be used to satisfy the open space requirement.
   (F)   Fire protection. Fire hydrants are to be installed every 1,000 feet
apart, or no further than 500 feet from any lot in the manufactured home rental
community.
   (G)   Drainage. The new park shall be located on a well-drained and properly
graded site. Necessary site drainage improvements as approved by the District
Health Department shall be provided.
   (H)   Water supply.
      (1)   Manufactured home rental community developers who are developing
new lots shall construct a water system that complies with the standards and
specifications of the public water system with jurisdiction and connect it to
the system serving the area in which the park is located.
      (2)   If the owner is developing a manufactured home rental community
within the service area of the county water system, the subdivides shall
construct a water system and connect it to the system owned and operated by the
county, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Construction plans for the proposed system shall be prepared by
a registered engineer, materials and construction to be in accordance with the
specifications for the county water system, as prepared by the County Water
Superintendent, and submitted with the plat for approval to the Planning Board,
County Water Superintendent and the appropriate state agencies;
         (b)   The cost of the construction, connection and approval of the
subdivision water system shall be paid by the subdivides; and
         (c)   All water mains, laterals, meter box and easements shall be
dedicated to the public water system. Water lines shall be installed on the
street right-of-way where possible.
      (3)   The county may require installation of certain oversized facilities
such as water mains in excess of eight inches in diameter when it is in the
interest of future development. The county shall pay for that portion of the
improvement which exceeds the standards set forth in this subchapter.
   (I)   Individual water lateral pipes and connections.
      (1)   Individual water and lateral pipes shall be provided and located
within the confined area of the manufactured home stand at a point where the
connections will approximate a vehicle position. An approved underground valve
box with a three-fourths inch cut-off at the box shall be provided and
installed for connection of the water service to the manufactured home.
      (2)   The sewer lateral/building drain shall be provided with a cleanout
and installed in a two-foot by two-foot concrete pad within the confined area
of the manufactured home stand.
   (J)   Manufactured home stands and anchors. Each manufactured home space
shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for the placement and
anchoring of the manufactured home as follows.
      (1)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored in a manner approved by
the state regulations for North Carolina manufactured homes, as from time to
time amended, published by State Department of Insurance.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall have front and back steps, of single
unit construction and permanent in nature. The owner of the manufactured home
shall be responsible for providing steps.
      (3)   (a)   Skirts must be installed on all manufactured homes within 30
days after receiving electricity.
         (b)   Skirting material must be noncombustible and corrosive
resistant. Skirting must extend from the bottom of the unit to the ground with
one access door measuring not less than 18 inches by 24 inches, this door must
be removable without the use of tools.
      (4)   The crawl space shall be ventilated according to Department of
Insurance manufactured home regulations.
      (5)   Each new manufactured home rental community and any additions
thenceforth shall meet the current North Carolina Electric Code. All utilities
must be placed underground.
   (L)   Service, administrative and other buildings. One manufactured home
within the community may be used as an administrative office. Other
administrative and service buildings housing sanitation and laundry facilities
or any other facilities shall comply with all applicable ordinances, codes and
statutes regarding buildings, electrical installations, plumbing and sanitation
systems.
   (M) Lighting. All interior streets within the community shall be lighted at
night with electric lamps. Lamps should be of sufficient wattage and distance
to provide adequate lighting of interior streets. Poles 25 feet in height, no
more than 250 feet apart using 175 watt bulbs, shall be the minimum lighting
standard.
   (N)   Buffer zones.
      (1)   A buffer strip at least ten feet wide adjacent to each exterior
property line shall be densely planted and maintained.
      (2)   Plant species must be of sufficient growth capability and maturity
that within three years of planting, the plants will grow to a minimum height
of five feet. Acceptable plant species include the following:
         (a)   Wax myrtle;
         (b)   Autumn olive;
         (c)   Photinia;
         (d)   Euonymus; and
         (e)   Leyland cypress.
      (2)   The building of structures in the buffer zone is prohibited.
   (O)   Nonresidential purposes. No part of any new manufactured home rental
community may be used for nonresidential purposes that may create any unusual
noises, odors, pollution or other offensive matters that are not associated
with residential living.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.08 MANAGEMENT AND OCCUPANTS; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   The person to whom a permit for a new manufactured home rental
community is issued shall operate the community to compliance with this
subchapter and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the community,
its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary manner.
      (2)   The community management shall notify all occupants of applicable
provisions of this subchapter and inform them of their responsibilities.
      (3)   The community management shall supervise the placement of each
manufactured home on its stand, securing its stability and installing all
utility connections.
      (4)   The community management shall maintain a complete register
containing all information necessary for identification and location of all
community occupants. The register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the park.
      (5)   The community management shall be responsible for the lawful
operation of the manufactured home rental community.
   (B)   (1)   Each manufactured home rental community occupant shall comply
with all applicable requirements of this subchapter and shall maintain the
manufactured home lots in a clean and sanitary manner.
      (2)   The manufactured home rental community occupant shall be
responsible for proper placement of the manufactured home on its stand and of
proper installation and operation of all utility connections in accordance with
this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.09 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Amendments.
      (1)   (a)   The County Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend
the terms of this subchapter, but no amendment shall become effective unless it
shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation.
         (b)   The Planning Board shall have 30 days from the time proposed
amendment is submitted to it within which to submit its report. If the Planning
Board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be deemed to
have recommended approval of the amendment.
      (2)   (a)   No amendment shall be adopted by the governing body until it
has held a public hearing on the amendment.
         (b)   Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county area at least once a week for two successive
calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial notice shall appear not more
than 25 nor less than ten days prior to the hearing date. In computing the ten-
and 25-day periods, the date of publication is not to be counted, but the date
of the hearing is.
   (B)   Severability. Should any section or provision of this subchapter be
declared by the courts to be invalid for any reason, the declaration shall not
affect the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so
declared to be invalid.
   (C)   Conflict. When requirements of this subchapter conflict with
requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the
more stringent or higher requirements shall govern.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
§ 154.10 APPLICABLE CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Certificate of ownership.
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and
described hereon which was conveyed to me (us) by deed recorded in Book
               , Page            , and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of
manufactured home rental community with my (our) free consent. Further, I (we)
certify that the land as shown hereon is within the manufactured home rental
community regulations jurisdiction of the County Board of Commissioners of
Pasquotank County and all dedications are free and clear of any lien, lease,
deed of trust or any other encumbrance.
This, the                        day of                                       ,
                     .
Owner
                                                                                                
Owner
                                                                                                
   (B)   Certificate of accuracy.
I hereby certify that under my direction and supervision this plan, shown and
described hereon, was drawn from an actual survey of land; that the error of
closure is calculated by latitudes and departures and is
                                                                               
; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines; that this Plat
was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30, as amended.
Witness my hand and seal this                         day of
                                 ,               .
Registered Land Surveyor
                                                                      
Registration Number
                                                                             
   (C)   Certificate of approval of sewage system.
This manufactured home rental community, entitled
                                                       has been designed for
the construction of individual sewage systems and meets the criteria and
requirements of the Pasquotank, Perquimans, Camden and Chowan Counties District
Health Department based on existing conditions and regulations. The District
Health Department reserves the right to require additional improvements to
these properties and to limit the number of bedrooms and size of structure
based on site conditions upon issuance of the final site improvements permits.
This certification does not constitute a warranty and is issued based on this
manufactured home rental community being serviced by
                                                              water system.
                                            ,                   
Date
                                                                                                            
District Health Director or Authorized Representative
   (D)   Certificate of approval of artificial drainage improvements.
In the manufactured home rental community entitled
                                                     artificial drainage has
been installed according to plans and specifications prepared by
                                             and based upon the requirement of
the Pasquotank, Perquimans, Camden and Chowan Counties District Health
Department to keep the seasonal high water table a minimum of 12 inches below
the septic tank nitrification lines. Proper landscaping and maintenance of
these drainage facilities are the responsibility of the property owners to
insure that septic tank malfunctions do not occur. The District Health
Department assumes no responsibility for the design, maintenance or the
guaranteed performance of the artificial drainage measures and their effects.
                                                                                                                
Certifier of Drainage Facilities               Date
                                                                                                                 
District Health Director            Date
   (E)   Certificate of approval by the Planning Board.
I,                                                                , Chairperson
of the Pasquotank County Planning Board, do hereby certify that the Planning
Board fully approved the plat of the manufactured home rental community
entitled                                                                 on
the                     day of                                            ,
                .
                                                                
Chairperson
Pasquotank County Planning Board
   (F)   Certificate of approval of water supply.
I hereby certify that the water distribution system installed or proposed for
installation in
                                                                     
manufactured home rental community fully meets the requirements of the
                                                                                   
(appropriate public water system).
This the                        day of                                        ,
                        .
                                                                                                             
Director of Public Water System
   (G)   Certificate of approved light and electrical system.
I,                                                                          ,
County Electrical Inspector, hereby certify that the proposed electrical and
lighting systems in
                                                                manufactured
home rental community meets the requirements of the North Carolina Building
Code.
This the                       day of                                   ,
                    .
                                                                                                   
County Electrical Inspector
   (H)   Certificate of approved fire protection system.
I,                                                           , Elizabeth City
Fire Marshal, hereby certify that the fire protection system in
                                                                       
manufactured home rental community complies with the rules and regulations of
North Carolina.
This the                          day of                                    ,
                    .
                                                                                                       
Elizabeth City Fire Marshal
   (I)   Compliance with state guidelines for areas of environmental concern.
      (1)   Prior to approval of any manufactured home rental community, the
County Manager and the local AEC Permit officer shall determine if the site, in
whole or in part, is located within or without any area of environmental
concern. This determination shall result from both an on-site investigation and
a review of the official AEC overlay map.
      (2)   If the site is, in whole or in part, within any area of
environmental concern, the proposed development will comply with development
standards of the State Guidelines for Areas of Environmental Concern prior to
the issuance of any development permit; and a certification of compliance to
that effect shall be signed by both the AEC permit officer and the County
Manager.
   (J)   Certification of manufactured home rental community ordinances and
CAMA areas of environmental concern consistency.
This certifies that on                                                      
the local AEC permit officer and the County Manager have examined a tract of
land located at
                                                                    and
                                                                     
                                                                                           owned
by
                                                                                                        
for the purpose of determining if the tract is in whole or in part within or
without an AEC, based on an on-site investigation and on examination of the
official AEC overlay map.
This further certifies that if the tract is, in part or totally, within an Area
of Environmental Concern, all proposed uses or structures in the AEC will
comply with development standards of the State Guidelines for Areas of
Environmental Concern.
                                                                                              
AEC Permit Officer
                                                                                              
County Manager
                                                                                              
Date
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
ALLOWABLE MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME UNITS
§ 154.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is to regulate allowable manufactured homes
or mobile homes within the jurisdiction of the county in order to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. passed 8-17-1992)
§ 154.21 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted under the authority of G.S. § 153A-121.
(Ord. passed 8-17-1992)
§ 154.22 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall govern each and every manufactured home or mobile
home that is brought into the county or moved from one location to another
within the county as provided in G.S. § 153A-121, Art. 6. This chapter shall
regulate all manufactured homes and mobile homes located within the county,
except those located within the jurisdiction of any municipality.
(Ord. passed 8-17-1992)
§ 154.23 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “HUD” LABEL.
      (1)   A label attached to individual manufactured home units certifying
that the unit was built in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing
and Construction and Safety Standards.
      (2)   The label is approximately two inches by four inches, and has a
three letter prefix which identifies the primary inspection agency and it
contains a six digit number. A sample label reads as follows:
         As evidenced by this Label No.         , the manufacturer certifies to
the best of the manufacturer’s knowledge and belief that this manufactured home
has been inspected in accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development and is constructed in conformance with the
federal manufactured home construction and safety standards in effect on the
date of manufacture. See date plat.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family dwelling fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installing or assembling on the building site
bearing a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the National
Manufactured Housing and Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq., which became effective June 15, 1976.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure designed to be used as a year-round
residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 which became
effective June 15, 1976.
(Ord. passed 8-17-1992)
§ 154.24 PERMITTED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes that are presently located within
the county may be moved from one location to another within the county for the
purpose of permanent set-up. To qualify for relocation, the mobile home or
manufactured home must be listed in the County Tax Assessor’s office as of the
date of ratification of this subchapter.
   (B)   Manufactured homes must have an attached HUD label and shall not be
more than ten years old on the date of application for a building permit for
the purpose of permanent set up.
(Ord. passed 8-17-1992) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   All persons who violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $50. Each day’s failure to
comply with any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation. The county may use any of the enforcement techniques authorized by
G.S. § 153A-123.
(Ord. passed 2-18-1991)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Introductory Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Authority
   
155.004   Jurisdiction
   
155.005   Prerequisite to plat recording
   
155.006   Issuance of permits
   
155.007   Compliance with other official county plans
Legal Provisions
   
155.020   General procedure for plat approval
   
155.021   Duty of subdivider or authorized agent
   
155.022   Effect of plat approval on dedications
   
155.023   Separability
   
155.024   Variances
   
155.025   Amendments
   
155.026   Abrogation
   
155.027   Re-enactment and repeal of existing subdivision ordinance
   
155.028   Effective date
   
155.029   Administrator
   
155.030   Minimum standards
   
155.031   Word interpretation
Procedures for Review and Approval; Generally
   
155.045   Plat shall be required on any subdivision of land
   
155.046   Approval prerequisite to plat recording
   
155.047   Procedure for family subdivision review
Procedures for Review and Approval; Sketch Plan Review
   
155.060   General
   
155.061   Sketch design plan requirements
Procedures for Review and Approval; Preliminary Plat Review
   
155.075   General
   
155.076   Preliminary plat requirements
   
155.077   Public water service requirements
   
155.078   Preliminary plat approval
Procedures for Review and Approval; Final Plat Review
   
155.090   General
   
155.091   The Planning Board review of final plat
   
155.092   Final plat approval by County Board of Commissioners
   
155.093   Final plat requirements
   
155.094   Preparation of final plat and installation of improvements
   
155.095   Improvement guarantees
   
155.096   Maintenance of streets until acceptance
   
155.097   Acceptance guarantees for street maintenance
   
155.098   Recreation fees
   
155.099   Approval of amended subdivision map
   
155.100   Plat requirement checklists
Procedures for Review and Approval; Other Agencies
   
155.115   Review by other agencies
Procedures for Review and Approval; Certificates to be Applied to Face of Plat
   
155.130   Certificate of ownership and dedication
   
155.131   Certificate of accuracy
   
155.132   Certificate of the approval of sewage system
   
155.133   Certificate of approval of artificial drainage improvements
   
155.134   Certificate of District Highway Engineer
   
155.135   Certificate of approval and acceptance of dedications
   
155.136   Certificate of approval by Planning Board
   
155.137   Certificate to subdivision classification
   
155.138   Certificate of approval for amended map by the Subdivision
Administrator
   
155.139   Certificate of approval of stormwater drainage improvements
Minimum Design Standards
   
155.150   General
   
155.151   Streets
   
155.152   Minimum street right-of-way width
   
155.153   Pavement width
   
155.154   Pavement design
   
155.155   Street grades
   
155.156   Radii of curvature
   
155.157   Tangents
   
155.158   Intersections
   
155.159   Cul-de-sacs
   
155.160   Street names and traffic signs
   
155.161   Access roads
   
155.162   Lots
   
155.163   Building setback lines
   
155.164   Blocks
   
155.165   Easements
   
155.166   Buffer strips between residential subdivision and railroads or
limited access highways
   
155.167   Utilities
   
155.168   Buffer strips between residential subdivisions and existing
agricultural uses
   
155.169   Fire hydrants
   
155.170   Stormwater management
   
155.171   Name duplication
   
155.172   Subdivision phasing
Definitions
   
155.185   Subdivision defined
   
155.186   General definitions
 
   
155.999   Penalty
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Regulation
for Pasquotank County, North Carolina”, and may be referred to as the
“Subdivision Regulations”.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to support and guide the proper subdivision
of land within the jurisdiction of the county in order to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county. The chapter
is designed to promote the orderly development of the county; for the
coordination of streets and highways within proposed subdivisions with existing
or planned streets and highways with other public facilities; for the
dedication or reservation of right-of-way or easements for street and utility
purposes; and for the distribution of population and traffic, which shall avoid
congestion and overcrowding and which will create conditions essential to
public health, safety and the general welfare. This chapter is designed to
further facilitate adequate provision for water, sewage, parks, schools and
playgrounds, and also to facilitate the further resubdivision of large tracts
into smaller parcels of land.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.003 AUTHORITY.
   The chapter is adopted under the authority of G.S. Ch. 153A, Art. 2.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.004 JURISDICTION.
   On and after April 17, 1989, these regulations shall govern each and every
subdivision of land within the county as provided in G.S. Ch. 153A, Art. 18,
except those lands lying within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of any
municipality, unless such municipality shall have by resolution formally
requested the county to enforce these regulations within the city’s area of
jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.005 PREREQUISITE TO PLAT RECORDING.
   (A)   After April 17, 1989, the effective date of this chapter, each
individual subdivision plat of land within the county’s jurisdiction shall
receive preliminary approval by the County Planning Board and preliminary and
final approval by the County Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   In instances where the subdivision qualifies for the abbreviated
subdivision, the plat shall receive preliminary and final approval by the
County Subdivision Administrator.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 155.006 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   No street shall be recommended for acceptance for maintenance by the State
Board of Transportation nor shall any permit be issued by any administrative
agent of the county for the construction of any building or other improvement
requiring a permit, upon any land concerning which a plat is required to be
approved, unless and until the requirements set forth in this chapter have been
complied with and the same approved by the Planning Board and Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.007 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER OFFICIAL COUNTY PLANS.
   Proposed subdivisions must comply in all respects with the rules and
regulations of the appropriate water district providing the water service and
with all other officially adopted plans in effect in the area to be subdivided,
including the locally adopted Coastal Resources Commission ratified Land Use
Plan.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
LEGAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.020 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   After the effective date of this chapter, no subdivision plat of land
within the subdivision jurisdiction of the county shall be filed or recorded
until it has been submitted to, and approved by, the County Board of
Commissioners or the County Subdivision Administrator, as set forth in §
155.005, and until this approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat
by the Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners or the Subdivision Review
Officer of the county.
   (B)   The Register of Deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision
of land within the territorial jurisdiction of the county that has not been
approved in accordance with these provisions, nor shall the Clerk of Superior
Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the recording would be in
conflict with this section.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 155.021 DUTY OF SUBDIVIDER OR AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   A plat must be prepared, approved and recorded whenever the subdivision of
land takes place, as defined in this chapter. The owner of land shown on a
subdivision plat submitted for recording, or an authorized agent, shall sign a
statement on the plat stating whether any land shown thereon is within the
subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the county.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.022 EFFECT OF PLAT APPROVAL ON DEDICATIONS.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 153A-333, the approval of a plat does not constitute or
effect the acceptance by the county or the public of the dedication of any
street or other ground, public utility line or other public facility shown on
the plat and shall not be construed to do so.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 4, passed 6-21-1993)
§ 155.023 SEPARABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be decided by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.024 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may, on recommendation from the
Planning Board, authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its
opinion, unnecessary hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting
any variance, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the nature of the
proposed subdivision, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect
of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.
Appropriate conditions may be imposed on a subdivision variance, provided that
the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. A concurring vote of
four-fifths of the Board shall be necessary to grant a variance.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the County Board of Commissioners
finds:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured and substantial
justice is achieved.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 15-01, passed - - )
§ 155.025 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend the
terms of this chapter, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall
have been proposed by, or shall have been submitted to, the Planning Board for
review and recommendation. The Planning Board shall have 30 days from the time
proposed amendment is submitted to it within which to submit its report. If the
Planning Board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be
deemed to have recommended approval of the amendment.
   (B)   No amendment shall be adopted by the governing body until it has held
a public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the county area at least once a week for
two successive calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial notice shall
appear not more than 25, nor less than ten, days prior to the hearing date. In
computing the ten and 25- day periods, the date of publication is not to be
counted, but the date of the hearing is.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.026 ABROGATION.
   It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant
to law. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.027 RE-ENACTMENT AND REPEAL OF EXISTING SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter, in part, carries forward by re-enactment some of the
provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the county adopted on April 4, 1966,
and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue
enforcing such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have
accrued thereunder are preserved and may be enforced.
   (B)   All provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance which are not re-enacted
herein are hereby repealed.
   (C)   All suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from
the violation of any Subdivision Ordinance heretofore in effect, which are now
pending in any of the courts of this state or of the United States, shall be
prosecuted to their finality the same as if this chapter has not been adopted;
and any and all violations of the existing ordinance, prosecutions for which
have not yet been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted; and
nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss
any litigation or prosecution now pending and/or which may heretofore have been
instituted or prosecuted.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.028 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect and shall be in force on and after April 17,
1989. Duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners April 17, 1989.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.029 ADMINISTRATOR.
   The holder of the office of County Planning Director is hereby appointed to
serve as Subdivision Administrator.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991)
§ 155.030 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   Wherever the provisions of any other law, ordinance or regulation impose
higher standards than are required by the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of such law, ordinance or regulation shall govern.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.031 WORD INTERPRETATION.
   For the purpose of the chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as
follows.
   (A)   The word “may” is permissive.
   (B)   The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory.
   (C)   The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense
includes the present tense.
   (D)   The singular includes the plural and plural includes the singular.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL; GENERALLY
§ 155.045 PLAT SHALL BE REQUIRED ON ANY SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 153A-332, a final plat shall be prepared, approved and
recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter whenever any subdivision of
land takes place.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.046 APPROVAL PREREQUISITE TO PLAT RECORDING.
   (A)   No final plat of a subdivision within the subdivision jurisdiction of
the county, as established in §
155.004, shall be accepted for record by the Register of Deeds of the county
until final approval has been given by the Board of Commissioners or the County
Subdivision Administrator.
   (B)   To secure such approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall
generally follow the procedures established in this section.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 155.047 PROCEDURE FOR FAMILY SUBDIVISION REVIEW.
   (A)   Lots divided as a family subdivision, as defined in §
155.186, shall be approved under the following conditions:
      (1)   Lots created by means of a family subdivision shall have a minimum
of 25 feet of frontage upon a state-maintained road;
      (2)   Lots shall be a minimum of 43,000 square feet in area, with at
least 140 feet of lot width at the front minimum building setback;
      (3)   To qualify as a family subdivision, the property owner must provide
proof that ownership of the tract to be subdivided has been in continuous
ownership for a minimum of five years;
      (4)   Lots created through the family subdivision review shall not be
eligible for further subdivision for ten years; and
      (5)   Lots shall be approved under the family subdivision provisions as a
one-time gift of a single lot to each child, grandchild or parent of the
property owner. A gift of any additional lot to the same child or parent shall
require compliance with the major subdivision provisions within this chapter.
   (B)   Family subdivision plats shall be approved by the Board of
Commissioners and submitted in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The application and plat indicate that it qualifies as a family
subdivision as defined in §§
155.045 through
155.139;
      (2)   The applicant must provide documentation that attests to the linear
relationship that qualifies the applicant for the family subdivision;
      (3)   The plat shall state that the lot may not be further subdivided for
a period of at least ten years; and
      (4)   An improvement authorization permit must be provided from the
Environmental Health Department regarding the soil suitability for an on-site
septic tank disposal system.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992;
Ord. 4, passed 6-21-1993; Ord. 14, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 15, passed 8-5-2002;
Ord. 21, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 22, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 23, passed 4-21-2008;
Ord. 29, passed 10-17-2011)
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL; SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
§ 155.060 GENERAL.
   (A)   (1)   If the land to be subdivided contains more than ten acres or is
waterfront property, the subdivider shall submit a sketch plan prior to
submitting a preliminary plan. Smaller subdivisions may be submitted in sketch
plan form if the subdivider wishes.
      (2)   If a sketch plan is required or the subdivider wishes to submit one
for review, it must be submitted to the Subdivision Administrator at least 21
days prior to the regular meeting of the Technical Review Committee.
   (B)   (1)   Upon submission of the sketch plan for processing by the
Subdivision Administrator, the subdivider shall pay a processing fee in
accordance with an approved subdivision fee schedule adopted by the County
Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Sketch plans shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee
prior to the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioner review.
   (C)   The TRC shall make a recommendation for approval, conditional approval
or disapproval of the sketch plan. At the Technical Review Committee, Planning
Board and Board of Commissioner meetings, the subdivider or his or her
representative should explain the plan, answer questions and advise the Boards
of any variations from the subdivision regulations. Sketch plans shall conform
to the following requirements when submitted for review.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 19, passed 9-18-2006)
§ 155.061 SKETCH DESIGN PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The sketch design plan shall depict or contain the following
information:
      (1)   Boundary of tract and the portion to be subdivided;
      (2)   Sketch of proposed street and lot layout;
      (3)   Dimensions of street right-of-way;
      (4)   Location of other rights-of-way and easements;
      (5)   Sites, if any, for schools, churches, parks, beaches and the like;
      (6)   Location of streets and lots of developed or platted properties
within 100 feet of property being considered for subdivision;
      (7)   Zoning classification(s) of the tract and of adjacent properties,
if applicable;
      (8)   Site data:
         (a)   Acreage in tract;
         (b)   Acreage to be subdivided;
         (c)   Approximate acreage in parks or other land usage; and
         (d)   Approximate number of lots proposed.
      (9)   Sketch vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the surrounding area, the adopted thoroughfare plan, the 100-
year flood plain, areas of environmental concern and land classification map.
(Note: Information pertaining to the last four items may be obtained from the
Tax Supervisor’s Office.);
      (10)   Twenty copies shall be submitted to the Subdivision Administrator.
In addition, one reduced copy shall be submitted which is eight and one-half
inches by 11 inches in size and one plan digital file shall be submitted. No
specific graphics media must be employed;
      (11)   No specific size requirements apply to sketch design plans; it is
suggested that the requirements applicable to preliminary and final plats be
utilized;
      (12)   Upon submission of a sketch plan for review by the Technical
Review Committee the subdivider shall pay a processing fee to the County
Subdivision Review Officer in accordance with an approved subdivision fee
schedule adopted by the County Board of Commissioners. In addition, a
stormwater review fee shall also be submitted with the sketch plan application;
and
      (13)   No certificates must be provided in connection with the submission
of sketch design plans.
   (B)   The Technical Review Committee, Planning Board and Board of
Commissioners shall review the sketch design plan for general compliance with
the requirements of this regulation. The Boards shall advise the subdivider or
his or her authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed
subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission
of the preliminary and final plats. This review shall in no way be construed as
constituting an official action of approval for recording of the subdivision by
the Planning Board or County Board of Commissioners as required by this
regulation.
   (C)   One copy shall be retained as part of the minutes of the Board of
Commissioners, with the remaining copies being returned to the subdivider or
his or her authorized agent.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 19, passed 9-18-2006; Ord. 28, passed 3-1-
2010)
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL; PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW
§ 155.075 GENERAL.
   (A)   The subdivider shall submit 20 copies of the preliminary plat and any
supplementary material to the Subdivision Administrator at least 21 days prior
to the regularly scheduled Technical Review Committee meeting at which said
plat is to be considered. The subdivider shall also include with the submittal
one reduced copy of the subdivision plat which is eight and one-half inches by
11 inches in size. In addition to the hard copies, the subdivider shall submit
one digital plan file for review by the Planning Board and the Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   Upon submission of the preliminary plat for processing by the
Subdivision Administrator, the subdivider shall pay a processing fee to the
county in accordance with an approved subdivision fee schedule adopted by the
County Board of Commissioners. The preliminary plat shall be submitted not more
than 24 months after the date on which the sketch plan was approved, otherwise
the sketch plan approval shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999;
Ord. 16, passed 1-20-2004; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 28, passed 3-1-
2010)
§ 155.076 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall depict or contain the following
information:
      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or
larger and shall be a reproducible plat, either original ink or polishers film
(Mylar), or a reproduced drawing, transparent and archival (as defined by the
American National Standards Institute) which is 18 inches by 24 inches in size;
      (2)   The location of existing and platted property lines, streets and
street names, buildings, watercourses, railroads, transmission lines, sewers,
bridges, culverts and drain pipes, water mains, existing fire hydrant location
nearest to site, city and county lines (if adjoining) and any public utility
easements;
      (3)   Boundaries of tract shown with bearings and distances;
      (4)   Wooded areas, marshes and any other conditions affecting the site;
      (5)   Names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions;
      (6)   Zoning classification, if any, both on the land to be subdivided
and on adjoining land;
      (7)   Proposed streets, street names, rights-of-way, roadway widths and
approximate grades;
      (8)   The plans for proposed utility layouts (sewer, water, gas,
electricity) showing connections to existing systems or plans for individual
water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage and the like. Utility plans are
encouraged to be a separate drawing(s) from the preliminary plat. This
eliminates utility information from cluttering the plat to be recorded in the
Register of Deeds’ office;
      (9)   Other proposed right-of-way or easements; locations, widths and
purposes;
      (10)   Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate
dimensions;
      (11)   Proposed minimum building setback lines;
      (12)   Contour lines with elevation intervals of one foot. The 100-year
flood plain contour shall be labeled and clearly indicated with a bolder,
thicker line;
      (13)   Proposed parks, school sites or other public open spaces, if any;
      (14)   Title, date, north point and graphic scale;
      (15)   Name of owner, surveyor or land planner;
      (16)   Site data:
         (a)   Acreage in total tract;
         (b)   Acreage in parks or other land usage;
         (c)   Total number of lots; and
         (d)   Lineal feet in streets.
      (17)   Sketch vicinity map showing relationship between subdivision and
surrounding area, adopted thoroughfare plan, 100-year flood plain, areas of
environmental concern and land classification map; (Note: Information
pertaining to the last four items may be obtained from the Tax Supervisor’s
Office.)
      (18)   Pursuant to G.S. §§ 113A-8 through 113A-10, the Planning Board may
require the subdivider to submit an environmental impact statement with his or
her preliminary plat if:
         (a)   The development exceeds ten acres in area; and
         (b)   If the Board deems it necessary due to the nature of the land to
be subdivided, or peculiarities in the proposed layout.
      (19)   Provide a letter from the appropriate electric utility company
certifying that the utilities will be installed underground.
   (B)   The county is not responsible for maintaining drainage within the
subdivision or drainage outlets for discharging water collected within the
subdivision.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992;
Ord. 8, passed 2-19-1996; Ord. 9, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999)
§ 155.077 PUBLIC WATER SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   Prior to preliminary plat submission, the Planning Board or its authorized
representative shall determine if public water services are available for the
proposed subdivision.
   (A)   If public water service is not available, then the plans for the
construction of the proposed water facilities or individual water supplies
shall meet the standards of the District Health Department. Systems having 15
or more connections must meet the standards of the State Commission for Health
Services, Division of Environmental Management. Plans approved by the reviewing
agency with jurisdiction shall be submitted with a preliminary plat.
   (B)   If public water service is to be available and the subdivider is
developing new lots, the subdivider shall construct a water system that
complies with the standards and specifications of the public water system with
jurisdiction and connect it to the system serving the area in which the
subdivision is located.
   (C)   If the subdivider is developing new lots within the service area of
the County Water System, the subdivider shall construct a water system and
connect it to the system owned and operated by the county, subject to the
following conditions.
      (1)   Construction plans for the proposed system shall be prepared by a
registered engineer, materials and construction to be in accordance with the
specification for the County Water System as prepared by the County Engineer,
and submitted with the preliminary plat for approval by the Planning Board,
County Water Superintendent and the appropriate state agencies.
      (2)   The cost of the construction, connection and approval of the
subdivision water system shall be paid by the subdivider.
      (3)   All water mains, laterals, meter boxes and easements shall be
dedicated to the County Water System. Water lines shall be installed on the
street right-of-way where possible.
   (D)   The county may require installation of certain oversized facilities
such as water mains in excess of eight inches in diameter when it is in the
interest of future development. The county shall pay for that portion of the
improvement which exceeds the standards set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.078 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   After review of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board may recommend
the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the plat to the Board of
Commissioners. If not reviewed and a recommendation presented to the Board of
Commissioners within 45 days of the first consideration of the plat, the
subdivider may apply to the County Board of Commissioners for approval or
disapproval, unless the subdivider agrees to an extension of time.
   (B)   The Subdivision Review Officer or a Planning Board member shall place
the preliminary plat on the Board of Commissioners’ agenda. The Board of
Commissioners has 45 days from the receipt of the Planning Board recommendation
to take action on the plat or the plat may be considered disapproved by the
subdivider, unless an extension of time is agreed upon.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners shall approve or disapprove the preliminary
plat. If the Board approves the plat, such approval shall be noted on two
copies of the plat. One copy shall be retained by the Board of Commissioners in
the County Planning Department and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider
or his or her authorized agent.
   (D)   If the Board of Commissioners disapprove the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall be given the reasons in writing and one copy of the plat. The
subdivider shall be instructed concerning possible resubmitting of the plat to
the Board of Commissioners if deficiencies can be corrected.
   (E)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of Commissioners,
the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and the
installation of, or arrangement for, required improvements in accordance with
the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this chapter. Preliminary
plat approval shall in no way be construed as constituting an official action
of approval for recording of the subdivision as required by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992)
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL; FINAL PLAT REVIEW
§ 155.090 GENERAL.
   (A)   (1)   Prior to submittal of the final plat for review by the County
Board of Commissioners, the developer shall have completed the installation of
all improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat.
      (2)   The only exception will be asphalt street paving, provided the
developer submits an improvement guarantee in accordance with §
155.095.
   (B)   (1)   Upon completion of the installation or an arrangement for the
improvements shown on the approved preliminary plat for the whole or in a
portion of the subdivision that is acceptable to the Planning Board and County
Commissioners, the applicant shall submit a final plat 21 days prior to the
regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners showing the areas covered by such
improvements. At the same time the final plat is submitted, the developer shall
schedule a meeting at the subdivision site with the Subdivision Administrator
and the County Engineer to inspect the project for conformance with the
approved preliminary plan.
      (2)   Should the developer opt to provide an improvement guarantee rather
than install asphalt street paving at final plat submittal, he or she shall
have installed and graded the base materials to provide for positive drainage
in accordance with the pavement cross section detail. Roadway shoulders and
ditches, lot line swales, outfall ditches and the like shall be graded and
grass shall be established in accordance with the approved preliminary plat.
Grass shall be mowed so that the Subdivision Administrator and County Engineer
can verify construction conforms to the approved preliminary plan.
   (C)   A final plat for the first phase of subdivision shall be submitted not
more than 24 months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved,
otherwise preliminary approval shall be null and void, unless a written
extension of this limit is granted by the County Board of Commissioners on or
before the 24-month anniversary of the preliminary plat approval. Subsequent
phases shall be submitted not more than 24 months after the date of the final
plat approval for the prior phase of development, otherwise preliminary
approval shall be null and void, unless a written extension of the limit is
granted by the County Board of Commissioners on or before the 24-month
anniversary of the previous final plat approval.
   (D)   On application for final plat review, the subdivider shall pay a
processing fee to the County Subdivision Administrator in accordance with an
approved subdivision fee schedule adopted by the County Board of Commissioners.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit four copies of the final plat and ten
reduced copies of the subdivision plat, which are eight and one-half inches by
11 inches in size, and one plan digital file.
      (2)   The final plat shall be reviewed by the Subdivision Administrator
for compliance with the endorsed preliminary plan. The Planning Board may
appoint an engineer to check the final plat against the subdivision’s actual
layout for correctness; charging the costs to the subdivider if the plat is
found to be seriously in error.
         (a)   If the plat is found to be in compliance, the Subdivision
Administrator shall transmit the final plat together with his or her
recommendations to the County Board of Commissioners for final action.
         (b)   If the final plat is found not to be in compliance or if changes
have been made from the endorsed preliminary plat, the Subdivision
Administrator shall notify the subdivider and transmit the final plat to the
Planning Board.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 16, passed 1-20-2004;
Ord. 20, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 28, passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.091 THE PLANNING BOARD REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   If the Planning Board endorses the changes made from the approved
preliminary plat, the Subdivision Administrator shall transmit the final plat,
together with the Planning Board’s recommendations, to the County Board of
Commissioners for final action.
   (B)   If the final plat is not in compliance with this chapter or the
Planning Board does not accept the changes from the endorsed preliminary plat,
the subdivider shall be given an opportunity to submit a revised final plat. If
a revised final plat is not submitted, the Subdivision Administrator shall
transmit the final plat together with the Planning Board’s recommendations to
the County Board of Commissioners for final action. Such recommendations shall
specify any unaccepted changes from the endorsed preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 155.092 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL BY COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The final plat and the recommendations of the Subdivision
Administrator or the Planning Board, whichever is the case, shall be reviewed
by the County Board of Commissioners. The Commissioners shall approve or
disapprove the final plat.
   (B)   Upon approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall have
authorization to file the plat with the Register of Deeds. Approval shall be
null and void for any plat not recorded within 90 days.
   (C)   If the County Board of Commissioners should disapprove the final plat,
the reasons for such action shall be noted and recommendations made on the
basis of which the proposed subdivision would be approved.
   (D)   The action of the County Board of Commissioners shall be noted on two
copies of the final plat. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one
copy shall be retained for the permanent file of the Board of Commissioners in
the County Planning Department.
   (E)   No final plat shall be approved until all improvements are installed
or meet the requirements set forth in §§
155.093 and
155.094, all required fees have been paid and the certificates required by this
chapter to appear on the final plat have been properly filled out and signed.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995)
§ 155.093 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The final plat shall be at the same scale, same sheet size, graphic
media and shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and
shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record at the time.
   (B)   The final plat will show:
      (1)   The lines of all streets and roads;
      (2)   Lot lines and lot number;
      (3)   Minimum building setback lines;
      (4)   Reservations, easements, alleys and any areas to be dedicated to
public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their
purpose and any limitations;
      (5)   Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground,
the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line,
block line and building line, whether curved or straight, and including true
north point. This should include the radius, center angle and tangent distance
for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that are not
the boundary of curved streets;
      (6)   All dimensions should be to the nearest hundredth of a foot and
angles to the nearest second;
      (7)   Accurate location and description of all permanent monuments and
stakes;
      (8)   The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets, and
the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property;
      (9)   Title, date, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale and
north point (indicate if true north, magnetic north or State Grid System is
used);
      (10)   Name of owner, surveyor or land planner;
      (11)   Sketch vicinity map showing relationship between subdivision and
surrounding area;
      (12)   Provide maintenance of streets guarantee until acceptance by the
State Department of Transportation;
      (13)   Payment of fees for water laterals and meters in areas served by
the County Water System. The fee shall be paid to the County Water Department
in accordance with a fee schedule established from time to time by the County
Board of Commissioners; and
      (14)   Payment of fees for street signs.
   (C)   As-built drainage plan shall show:
      (1)   The lines of all streets and roads;
      (2)   Lot lines and lot number;
      (3)   Location of all ditches (includes road and outfall), culverts and
related drainage structures;
      (4)   High and low ditch inverts elevations. Flow arrows shall be shown
along ditches;
      (5)   Culvert material, size and inverts; and
      (6)   Location of all fire hydrants within subdivision with bench mark
elevations established on the top nut and denoted.
   (D)   Driveway culvert installation plan. In addition to the information
included on the as-built drainage plan, the plan shall show:
      (1)   Percent of slope on all ditches indicated to the nearest hundredth
of a percent;
      (2)   Indicate, at each lot corner that coexist with road right-of-way,
the roadway ditch invert (calculated according to ditch slopes); and
      (3)   Indicate, on each lot, the minimum driveway culvert size that
provides for proper drainage and meets NCDOT requirements.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995;
Ord. 8, passed 2-19-1996; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.094 PREPARATION OF FINAL PLAT AND INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the County Board of Commissioners,
the subdivider may proceed with the preparation or the arrangement for the
required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the
requirements of this chapter. Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider
shall have installed the improvements specified in this chapter or guaranteed
the installation as provided herein. No final plat will be accepted for review
by the County Board of Commissioners unless accompanied by written notice by
the Subdivision Administrator acknowledging compliance with the improvement and
guarantee standards of this chapter. Should the final plat require review by
the Planning Board due to discrepancies in the preliminary plat, the
Subdivision Administrator shall transmit the final plat together with the
Planning Board’s recommendations to the County Board of Commissioners for final
action. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time; such
portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992)
§ 155.095 IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Agreement and security required. In lieu of required completion of
asphalt street paving, shoulder/ditch grading and seeding prior to final plat
approval, the county may enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby
the subdivider shall agree to complete all asphalt street paving, shoulder/
ditch grading and seeding.
   (B)   Approval. Once the agreement is signed by both parties and the
required security is provided, the final plat may be approved by the County
Board of Commissioners, if all other requirements of this chapter are met. To
secure this agreement the subdivider shall provide, subject to approval of the
County Board of Commissioners, any one or combination of the following
guarantees.
      (1)   Surety performance bond. The subdivider shall obtain a performance
bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State. The
bonds shall be payable to the county and shall be in an amount equal to 1.30
times the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the
County Board of Commissioners, of installing the asphalt street paving and
completion of final shoulder/ditch grading and seeding. The duration of the
bond shall be until such time as the improvements are determined by the Board
of Commissioners to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. All
improvements must be made within 12 months of the date of authorization of the
security bond.
      (2)   Cash or irrevocable letters of credit on forms approved by the
County Attorney with a banking institution insured by either FSLIC or FDIC. The
subdivider shall deposit an irrevocable letter of credit or cash with the
county. The amount of the deposit shall be equal to 1.30 times the entire cost
of installing the asphalt street paving and completion of final shoulder/ditch
grading and seeding, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the County
Board of Commissioners. All improvements must be made within 12 months of the
date of authorization of the security.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 8, passed 2-19-1996;
Ord. 13, passed 4-23-2001; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.096 MAINTENANCE OF STREETS UNTIL ACCEPTANCE.
   The subdivider of any development containing streets intended for public
dedication shall post a letter of credit or other sufficient surety (see §
155.097) to guarantee that such streets will be properly maintained until the
offer of dedication is accepted by the State Department of Transportation.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.097 ACCEPTANCE GUARANTEES FOR STREET MAINTENANCE.
   The amount of the security shall constitute 30% of the cost of all
improvements relating to road construction (grading, ditching, culverts, stone
base, asphalt, seeding and the like). The developer shall provide information
sufficient to determine the cost of the improvements. The following types of
bonds/guarantees will be acceptable to the Board of Commissioners for the
purpose of satisfying maintenance of streets guarantees prior to final plat
approval.
   (A)   Surety bond. The subdivider shall obtain a surety bond from a surety
bonding company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be
payable to the county and shall be in an amount approved by the Board of
Commissioners. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the streets
are accepted by the State Department of Transportation.
   (B)   Cash or irrevocable letters of credit on forms approved by the County
Attorney with a banking institution insured by either FSLIC or FDIC. The
subdivider shall deposit an irrevocable letter of credit or cash with the
county. The amount of the deposit shall be approved by the County Board of
Commissioners. The security shall be held until such time as the streets are
accepted by the State Department of Transportation.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995;
Ord. 13, passed 4-23-2001; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.098 RECREATION FEES.
   (A)   All residential subdivisions and developments, except family
subdivisions, shall provide funds to the county whereby the county may acquire
public recreation and park land or areas to serve the development or
subdivision.
   (B)   The amount of such fee shall be the product of the total number of
dwelling units and/or building lots located in the development or subdivision
multiplied by the recreation fee as established by the County Board of
Commissioners.
   (C)   The fee must be paid prior to approval of a final plat for the
subdivision, provided that payments may be phased in accordance with the
approved phasing of the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.099 APPROVAL OF AMENDED SUBDIVISION MAP.
   (A)   Minor changes to a subdivision map which has received plat approval by
the Board of Commissioners are permissible and the Subdivision Administrator
may authorize such minor changes. A change is minor if it has no discernible
impact on neighboring properties or the general public. Examples of minor
changes are reduction in minimum building setbacks, which meet or exceed the
minimum requirements in this chapter, slight lot line realignments and the
combination of previously approved lots. This is not intended to be an all-
inclusive list.
   (B)   Major changes to a subdivision map which has received final plat
approval by the Board of Commissioners must be resubmitted to the Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners shall approve or disapprove the
amended map. Examples of major changes are an increase in the number of lots,
major shifting of lot lines and major shifting of streets. This is not intended
to be an all-inclusive list.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 3, passed 3-8-1993; Ord.
7, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 8, passed 2-19-1996; Ord. 28, passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.100 PLAT REQUIREMENT CHECKLISTS.
Information Required Sketch Plat Preliminary Plat Final Plat
Information Required                    Sketch Plat Preliminary Plat Final Plat
A copy of any deed restrictions or                  X                X
similar covenants.
A sketch vicinity map showing the
relationship between the proposed       X           X                X
subdivision and surrounding area at an
appropriate scale.
A topographic map showing vertical      X           X                X
contours every one foot.
An accurately positioned north arrow
tied into the North Carolina Grid                   X                X
System if within 2,000 feet of a
monument.
Any other information considered by
either the subdivider, Subdivision
Review Committee, Subdivision                       X                X
Administrator, Planning Board or Board
of Commissioners to be pertinent to the
review of the plat.
Bench mark elevations established on
the top of all fire hydrants within the                              X
subdivision and noted on the drainage
plan.
Corporate limits, township boundaries,
county lines, if on the subdivision     X           X                X
tract.
Date of survey plat preparation.                    X                X
Existing buildings or other structures,
watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, storm drains, both on land to X           X                X
be subdivided and land immediately
adjoining.
Improvement certificate by the
Department of Transportation stating                                 X
the streets as installed or as designed
and guaranteed meet state standards.
Improvement certificate or letter of
approval for water and sewage systems                                X
by appropriate county and state
authorities.
Letter from appropriate utility company
certifying electric utilities will be               X
installed underground.
Letter from the Land Quality Section,
Division of Land Resources approving                X                X
the sedimentation and erosion control
plan.
Letter of approval from Department of
Transportation as to proposed roadway               X
alignment and construction.
Letter of approval of a stormwater
drainage plan from the Division of                  X                X
Environmental Management.
Letter of tentative approval of water
supply and sewage disposal plans by                 X
appropriate county and state
authorities.
Linear error of closure shall not
exceed one foot per 7,500 feet. Angular
error of closure shall not exceed 25                                 X
seconds times the square root of the
number of angles turned. Plus or minus
distance will not be approved.
Minimum building setback lines only.                X                X
Name of township, county and state in   X           X                X
which the subdivision is located.
Other applicable certificates.                      X                X
Payment for plat application fees.      X           X                X
Payment for street signs.                                            X
Payment for water laterals and meters
within the County Water System service                               X
area.
Payment of recreation fees.                                          X
Proposed roadways, existing and platted
streets on adjoining properties and in
proposed subdivision, right-of-way,
pavement widths, approximate grades,                X                X
design and engineering data for all
corners and curves and typical street
cross sections.
Provide maintenance of streets
guarantee until acceptance by State                                  X
Department of Transportation.
Scale denoted both graphically and      X           X                X
numerically.
Site data (to include zoning            X           X                X
classification).
Street names.                                       X                X
Sufficient data to determine readily
and reproduce on the ground the
location, bearing and length of every
street line, lot line, boundary line,
block line, and building, whether
curved or straight. This should include
the radius, central angle and tangent                                X
distance for the center line of curved
streets and curved property lines that
are not boundaries of curved streets.
All dimensions shall be measured to the
nearest 1/10 of a foot and all angles
to the nearest minute.
Ten year stormwater review by County                X                X
Technical Staff.
The accurate locations and descriptions
of all monuments, markers and control                                X
points.
The blocks numbered consecutively
throughout subdivision and the lots
numbered consecutively throughout each  X           X                X
block, square feet of each lot so
indicated.
The boundaries of the tract or portion
thereof to be subdivided distinctly and X           X                X
accurately represented with all
bearings and distance shown.
The exact boundary lines of the tract
to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location                               X
of existing boundary lines of adjoining
lands.
The location and dimensions of all
rights-of-way, utility or other         X           X                X
easements.
The name of the subdivision.            X           X                X
The names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all owners mortgagees,
registered surveyors land planners and              X                X
professional engineers responsible for
the subdivision.
The names of adjoining property owners. X           X                X
The names of any adjoining subdivisions             X                X
of record or proposed and under review.
The plans for utility layouts including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water
distribution lines, natural gas,                    X                X
telephone and electric service or plans
for individual water supply systems and
sewerage disposal systems.
The registration numbers and seals of
the professional engineers and                                       X
registered surveyors.
Total acreage of tract to be subdivided
with the location of previously                     X
subdivided lots within the tract.
Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock
outcrops, ponds or lakes, streams or
stream beds and any other natural       X           X
features affecting the site, including
the location of known areas subject to
flooding.
 
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999;
Ord. 13, passed 4-23-2001)
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL; OTHER AGENCIES
§ 155.115 REVIEW BY OTHER AGENCIES.
   (A)   Prior to approval of the preliminary plat to the Subdivision
Administrator, the subdivider shall submit copies of the preliminary plat and
any accompanying material to other officials and agencies concerned with new
development including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The District Highway Engineer as to proposed streets, highways and
drainage systems;
      (2)   The Sanitarian with the Health Department serving the county as to
proposed water and sewer systems, or satisfactory soil percolation tests or
general subsurface soil conditions to allow septic tank use;
      (3)   Such other agencies and officials as the County Planning Board and/
or County Board of Commissioners may deem, from time to time, necessary or
desirable;
      (4)   An official of the appropriate water system that will provide
service to the proposed subdivision as to the materials and the construction of
proposed water systems to be connected to the particular water system;
      (5)   The Land Quality Section, Division of Land Resources as to
sedimentation and erosion control for review and recommendation;
      (6)   The Division of Coastal Management as to locations of any Areas of
Environmental Concern that may be located on the proposed subdivision property;
      (7)   The Division of Environmental Management as to the applicability of
stormwater drainage;
      (8)   It is recommended that any subdivision plat with five lots or more
be submitted to the U.S. Post Office for possible inclusion in the Community
Mail Box Program; and
      (9)   The Fire Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department responsible for
servicing the proposed subdivision shall review the plat for possible locations
of dry fire hydrants, where applicable.
   (B)   Comments from these reviewing agencies must be made available to the
Planning Board before a preliminary plat may be approved, unless this
requirement is specifically waived by the Planning Board.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL;
CERTIFICATES TO BE APPLIED TO FACE OF PLAT
§ 155.130 CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION.
   I (We) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown
and described hereon which was conveyed to me (us) by deed recorded in Book
____, Page ____, and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my
(our) free consent, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other
open spaces to public use unless otherwise noted. Further, I (we) certify that
the land as shown hereon is within the subdivision regulations jurisdiction of
the County Board of Commissioners of Pasquotank County and all dedications are
free and clear of any lien, lease, deed of trust or any other encumbrance.
Date__________                  _________________
                           Owner
                        _________________
                           Owner
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991)
§ 155.131 CERTIFICATE OF ACCURACY.
   I hereby certify that under my direction and supervision this Plat, shown
and described hereon, was drawn from an actual survey of land; that the Error
of Closure is calculated by latitudes and departures and is 1:
__________________________________: that the boundaries not surveyed are shown
as broken lines; that this Plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30 as
amended.
Witness my hand and seal this_____day of_______________,______.
Registered Land Surveyor
Registration Number
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.132 CERTIFICATE OF THE APPROVAL OF SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   This subdivision entitled ______________________________________________,
has been designed for the construction of individual sewage systems and meets
the criteria and requirements of the Albemarle Regional Health Service based on
existing conditions and regulations. The District Health Department reserves
the right to require additional improvements to these properties and to limit
the number of bedrooms and size of structure based on site conditions upon
issuance of the final site improvements permits. This certification does not
constitute a warranty and is issued based on this subdivision being serviced by
____________      Water system.
                                    (Individual/Public)
___
                                                                              __
_
Date                              District Health Director or his
                              or her Authorized Representative
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.133 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF ARTIFICIAL DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   In the subdivision entitled ____________________________________________,
artificial drainage has been installed according to plans and specifications
prepared by___________________________, and based upon the requirement of the
Albemarle Regional Health Service to keep the seasonal high water table a
minimum of 12 inches below the septic tank nitrification lines. Proper
landscaping and maintenance of these drainage facilities are the responsibility
of the property owners to ensure that septic tank malfunctions do not occur.
The District Health Department assumes no responsibility for the design,
maintenance or the guaranteed performance of the artificial drainage measures
and their effects.
___________________________         _________
Certifier Of Drainage Facilities            Date
___________________________         _________
   District Health Director            Date
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.134 CERTIFICATE OF DISTRICT HIGHWAY ENGINEER.
   I hereby certify that these streets as installed or as designed and
guaranteed are in accordance with the minimum design criteria presently
required by the State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, for
the acceptance of subdivision streets on to the state system for maintenance.
__________         _____________________________________________________
Date            District Engineer
            State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.135 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL AND ACCEPTANCE OF DEDICATIONS.
   I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Pasquotank County, with the
exception of such variances, if any, as are noted in the minutes of the County
Board of Commissioners meeting held this date, and that it has been approved
for recording in the office of the Register of Deeds, and that the dedication
of the easements, rights-of-way and public park shown thereon were accepted by
the county, but it assumes no responsibility to open or maintain the same
until, in the opinion of the governing body of Pasquotank County, it is in the
public interest to do so. I further certify that (1) the streets, utilities,
and other improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and
according to county specifications in the subdivision entitled
_________________________________________, or (2) that a security bond in the
amount of $ ____________, has been posted with the County Board of
Commissioners to assure completion of all required improvements in case of
default.
___________                  __________________________________
Date                        Chairperson, County Commissioners
Attest:_____________________ Clerk
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.136 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL BY PLANNING BOARD.
   I,_____________________________________, Chairperson of the Pasquotank
County Planning Board, do hereby certify that said Planning Board fully
approved the plat of the subdivision entitled on the ______ day of
_______________, ______.
____________________________________________
   Chairperson, Pasquotank County Planning Board
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.138 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR AMENDED MAP BY THE SUBDIVISION
ADMINISTRATOR.
   I hereby certify that the amended subdivision plat shown hereon has been
found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Pasquotank County and that
this plat is approved for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds.
____________                        ____________________________
   Date                              Subdivision Administrator
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 15, passed 8-5-2002)
§ 155.139 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   In the subdivision entitled ______________________________________,
stormwater drainage improvements have been installed (1) according to plans and
specifications prepared by __________________ or (2) according to the as-built
plan submitted by ____________________, and approved by the Pasquotank County
Board of Commissioners. The Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners assumes no
responsibility for the design, maintenance or the guaranteed performance of the
stormwater drainage improvements and their effects.
___________________________________                     __________
Registered Land Surveyor/Civil Engineer                        Date
_________________
Registration Number
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 6, passed 3-1-1995; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995)
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.150 GENERAL.
   The following shall be considered the minimum requirements for all new
subdivisions.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.151 STREETS.
   (A)   Proposed subdivisions shall be designed and developed in such a way
that all lots shall have direct vehicular access to a new interior street. The
street layout shall conform to the arrangement, width and location indicated on
any official plans or maps for the county. In areas for which such plans have
not been completed, the streets shall be designed and located in proper
relation to existing and proposed streets, to the topography, to such natural
features as streams and tree growth, to public convenience and safety, and to
the proposed use of land to be served by such streets. All streets must be
dedicated to public use free and clear of any liens, easements exclusive of
utilities, deeds of trust or any other encumbrance.
   (B)   The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land
planning practice for the type of development proposed, and shall be
coordinated with the street system of the surrounding areas. All streets must
provide for the continuation or appropriate projection or principal streets in
the surrounding area and provide reasonable means of ingress and egress for
surrounding acreage tracts.
   (C)   Construction plans for the proposed street system shall be prepared by
a registered engineer or registered surveyor with materials and construction to
be in accordance with standards specified by the Division of Highways, State
Department of Transportation in the most current edition of their manual
entitled Subdivision Roads: Minimum Construction Standards.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.152 MINIMUM STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH.
   Street right-of-way width shall be a minimum of 50 feet. If the adopted
thoroughfare plan or the NCDOT Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards
mandates a greater width, the right-of-way shall be the greater width.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.153 PAVEMENT WIDTH.
   Pavement width shall be a minimum of 20 feet. If the NCDOT Subdivision Roads
Minimum Construction Standards requires a greater width, the pavement width
shall be the greater width.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.154 PAVEMENT DESIGN.
   (A)   Soil testing by a certified geotechnical engineer shall be performed
for all streets to determine the soil classification and structural strength of
the subgrade. The developer’s engineer shall provide a pavement design based
upon the soil type and strength. California bearing ration (CBR) tests shall be
performed on the subgrade material. At least two tests shall be performed for
any development which proposes public roads. CBR tests shall not be spaced more
than 500 feet apart as measured along the roadway.
   (B)   (1)   Traffic counts shall be in accordance with the Institute of
Transportation Engineers “Trip Generation” latest edition. The minimum design
count shall be based upon ten trips per day per single-family home. Collector
streets shall be designed using the sum of the traffic generated by
contributing local streets. A minimum of 10% truck traffic for industrial and
commercial roads shall be used in traffic counts.
      (2)   The pavement design thickness shall in no case be less than that
specified in the NCDOT Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards. The
soils reports supporting the pavement design and the pavement design shall be
submitted to the county for review and approval. Pavement design methods shall
conform to NCDOT criteria.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.155 STREET GRADES.
   Unless necessitated by exceptional topography and subject to the approval of
the Planning Board, the grades shall meet the requirements of the NCDOT
Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.156 RADII OF CURVATURE.
   When a continuous street center line deflects at any point by more than ten
degrees, such center line shall follow the arc of a circle having the radius as
follows:
   (A)   Major streets: 300 feet;
   (B)   Collector streets: 200 feet; and
   (C)   Minor streets: 150 feet.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.157 TANGENTS.
   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be provided between reverse curves on
all streets.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.158 INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60
degrees.
   (B)   Street jogs with center lines offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
   (C)   Intersections with a major street or highway shall be at least 800
feet apart.
   (D)   Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum
radius of 20 feet or of a greater radius when required by the Planning Board.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.159 CUL-DE-SACS.
   Permanent dead end streets or cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than 600 feet,
other than a minor street cul-de-sac as defined in this regulation, and shall
be provided at the closed end with a turn-around which meets the requirements
of the NCDOT Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards and the County
Fire Marshal.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995;
Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.160 STREET NAMES AND TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   (A)   Street names for all subdivision plats shall be subject to approval of
the Planning Board and Board of Commissioners. New street names shall not
duplicate or be similar to existing street names and existing street names
shall be projected wherever possible.
   (B)   Stop, yield or other traffic signs, as would be required by the
Division of Highways, at the intersection of streets within the subdivision
shall be required. Any supplemental signs deemed necessary to safety and
welfare by the Planning Board and Board of Commissioners shall also be
required.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to pay for the
cost of purchasing and installing street name and traffic signs at the
intersection of streets within his or her development. County personnel shall
be responsible for purchasing and installing the signs at each intersection
upon the payment of a fee per sign by the developer.
      (2)   The fee per sign shall be established by the County Board of
Commissioners and may be changed as necessary. The fee for street name and
traffic signs shall be paid by the developer to the Planning Department at
final plat submittal.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.161 ACCESS ROADS.
   (A)   Where a tract of land to be subdivided adjoins a federal or state
highway, the subdivider may be required to provide a marginal access street
parallel to the highway or reverse frontage on an interior street for the lots
to be developed adjacent to the highway.
   (B)   If reverse frontage is required, then the subdivider shall be required
to provide a ten-foot easement parallel and adjacent to the right-of-way of the
highway. Such easement shall be restricted to the planting of trees or shrubs
for screening purpose and shall be in addition to all other easements required
by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 12, passed 3-19-2001;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.162 LOTS.
   (A)   Lot sizes, shapes and locations shall be made with due regard to
topographic conditions, contemplated use and the surrounding area. Land subject
to flooding and land deemed by the Planning Board to be uninhabitable for other
reasons shall not be platted for occupancy, nor for such other uses as may
increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood hazard, but
such land may be set aside for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic
or occasional inundation.
   (B)   (1)   Every lot shall front or abut on a public street. Each lot must
have a minimum road or street frontage of 50 feet and a minimum width, as
designated in §
157.120, at the building setback line.
      (2)   Subdivisions that have received sketch plan approval by the County
Planning Board prior to January 1, 2001 shall be required to maintain a minimum
100 feet width at the front setback line.
   (C)   Lots served by a community water system and by a community sewer
system that has been approved by the State Division of Environmental Management
or the Albemarle Regional Health Services shall have a minimum lot size of
15,000 square feet.
   (D)   Lots served by the community water system shall be at least 15,000
square feet in usable area. All lots must abut on streets that contain water
lines. A water meter must be placed on each lot to be served by the County
Water System.
   (E)   (1)   Where public water and sewer facilities are not available and
individual water supplies or individual sewage disposal systems are planned,
the subdivider, at his or her own expense, shall have the site investigated
under the supervision of Albemarle Regional Health Services to determine
whether or not such individual facilities are feasible and shall present proof
to the Planning Board that appropriate soil tests have been conducted and each
lot in the subdivision has been approved by Albemarle Regional Health Services
for individual water supplies and/or sewage disposal systems. The site
investigation shall be conducted according to the standards of Albemarle
Regional Health Services.
      (2)   When individual sewage disposal systems are planned, the minimum
lot sizes specified in this chapter shall be increased as required by the
standards of Albemarle Regional Health Services.
      (3)   Water supply and sewage facilities shall comply with applicable
state and county public health laws and regulations.
   (F)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where required to separate development from through traffic. A ten-foot non-
access zone shall be provided along all rear lot lines adjacent to an existing
right-of-way.
   (G)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
   (H)   All lots shall conform to the minimum standards or dimensions noted
herein and those contained in an applicable zoning ordinance, building codes or
other official regulation.
   (I)   The creation of a new parcel in accordance with these regulations
shall not result in the residual parcel being a nonconforming lot.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 6, passed 3-1-1995; Ord. 12, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 155.163 BUILDING SETBACK LINES.
   (A)   The minimum building setback from the property lines shall be as
designated in §
157.120, for the appropriate zoning district.
   (B)   In addition, the following additional setbacks are required:
      (1)   From the front property line on major thoroughfares 40 feet; and
      (2)   From water’s edge 50 feet.
   (C)   Subdivisions that have received sketch plan approval by the County
Planning Board prior to January 1, 2001 shall be required to maintain a minimum
30 feet horizontal distance from the street right-of-way line for the front
yard setback.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.164 BLOCKS.
   Blocks shall be laid out with special attention given to the type of use
contemplated. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet or be less than 300
feet.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
§ 155.165 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for
utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide.
   (B)   (1)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose.
      (2)   Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection
therewith.
   (C)    (1)   Lakes, ponds, creeks and similar areas will be accepted for
maintenance only if sufficient land is dedicated as a public recreation area or
park, or if such area constitutes a necessary part of the drainage control
system.
      (2)    The acceptance of such dedicated area must be endorsed by the
Planning Board before the Board of Commissioners will consider accepting it.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.166 BUFFER STRIPS BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION AND RAILROADS OR
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS.
   In residential districts, a buffer strip at least 50 feet in depth, in
addition to the normal lot depth required, shall be provided adjacent to all
railroads and limited access highways. This strip shall be a part of the
platted lots, but shall have the following restrictions lettered on the face of
the plat. “This strip reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the
owner; the building of structures hereon is prohibited”.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 155.167 UTILITIES.
   All utilities shall be installed underground. Underground utilities to be
located inside the street right-of-way shall meet the standards established by
the State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 16, passed 1-20-2004;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 18, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 155.168 BUFFER STRIPS BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS AND EXISTING
AGRICULTURAL USES.
   (A)   Residential subdivisions are required to provide a 75-foot perpetually
maintained vegetative buffer along all property lines that are located adjacent
to existing agricultural uses. This buffer shall be permanently set aside as
open space. Ownership and maintenance of the required open space shall be the
responsibility of the developer and/or a homeowner’s association. A 6:1 sloped
ditch shall be located on the property line adjacent to the buffer.
   (B)   The required buffer shall include a minimum of two rows of trees and
must meet the following criteria.
      (1)   At least 50% of the required trees shall be an evergreen species.
      (2)   Each tree shall be a minimum eight feet in height and shall have a
minimum caliper of two inches (measured six inches above grade) at the time of
planting.
      (3)   Each tree shall be a species which can be expected to attain a
minimum height of 40 feet and have a crown width of 30 feet or greater at
maturity.
      (4)   Minimum spacing in each row shall generally be no wider than 20
feet between tree trunks.
      (5)   There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet from the property line
adjacent to the agricultural use and the first row of trees.
   (C)   Stormwater retention ponds are allowed within the buffer yard,
provided that the proposed locations of such uses are necessary for their
proper functioning, the total width of the buffer yard is maintained and no
screening required by this chapter is reduced or eliminated.
   (D)   Existing vegetation that meets or exceeds the screening requirements
may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 12-19-2005)
§ 155.169 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrant locations and standards shall include:
   (A)   Fire hydrants shall be installed a maximum of 1,000 feet apart, or no
further than 500 feet from any lot within the subdivision. Measurements along
street center lines will be made to determine compliance with this requirement;
   (B)   Fire hydrant construction standards shall comply with the public water
supplier standards serving the subdivision site;
   (C)   Fire hydrants shall flow a minimum 500 gallons per minute with a
residual of 20 psi (pounds per square inch); and
   (D)   Fire hydrants are not required for subdivisions that qualify as an
exempt subdivision.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 12, passed 3-19-2001;
Ord. passed 1-20-2004; Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 25, passed 2-16-2009)
§ 155.170 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   Subdivisions shall be designed to meet the minimum requirements found within
the County Stormwater Ordinance and the Stormwater Drainage Manual.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 24, passed 11-17-2008;
Ord. passed 2-16-2009)
§ 155.171 NAME DUPLICATION.
   The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the
name of an existing subdivision within Pasquotank County or Camden County.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 11, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. passed 11-17-2008; Ord.
26, passed 3-1-2010)
§ 155.172 SUBDIVISION PHASING.
   Subdivisions that contain more than ten lots may be divided into phases
provided that the following criteria are met.
   (A)   Each phase shall contain a minimum of ten lots or at least 25% of the
total number of lots proposed within a development.
   (B)   A phasing plan showing the phases of development must be approved as
part of the preliminary plat.
   (C)   Road construction, water supply, stormwater management, erosion and
sedimentation control, and other required improvements in each phase, and
previously approved phases, shall be sufficient to serve or handle all of the
development within that phase.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. passed 3-1-2010)
DEFINITIONS
§ 155.185 SUBDIVISION DEFINED.
   A SUBDIVISION. Includes all divisions of a tract or parcel of land (in
addition to the undivided remaining portion of the original undivided tract)
into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of
sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and includes all
division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets; however, the following is not included within this definition
and is not subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this part:
   (A)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided
and recorded lots, if the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots are equal to, or exceed, the standards of the county as shown in
its subdivision regulations;
   (B)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres, if no street
right-of-way dedication is involved;
   (C)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for widening or
opening streets; and
   (D)   The division of a tract in single ownership, the entire area of which
is no greater than two acres, into not more than three lots, if no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and if the resultant lots are equal to, or
exceed, the standards of the county as shown by its subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 1, passed 12-16-1991)
§ 155.186 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be used, interpreted and defined as follows.
   ALLEY. A roadway easement which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
   ARTERIAL STREET. A street connecting widely separated areas and designed to
carry a large volume of traffic which may be fast, heavy or both. ARTERIAL
STREETS are sometimes referred to as major thoroughfares, freeways and the
like, and are usually numbered state or federal highways.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT. One who is acting as representative for, or by the
authority of the subdivider.
   BLOCK. A piece of land bounded on one or more sides by streets or roads.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Board of County Commissioners; County Board of
Commissioners; the governing body of the County of Pasquotank, North Carolina.
   BUFFER STRIP. An area of land that shall not be developed, required to
separate land uses deemed incompatible, front yard setbacks and side yards are
examples of buffers. In some cases additional screening, landscaped or
otherwise, may be required.
   CAMA. The Coastal Area Management Act of 1974, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et
seq.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which serves as the connecting street system
between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system.
   CORNER LOT. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of
two street lines. The street line forming the least frontage shall be deemed
the front of the lot except where the two street lines are equal, in which
case, the owner shall be required to specify which is the front when requesting
a building permit.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having one end open to traffic and the other end
being permanently terminated and a vehicular turn-around provided.
   DEDICATION. A gift, by the owner, or a right to land for a specified purpose
or purposes. Because a transfer of property rights is entailed, dedication must
be made by written instrument and is completed with an acceptance.
   DISCLOSURE STATEMENT. A statement prepared and signed by the subdivider and
the buyer of the subject real estate, fully and completely disclosing the
status (whether public or private) of the street upon which the lot fronts. The
statement shall also include an explanation of the consequences and
responsibility as to maintenance and construction of proposed roadways.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from
both streets upon which it fronts.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner for use by the public or others of a
strip of land for specified purposes.
   FAMILY SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land as a gift to a naturally
or legally defined child, stepchild, grandchild, step-grandchild or parent of a
property owner.
   FREEWAY, EXPRESSWAY or PARKWAY. Divided multi-lane roadway designed to carry
large volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds. A FREEWAY providing for
continuous flow of vehicles with no direct access to abutting property or
streets and with access to selected crossroads provided via connecting ramps.
An EXPRESSWAY is a divided highway with full or partial control of access and
generally with grade separations at major intersections. A PARKWAY is a highway
for noncommercial traffic with full or partial control of access and usually
located within a park or a ribbon of park-like development.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A street that is parallel to a fully or partially access
controlled street, which functions to provide controlled access to adjacent
land.
   HALF STREET. A street whose center line coincides with a subdivision plat
boundary with one-half the street right-of-way width being contained within the
subdivision plat. Also, any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
   IMPROVEMENTS. The construction of infrastructure required by this chapter to
obtain final plat approval. Infrastructure shall consist of, but not be limited
to, water mains, fire hydrants, roadways, surface drainage improvements and
artificial drainage improvements.
   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a
street.
   LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREET. Cul-de-sacs, loop streets less than 2,500 feet in
length or streets less than one mile in length that do not connect
thoroughfares or serve major traffic generators, and do not collect traffic
from more than 100 dwelling units.
   LOCAL STREET. A local street is any link, not part of a higher-order urban
system, which serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and
access to higher systems.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. The word LOT
includes the word parcel or plot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of which has
been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of the county prior to the
adoption of this chapter or a lot described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
   MAJOR COLLECTOR. A road which serves major intra-county travel corridors and
traffic generators, and provides access to the arterial system.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARES. Major thoroughfares consist of interstate, other
freeway and expressway links, and major streets that provide for the
expeditious movement of volumes of traffic within and through urban areas.
   MINOR ARTERIAL. A rural link in a network joining cities and larger towns,
and providing intrastate and intercounty at relatively high overall travel
speeds with minimum interference to through movement. This network would
primarily serve traffic.
   MINOR COLLECTOR. A road which provides service to small local communities
and links locally important traffic generators with their rural hinterland.
   MINOR STREET. A street whose primary function is to provide access to
abutting properties and is designed to discourage use by through traffic. MINOR
STREETS may also be referred to as neighborhood streets.
   MINOR THOROUGHFARES. Minor thoroughfares are important streets in the urban
system and perform the function of collecting traffic from local access streets
and carrying it to the major thoroughfare system by facilitating a minor
through traffic movement, and may also serve abutting property.
   OFFICIAL MAPS OR PLAN (LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN). Any
maps or plans officially adopted by the County Board of Commissioners as a
guide for the development of the county.
   OPEN SPACE. An area (land and/or water) generally lacking in human-made
structures and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A land development project comprehensively planned
as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building
siting, mixtures of building types and land uses, recreational areas and usable
open spaces and the preservation of significant natural features. Included
within this definition shall be PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS and
PLANNED UNIT NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS or combination thereof.
   PLANNING BOARD. The Planning Board of Pasquotank County.
   PLAT. A map or plan delineating a tract or parcel of land to be subdivided,
land to be dedicated for public use or right-of-way for street or utility
purposes. The word PLAT shall include the terms map, plot and plan.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications, acceptances and with
complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets, public areas and other dimensions of land, as prescribed by this
chapter.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of proposed land subdivision showing the character
and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivisions of land, as prescribed by this
chapter.
   PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. A rural link in a network of continuous routes serving
corridor movements having trip length and travel density characteristics
indicative of substantial statewide or interstate travel and existing solely to
serve traffic. This network would consist of interstate routes and other routes
designed as PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS.
   PRIVATE DRIVEWAY. A roadway serving two or fewer lots, building sites or
other division of land and not intended to be public ingress or egress.
   PRIVATE STREET. An undedicated private right-of-way which affords access to
abutting properties and requires a subdivision streets disclosure statement in
accordance with G.S. § 136-102.6.
   PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A system serving two or more dwelling units
and approved by the Pasquotank County Health Department and the North Carolina
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development.
   RECREATION AREA or PARK. An area of land or combination of land and water
resources that is developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuits with
various human-made features that accommodate such activities.
   RESERVATION. A reservation of land not involving the transfer of property
rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from
development for a stated period of time.
   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREET. A local access street which serves as a
connector street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREETS typically collect traffic from 100 to 400
dwelling units.
   REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or
approximately right angles (interior angles less than 135 degrees) to the
general pattern in that area. A REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT may also be a corner lot,
an interior lot or a through lot.
   SETBACK LINE. A line located a minimum horizontal distance from the right-
of-way line of any street or road parallel thereto, between which and the
right-of-way line no structure (to include steps, eaves, gutters and similar
fixtures) shall be erected or altered. SETBACK LINES are also located a minimum
horizontal distance from lot boundary lines parallel thereto, between which and
the lot boundary line no structure (to include steps, eaves, gutters and
similar fixtures) shall be erected or altered.
   SHALL. The act referred to is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   SINGLE-TIER LOT. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier or another type of land use, and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.
   STREETS. A right-of-way dedicated to the public for vehicular traffic.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected including, but not limited to,
buildings which requires on, above or below the surface of the land or
attachment to something having permanent location on the land.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops any
land deemed to be subdivision as defined in this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land that does not
qualify as an exempt subdivision according to §
155.185.
   SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed by the County Commissioners
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (TRC). A committee whose purpose is to review,
comment and make recommendations on the technical aspects of all major site
plans and subdivision plats.
   THROUGH LOT or A DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with
frontage on more than one street. THROUGH LOTS abutting two streets may be
referred to as DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989; Ord. 2, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 5, passed 8-16-1993;
Ord. 6, passed 3-1-1995; Ord. 7, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 10, passed 12-21-1998;
Ord. 17, passed 11-21-2005; Ord. 21, passed 7-9-2007)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial
jurisdiction of this chapter, thereafter subdivides his or her land in
violation of this chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land,
before the plat has been properly approved under the terms of this chapter and
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not
exempt the transaction from this penalty. The county, through its attorney or
other official designated by the County Board of Commissioners, may enjoin
illegal subdivision, transfer or sale of land by action for injunction.
Further, violators of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine
and/or imprisonment as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
   (C)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the
county. Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within
ten days.
   (D)   Each day’s continuing violation of this chapter shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense.
   (E)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (D) above, this chapter may be
enforced by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the use of
remedies available to the county. The county may seek to enforce this chapter
by using any one, all or a combination of remedies.
(Ord. passed 4-17-1989)
CHAPTER 156: AIRPORT ZONING
Section
   
156.01   Authority; purpose
   
156.02   Title
   
156.03   Definitions
   
156.04   Airport zones
   
156.05   Height limitations
   
156.06   Use restrictions
   
156.07   Nonconforming uses
   
156.08   Permits
   
156.09   Administration and enforcement
   
156.10   Board of Adjustment
   
156.11   Appeals
   
156.12   Judicial review
   
156.13   Conflicts
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 AUTHORITY; PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by G.S.
Ch. 63, Art. 4. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for
endangering the lives and property of users of the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank
County Regional Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity;
that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums
of the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Regional Airport and that an
obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff and
maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the
Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Regional Airport and the public investment
therein.
   (B)   Accordingly, it is declared:
      (1)   The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential
of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the Elizabeth
City-Pasquotank County Regional Airport;
      (2)   It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety
and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are
a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
      (3)   The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the
extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power.
   (C)   It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the marking and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision
may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Elizabeth City-
Pasquotank County Height Restriction Chapter.”
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Regional Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. Twelve feet above mean sea level.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
156.05. In plan, the perimeter of the APPROACH SURFACE coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES. Those zones as set
forth in §
156.04.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County height
restriction zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless
otherwise specified.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth or
use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an
amendment thereto.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
156.05.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver,
an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or precision approach
radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is
planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other
planning document.
   PRIMARY SURFACE.
      (1)   A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has
a specially prepared hard surface, the PRIMARY SURFACE extends 200 feet beyond
each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no
specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface
ends at each end of that runway.
      (2)   The width of the PRIMARY SURFACE is set forth in §
156.04. The elevation of any point on the PRIMARY SURFACE is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway center line.
   RUNWAY. A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
a human, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to
the runway center line and the runway center line extended at a slope of seven
feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the precision approach surfaces,
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway center line.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.04 AIRPORT ZONES.
   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and
conical surfaces as they apply to Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Regional
Airport. The zones are shown on the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County height
restriction zoning map dated February 15, 1999, which is attached to this
chapter and made a part hereof.
   (B)   An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered
to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various
zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
      (1)   Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at
a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line
is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
      (2)   Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom
a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
      (3)   Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging
arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those
arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transition zones.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.05 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any
zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for the zone.
   (B)   The applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones in question as follows.
      (1)   Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes 50 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway center line; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each
foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the
extended runway center line.
      (2)   Transitional zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation which is feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing,
there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the
precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone,
there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-
degree angles to the extended runway center line.
      (3)   Horizontal zone. One hundred-fifty feet above the established
airport elevation.
      (4)   Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
      (5)   Excepted height limitation. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or
growth of any tree to a height up to 20 feet above the surface of the land.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.06 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of
land or water within any zone established by this chapter in a manner as to
create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish
between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using
the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird
strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing,
takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.07 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change
or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance
of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter, and
is diligently prosecuted.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to install, operate and maintain thereon the markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Airport
Authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of the airport obstruction. The markers and lights shall
be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the owner.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.08 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(3) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit shall have been applied for
and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which
the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be
determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. All permit applications for obstructions in
either the conical or horizontal surface related to the Elizabeth City-
Pasquotank County Regional Airport shall be reviewed and evaluated by the
Federal Aviation Administration using FAA form 7460 (notice of construction).
The FAA report shall be a part of the application submittal to the Elizabeth
City-Pasquotank County Airport Authority for consideration for approval. If the
determination by the Authority is in the affirmative, the permit shall be
granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with
division (D) below.
      (1)   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone covered by this chapter, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except
when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, the tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for the zones.
      (2)   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no
permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would
extend above the height limit prescribed for the approach zones.
      (3)   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
the tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the transition
zones.
      (4)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration
of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this chapter, except as set forth in §
156.05.
   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on
the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto or than it is when
the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for
a permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the building
inspector determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned
or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall
be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the height restriction zoning
regulations.
   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a variance from the regulations. The application for a variance
shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. The
variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief
granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard
to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with
the spirit of this chapter. Additionally, no application for variance to the
requirements of this chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment
unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Elizabeth City-
Pasquotank County Airport Authority for advice as to the aeronautical effects
of the variance. If the Elizabeth City-Pasquotank County Airport Authority does
not respond to the application within 45 days after receipt, the Board of
Appeals may act on its own to grant or deny the application.
   (E)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if the action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and
be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner
of the structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at the
owner’s expense, the markings and lights as may be necessary.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.09 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Planning Director shall administer this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall enforce this chapter. He or she may be
provided with assistance of other persons as the County Commissioners may
direct.
   (C)   Applications for permits and variances required by this chapter may be
obtained in the Planning and Inspections Department. Applications are to be
submitted to the Building Inspector. All completed applications shall be
promptly considered and either granted or denied. Applications for action by
the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the Building
Inspector.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.10 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall have and exercise the following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement of this
chapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter
upon which such Board of Adjustment under regulations may be required to pass;
and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in
harmony with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from the facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Building Inspector or decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect
variation to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.11 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Planning Director or Building Inspector, made in the administration and
enforcement of the chapter, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment by filing with the Planning
Director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Planning
Director shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the
Building Inspector cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by the order of the Board of Adjustment
on notice to the Building Inspector and on due cause shown.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make the order,
requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.12 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment may appeal to the Superior Court of as provided in G.S. § 63-34.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.13 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees
and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 2-15-1999)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
Title, Enactment and Purpose
   
157.001   Title, enactment and preamble
   
157.002   Short title
   
157.003   Purpose
Establishment of Zoning Districts and Provision for Zoning Map
   
157.015   Official zoning map
   
157.016   Zoning map changes
   
157.017   Replacement of official zoning map
   
157.018   Responsibility for maintenance of the official zoning map
   
157.019   Rules for interpretation of zoning district boundaries
Exemptions
   
157.030   Bona fide farm operations exempt
Definitions of Terms
   
157.045   General interpretations
   
157.046   Word and term definitions
Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
157.060   Districts established
   
157.061   R-15, Residential District
   
157.062   R-15A, Residential District
   
157.063   R-25, Residential District
   
157.064   R-25A, Residential District
   
157.065   R-35A, Residential District
   
157.066   RMH-15, Residential Manufactured Home District
   
157.067   RMH-25, Residential Manufactured Home District
   
157.068   RMH-35, Residential Manufactured Home District
   
157.069   C-1, Commercial District
   
157.070   I-1, Industrial District
   
157.071   I-2, Industrial District
   
157.072   A-1, Agricultural District
   
157.073   A-2, Agricultural District
   
157.074   O&I, Office and Institutional District
   
157.075   M-F, Multi-Family District
   
157.076   P-1, Prison District
Application of General Regulations
   
157.090   Use
   
157.091   Only one principal building, one principal use on lot and orientation
of a building
   
157.092   Minimum yards
   
157.093   Lot subdivision
   
157.094   Certificate of occupancy
District Regulations
   
157.105   Table of permitted uses
   
157.106   Formulation of permitted uses table
   
157.107   Notes to the table of permitted uses
Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements
   
157.120   Table of area, yard and height requirements
   
157.121   Notes to the table of area, yard and height requirements
Provisions for Uses Allowed as Special and Conditional Uses
   
157.135   Objectives and purposes of special use permits
   
157.136   Special use permits
   
157.137   Additional restrictions imposed on certain special and conditional
uses requirements
   
157.138   Additional restrictions imposed on certain special and conditional
uses
Development Standards
   
157.150   Off-street parking and off-street loading requirements
   
157.151   Minimum parking requirements
   
157.152   Landscaping and buffer yards
   
157.153   Landscape and design standards for street yard buffers
   
157.154   Landscaping within parking areas
   
157.155   Property line buffers
   
157.156   Additional buffer yards and screening
   
157.157   Features allowed within buffer yards
   
157.158   Plant materials
   
157.159   Plant installation and maintenance
Nonconforming Situations
   
157.170   Definitions
   
157.171   Continuation of nonconforming situations and completion of
nonconforming projects
   
157.172   Nonconforming lots
   
157.173   Extension or enlargement of nonconforming situations
   
157.174   Change in kind of nonconforming use
   
157.175   Abandonment or discontinuance of nonconforming situations
   
157.176   Termination of nonconforming situations
   
157.177   Completion of nonconforming projects
Administration and Enforcement
   
157.190   Administration and enforcement
   
157.191   Technical review committee
   
157.192   Site plan approval
   
157.193   Zoning certificate
   
157.194   Building permits
   
157.195   Certificate of occupancy/compliance
   
157.196   Compliance with state guidelines for areas of environmental concern
   
157.197   Vested rights
Board of Adjustment
   
157.210   Creating the Board of Adjustment
   
157.211   Jurisdiction of Board of Adjustment
   
157.212   Rules for proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
   
157.213   Powers of Board
   
157.214   Appeal to the Board of Adjustment
   
157.215   Appeal from decision of the Board of Adjustment
Adoption and Amendment Procedures
   
157.230   Purpose and scope
   
157.231   Planning board review
   
157.232   Initiation of amendments
   
157.233   Amendment by petition
   
157.234   Public hearing
   
157.235   Notice requirements
   
157.236   Consistency and reasonableness statements
   
157.237   Pending applications
   
157.238   Down-zoning
   
157.239   Moratoria
Legal Status Provisions
   
157.250   Validity
   
157.251   Separability
   
157.252   Effective date
 
   
157.999   Penalty
TITLE, ENACTMENT AND PURPOSE
§ 157.001 TITLE, ENACTMENT AND PREAMBLE.
    A chapter, in pursuance of the authority granted by G.S. Chapter 160D, for
the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare; to provide for the establishment of zoning districts within the
county, to regulate within those districts the location, height, number of
stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that
may be occupied, the required open space, the density of population, and the
uses of land, buildings, and other structures; to provide methods of
administration of this chapter; to prescribe penalties for the violation
thereof; and to supersede any ordinances in conflict herewith.
   (A)   Whereas, the County Commissioners deem it necessary, for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the county to
enact such an ordinance; and
   (B)   Whereas, the County Commissioners have created a Planning Board to
prepare a proposed zoning ordinance, including both the full text of such
ordinance and zoning maps showing proposed district boundaries; and
   (C)   Whereas, the Planning Board has divided the county into districts and
has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with a
comprehensive plan and appropriate land use studies, and designed to lessen
congestion, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
and
   (D)   Whereas, the Planning Board has given reasonable consideration, among
other things, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability
for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land through those areas of the county
under the jurisdiction of this chapter; and
   (E)   Whereas, the Planning Board has certified its proposed zoning
ordinance to the County Commissioners; and
   (F)   Whereas, the County Commissioners have given due public notice of
hearings relating to adopting the zoning ordinance in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 18, and have held such
public hearings; and
   (G)   Whereas, all requirements of the General Statutes of North Carolina,
with regard to the preparation of the proposed ordinance by the Planning Board
in accordance with a comprehensive plan, and subsequent action of the County
Commissioners have been met;
   (H)   Now therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the county, does hereby
ordain and enact into law throughout the areas designated on the official
zoning map(s) of the county except as otherwise provided in G.S. Chapter 160D
the following articles and sections, this the 21st day of June, 2021.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.002 SHORT TITLE.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of Pasquotank County,
North Carolina.” The zoning map(s) herein referred to, which is identified by
the title “Official Zoning Map of Pasquotank County, North Carolina,” shall be
known as the “Zoning Map.”
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.003 PURPOSE.
    In accordance with the provisions of G.S. Chapter 160D, and for the
purposes more fully set out in that chapter, the Board of Commissioners of the
county, adopts this chapter to provide for the orderly growth and development
of the county.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND PROVISION FOR ZONING MAP
§ 157.015 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)    For the purpose of this chapter, the county zoning jurisdiction is
hereby divided into zones or districts as shown on the “Official Zoning Map(s)
of Pasquotank County, North Carolina,” which, together with all explanatory
matter thereon is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Official Zoning Map(s) shall be identified by the signature of the
Chairman of the County Board of Commissioners and attested by the County Clerk
and bear the seal of the county under the following words:
   "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in
Article 2 of the Zoning Ordinance of Pasquotank County, North Carolina together
with the date of adoption of this Ordinance."
   (C)   The Official Zoning Map(s), which shall be located in the Pasquotank
County Courthouse and recorded in the Pasquotank County Register of Deeds
Office, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land
and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the zoning jurisdiction of
the county.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.016 ZONING MAP CHANGES.
   (A)    If, in accordance with §§ 157.230 through 157.239 of this chapter,
changes are made in the zoning district boundaries or other matter shown on the
zoning map, such changes shall be made with an entry on the zoning map briefly
describing the change and the date of the change.
   (B)   No amendment to this chapter which involves a matter portrayed on the
zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been
made on said zoning map. The Board of Commissioners shall give official notice
of the zoning change to the Zoning Administrator within one work day, after
passage of said change.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.017 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
    In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost,
or difficult to interpret, the Board of Commissioners, may, by ordinance, adopt
a new official zoning map which shall be the same in every detail as the map it
supersedes. The new zoning map shall bear the signatures of the Chairman of the
Board of Commissioners and the County Clerk and shall bear the seal of the
county under the following words:
   "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces
the Official Zoning Map adopted on (date of adoption of map replaced) -
- together with the date of the adoption of the new zoning map."
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.018 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
    The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance of and
revision of the official zoning map. Upon notification by the Board of
Commissioners that a zoning change has been made, the Zoning Administrator
shall make the necessary changes on the official zoning map within one work day
following notification.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.019 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts as shown on the “Official Zoning Map of Pasquotank County, North
Carolina,” the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of
streets, highways, alleys, or railroads shall be construed to follow such
centerline.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be
construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or
other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerline.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (C) above shall be so construed. Distances
not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.
   (E)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in circumstances not
covered by division (A) through (D) above, the Board of Adjustment shall
interpret the district boundaries.
   (F)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may
permit, as conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either portion
of the lot, not to exceed 150 feet from the district boundary line. In
addition, the remaining parcel shall not be less than the minimum required for
the district in which it is located.
   (G)   If a parcel of land lies within the planning and development
regulation jurisdiction of both Pasquotank County and the City of Elizabeth
City, the local governments may, by mutual agreement and with the written
consent of the landowner, assign exclusive planning and development regulation
jurisdiction for the entire parcel to any one of those local governments. Such
a mutual agreement shall only be applicable to development regulations and
shall not affect taxation or other nonregulatory matters. The mutual agreement
shall be evidenced by a resolution formally adopted by each governing board and
recorded with the Pasquotank County Register of Deeds within 14 days of the
adoption of the last required resolution.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
EXEMPTIONS
§ 157.030 BONA FIDE FARM OPERATIONS EXEMPT.
   (A)   This chapter shall in no way regulate, restrict, or prohibit a bona
fide farm and its related uses, but any use of such property for non-farm
purposes shall be subject to such regulations.
   (B)   Bona fide farm purposes include the production and activities relating
or incidental to the production of crops, grains, fruits, vegetables,
ornamental and flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and all other forms
of agriculture, as defined in G.S. § 106-581.1. Activities incident to the farm
include existing or new residences constructed to the applicable residential
building code situated on the farm occupied by the owner, lessee, or operator
of the farm and other buildings or structures sheltering or supporting the farm
use and operation. For purposes of this section, "when performed on the farm"
in G.S. § 106-581.1(6) includes the farm within the jurisdiction of the county
and any other farm owned or leased to or from others by the bona fide farm
operator, no matter where located. For purposes of this section, the production
of a nonfarm product that the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
recognizes as a "Goodness Grows in North Carolina" product that is produced on
a farm subject to a conservation agreement under G.S. § 106-743.2 is a bona
fide farm purpose. For purposes of determining whether a property is being used
for bona fide farm purposes, any of the following is sufficient evidence that
the property is being used for bona fide farm purposes:
      (1)   A farm sales tax exemption certificate issued by the Department of
Revenue.
      (2)   A copy of the property tax listing showing that the property is
eligible for participation in the present-use value program pursuant to G.S. §
105-277.3.
      (3)   A copy of the farm owner's or operator's Schedule F from the
owner's or operator's most recent federal income tax return.
      (4)   A forest management plan.
   (C)   A building or structure that is used for agritourism is a bona fide
farm purpose if the building or structure is located on a property that (i) is
owned by a person who holds a qualifying farm sales tax exemption certificate
from the Department of Revenue pursuant to G.S. § 105-164.13E(a) or (ii) is
enrolled in the present-use value program pursuant to G.S. § 105-277.3. Failure
to maintain the requirements of this subsection for a period of three years
after the date the building or structure was originally classified as a bona
fide farm purpose pursuant to this subsection subjects the building or
structure to applicable zoning and development regulation ordinances adopted by
a county pursuant to G.S. § 160D-702 in effect on the date the property no
longer meets the requirements of this subsection. For purposes of this section,
"agritourism" means any activity carried out on a farm or ranch that allows
members of the general public, for recreational, entertainment, or educational
purposes, to view or enjoy rural activities, including farming, ranching,
historic, cultural, harvest-your-own activities, hunting, fishing, equestrian
activities, or natural activities and attractions. A building or structure used
for agritourism includes any building or structure used for public or private
events, including, but not limited to, weddings, receptions, meetings,
demonstrations of farm activities, meals, and other events that are taking
place on the farm because of its farm or rural setting.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
§ 157.045 GENERAL INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)    For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words and terms
used are defined in this section. Except as defined in this section or in G.S.
Chapter 160D all other words used in this chapter shall have their standard
dictionary definition.
   (B)   For general interpretation the following shall apply in all uses and
cases in this chapter:
      (1)   The present tense includes the future tense, and the future tense
includes the present tense.
      (2)   The singular number includes the plural number and the plural
number includes the singular number.
      (3)   The word “may” is permissive, and the “shall” is mandatory.
      (4)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
      (5)   The words “used” or “occupied” include the words “intended,
designed or arranged to be used or occupied.”
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.046 WORD AND TERM DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY USE OF STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with, but of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. A center or place operated by a person,
corporation, organization or association which receives a payment, fee or grant
for the care of more than five, but not more than 50, adults 18 years of age or
more for more than four hours per day, but not to exceed 24 hours at one time.
Services must be provided in a home or facility certified to meet State
standards and shall be provided for the following individuals:
      (1)   Adults who do not need nursing care but who require complete, full-
time daytime supervision;
      (2)   Adults who need assistance with activities of daily living in order
to maintain themselves in their own homes; and
      (3)   Adults who need intervention in the form of enrichment and
opportunities for social activities in order to prevent deterioration that
would lead to institutionalization.
   AEROSTAT MANUFACTURING.  The manufacturing and assembly of various products
and materials to construct aerostats. Fabrics are cut and sealed together using
methods such as heat, radio frequency and ultrasonic. The process includes the
machining of components and electro-mechanical assembly. Laboratory facilities
are involved in the development, testing and analysis of products and
processes. The testing of the finished product could include the flying of
aerostats.
   AIRPORT. A tract of land or water with facilities for aircraft landing,
take-off, shelter, supply and repair. Often used for receiving and discharging
passengers and cargo.
   ALLEY. A roadway easement which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.
   ALTER. To make any structural changes in the supporting or loadbearing
members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams, girders or floor joints.
   ANTENNA ARRAY. Communications equipment that transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless
communications services.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of one or more rooms, each of which have kitchen
facilities, and are designed or intended to be used, as an independent unit, on
a rental basis.
   APPLICANT. The property owner(s) or authorized agent submitting a petition
for a special or conditional use permit.
   AREAS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN (AEC's). Areas specifically defined in
subchapter 7-H of Chapter 15 of the North Carolina Administrative Code. These
defined areas which may be located within the jurisdiction of Pasquotank County
include: Coastal Wetlands; Estuarine Waters; Estuarine Shorelines, and Public
Trust Areas. If an AEC is involved in any permitted activity covered by this
chapter, then additional permits may be required by the State of North
Carolina; the four major AEC's are further briefly defined as follows: (See §
157.192).
      (1)   COASTAL WETLANDS. Any salt marsh or other marsh subject to regular
or occasional flooding by tides.
      (2)   ESTUARINE WATERS. All waters of the Atlantic Ocean, and associated
bays, sounds, rivers and tributaries, within the boundaries of North Carolina.
      (3)   ESTUARINE SHORELINE. Non-ocean shorelines especially vulnerable to
erosion, flooding, or other adverse effects of wind or water, and which are
connected to the estuary.
      (4)   PUBLIC TRUST AREAS. All public navigable waters, and lands
thereunder subject to measurable lunar tides.
   ASSEMBLY. A joining together of completely fabricated parts to create a
finished product.
   ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. An antenna array that is attached
to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which structures
shall include but not be limited to utility poles, signs, water towers,
rooftops, towers with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which
attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated
connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside
or outside of the attachment structure.
   BEACH BINGO GAMES. Any principal business enterprise where specific games of
chance are played with individual cards having numbered squares ranging from
one to 75, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers on
such cards conforming to a pre-determined pattern of numbers. Awarded prizes
may not exceed $10 in cash or merchandise.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A form of guest lodging in which bedrooms are rented
and breakfast is served, where such accommodations are provided only in
buildings used principally as private residences or in accessory structures.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A quasi-judicial body composed of representatives from
the zoning jurisdiction area which are given certain powers under and relative
to this chapter.
   BUFFER. A screening device used to moderate the adverse impacts of one land
use upon another. Buffers may include walls, hedges, landscaped areas, berms,
additional setbacks, or combination of the above. See §
157.120.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by column or walls, for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or goods.
   BUILDING, COMMERCIAL. Any building used for business purposes.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no party or common wall with another
building except an accessory building.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the average sidewalk or
street grade, or finished grade of the building line, whichever is the highest,
to the highest point of the building.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which the principle use of the lot on
which the building is situated is conducted.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE. A statement signed by an administrative
officer authorized by the Board of Commissioners, setting forth that the
building, structure, or use complies with the Zoning Ordinance, and that the
same may be used for the purpose stated herein.
   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. A place operated by a person, corporation,
organization or association which receives a payment, fee or grant for the care
of children. Inclusive of kindergarten, a facility for the care and/or
education of pre-school children.
   CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. An establishment operated by a corporation or
association of persons for recreational or charitable purposes, but which is
not operated for profit or to render a service which is customarily conducted
as a business.
   COLLOCATION. The installation of new wireless facilities on previously
approved structures, including towers, buildings, and water tanks.
   CONTRACTOR, GENERAL.  One who is engaged in all or most aspects of building
construction and/or land development through a legal agreement.
   CONTRACTOR, TRADES. One who accomplishes work or provides facilities under
contract with another specifically engages in a special trade such as plumbing,
heating, wiring, sheet metal, roofing work, etc.
   DRIVE-IN (EATING OR DRINKING FACILITY). An establishment that provides
employee curb service or accommodations through special equipment or facilities
for the ordering of food or beverage from a vehicle.
   DRYSTACK BOAT STORAGE. A dry dock boat storage facility associated with
commercial marinas.
   DUPLEX (TWO-FAMILY DWELLING). A building on one lot arranged and designed to
be occupied by two families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building used for or designed as a residence for more
than two families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential dwelling unit, other than a
manufactured/mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY (ATTACHED). An addition to a single-family dwelling
for the housing and caring for an immediate family member (mother, father, son,
daughter, brother, sister, grandparent, grandchild, nephew or niece) is
allowable so long as the same is in compliance with the Albemarle Regional
Health Services Regulations. The addition shall be attached to the principal
building and include a doorway which provides access to the addition from
within the principal building. The addition shall not consist of a manufactured
home, manufactured home, class A, or mobile home as defined within this
chapter.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   ERECT. Build, construct, rebuild, reconstruct as the same are commonly
defined.
   EVENT CENTER. A multi-purpose venue facility hosting special events such as
graduations, weddings, anniversaries, holiday gatherings, trade shows,
corporate functions or parties, concert settings, and general get-togethers. An
event center could typically have a catering kitchen, indoor and/or outdoor
seating and a stage or event area.
   EVIDENTIARY HEARING. A hearing to gather competent, material, and
substantial evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision.
   FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
   FABRICATION. Manufacturing, excluding the refining or other initial
processing of basic raw materials such as metal ores, lumber, or rubber.
Fabrication relates to stamping, cutting or otherwise shaping the processed
materials into useful objects.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, or a
group of not more than five persons not related by blood, adoption or marriage
living together as a single housekeeping group in a dwelling unit.
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A home with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care, and rehabilitation services in a family
environment for not more than six resident handicapped persons.
   FCC. Federal Communications Commission.
   FIELD OFFICE/STORAGE UNIT, TEMPORARY. A building or portion of a building
used for the coordination and/or storage for a construction project by the
general or subcontractor. Such a temporary field office/storage unit shall be
located within the confines of a project site on which the construction is
taking place.
   FRONTAGE. All property abutting on one side of a street measured along the
street line.
   FTA. Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building or space used as an accessory to or a part of
the main building permitted in any residential district that provides storage
space for motor vehicles and in which no business, occupation or service for
profit is in any way conducted.
   GROUP HOME. A facility owned or operated by a nonprofit organization
intended to be used solely for temporary occupancy by outpatients being treated
at a local hospital and family members of patients being treated at a local
hospital, with occupancy not to exceed 20 families per acre.
   HOME CARE UNIT. A facility meeting all the requirements of the State of
North Carolina for boarding and care of not more than five persons who are not
critically ill and do not need professional medical attention, to include homes
for the aged.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Certain occupations customarily conducted for profit within
a dwelling and carried on by the occupant thereof, which use is clearly
subordinate to the use of the dwelling for  residential purposes - limitations
are prescribed in this chapter to insure against the growth of a home
occupation into a commercial enterprise.
   IMPROVEMENTS. The addition of any building, accessory building, parking
area, loading area, fence, wall, hedge, lawn or mass planting (except to
prevent soil erosion) to a lot or parcel of property.
   INDUSTRIAL LAUNDERERS. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as
Personal Services. Typical uses include laundry agencies, diaper services or
linen supply services.
   INTERNET SWEEPSTAKES CAFÉ. Any principal business enterprise, where persons
utilize electronic machines including, but not limited to, computers and gaming
terminals to conduct games of chance (including sweepstakes) and where cash,
merchandise or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed,
whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by electronic games
played or by predetermined odds. This definition includes, but is not limited
to, internet sweepstakes, video sweepstakes, electronic gaming operations,
internet cafes, and/or cybercafés. Internet sweepstakes cafes shall only be
allowed as a principal or primary use and shall not be permitted as an
accessory use or combination use. Any lottery approved by the State of North
Carolina is not included under this definition.
   JUNK. Pre-used or unusable metallic parts or other non-metallic manufactured
products that are worn, deteriorated or obsolete making them unusable in their
existing condition, but are subject to be dismantled and salvaged.
   JUNK YARD. A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking, structural steel materials
and equipment, but not including the purchase or storage of used furniture,
used cars in operable condition, used or salvaged materials as part of
manufacturing operations.
   JUNKED OR WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES. Motor vehicles which do not display a
current license plate or a current registration sticker and which do not
display a current inspection sticker issued by or in the same state as the
license plate or registration sticker and which either:
      (1)   Are partially dismantled or wrecked; or
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which originally
intended.
   KENNEL. A place or facility prepared to house, board (for a long or short
term period), breed, handle, train or otherwise keep or care for dogs and cats
of customers, patrons or others, including lost or strayed animals for
compensation or as a humanitarian gesture. Facilities which solely provide
dental, medical or surgical care are exempt from this definition.
   KENNEL RUN, OUTSIDE. A fenced area outdoors for individual animals to get
exercise.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership or for development and which is recorded as such
in the Pasquotank County Register of Deeds office.
   LOT, AREA OF. The parcel of land enclosed within the boundaries formed by
the property lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two streets or roads (including platted but
unopened streets or roads) thus having two front lines.
   LOT DEPTH. The depth of a lot, for the purpose of this chapter, is the
distance measured in the mean direction of the sidelines of the lot from the
mid-point of the front line to the mid-point of the opposite lot line.
   LOT LINE. Any boundary of a parcel of land.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. Any boundary line of a lot running along a street right-of-
way line. If a lot abuts more than one street right-of-way line the front lot
line shall be determined at final subdivision plat approval or by the placement
of the structure provided appropriate setback requirements are met.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
     LOT OF RECORD.  A lot, or plat or a map which has been recorded in the
Office of Pasquotank County Register of Deeds, or a lot described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Pasquotank County
Register of Deeds Office.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines as measured along the
front building lines as specified by the applicable front yard setback in this
ordinance.
   MANUFACTURED COMMERCIAL UNIT. A manufactured building designed to be used as
a commercial structure which has been constructed and labeled indicating
compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code and shall meet the
following additional requirements:
      (1)   A continuous, permanent masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for
required ventilation and access, is installed under the unit after placement on
the lot and before occupancy; and
      (2)   The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing
apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family dwelling composed of one single section
fabricated in an offsite manufacturing facility for installing on the building
site bearing a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing and Construction Safety Standards. In addition the
MANUFACTURED HOME shall meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Skirting requirements.
         (a)   The perimeter of the MANUFACTURED HOME shall, upon installation,
have either (i) a permanent, continuous masonry curtain wall or (ii) a
continuous and opaque manufactured foundation skirting specifically designed
for manufactured homes which is ventilated, pre-packaged, and  installed
according to written instructions from the manufacturer (not to include wood or
corrosive materials i.e. aluminum, steel).
         (b)   The following installation requirements for manufactured home
skirting must be met in addition to the supplier's manufactured home skirting
instructions.
            1.   A minimum 2"x 2"x 12" salt-treated stake shall be driven into
the ground abutting the rear side of the channel, flush with the top of the
channel, no more than 12 inches from each corner. Additional minimal 2"x 2"x
12" stakes shall be located at a minimum four feet on center the entire length
of the channel. Minimum two-inch self-tapping screws shall be driven through
the front of the channel, through the skirting panel and into the wooden stake
at each stake location.
            2.   Fasten each skirting panel (top and bottom) with a no. 8, one-
inch self-tapping screw.
            3.   If the finished floor is 40 inches or higher than existing
grade, an additional support consisting of either 2"x 2" salt-treated lumber or
extra channel shall be installed to prevent bowing. Each skirting panel shall
be attached to the support by using a self-tapping screw.
         (c)   The perimeter skirting shall be installed prior to receiving a
certificate of occupancy/compliance.
      (2)   Landing preference.    Although not required, it is preferred that
all exterior doors be accessed directly by a minimum 4' x 4' landing.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS A. A single-family manufactured home consisting of
multiple sections fabricated in an offsite manufacturing facility for
installing and assembling on the building site bearing a seal certifying that
it was built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing and
Construction Safety Standards. In addition the MANUFACTURED HOME, CLASS A shall
meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Exterior appearance requirements. The exterior siding consists of
wood, hardboard, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case
exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition,
appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard
residential construction.
      (2)   Skirting requirements.
         (a)   If located on a single lot, the perimeter of the MANUFACTURED
HOME, CLASS A shall, upon installation, have a continuous, permanent masonry
curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access. the masonry
curtain wall shall be installed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy/
compliance.
         (b)   In mobile home parks that have been registered in the Pasquotank
County Tax Office, the perimeter of a MANUFACTURED HOMES, CLASS A shall have
either (i) a permanent, continuous masonry curtain wall or (ii) a continuous
and opaque manufactured foundation skirting specifically designed for
manufactured homes which is ventilated, pre-packaged, and installed according
to written instructions from the manufacturer (not to include wood or corrosive
materials i.e. aluminum, steel). The following installation requirements for
manufactured home skirting must be met in addition to the supplier's
manufactured home skirting instructions:
            1.   A minimum 2"x 2"x 12" salt-treated stake shall be driven into
the ground abutting the rear side of the channel, flush with the top of the
channel, no more than 12 inches from each corner. Additional minimal 2"x 2"x
12" stakes shall be located at a minimum four feet on center the entire length
of the channel. Minimum two-inch self-tapping screws shall be driven through
the front of the channel, through the skirting panel and into the wooden stake
at each stake location.
            2.   Fasten each skirting panel (top and bottom) with a no. 8, one-
inch self-tapping screw.
            3.   If the finished floor is 40 inches or higher than existing
grade, an additional support consisting of either 2"x 2" salt-treated lumber or
extra channel shall be installed to prevent bowing. Each skirting panel shall
be attached to the support by using a self-tapping screw.
      (3)   Landing preference. Although not required, it is preferred that all
exterior doors be accessed directly by a minimum 4' x 4' landing.
   MARINA, COMMERCIAL. Any dock or basin and associated structures providing
permanent or temporary commercial harboring more than 10 commercial and/or
pleasure boats and providing services related to the facility including, but
not limited to, fuel sales, retail and food sales, dry stack boat storage, and
other related services. Pump out facilities are required at commercial marinas.
   MARINA, RESIDENTIAL. A private, non-profit boating facility, including
permanent or temporary docks, piers and/or launching ramp planned for the
harboring or storing of ten or less boats on property having water frontage,
the use of which is intended to serve the residents within an approved
subdivision or planned unit development. The right to use such facility shall
be conferred by an easement appurtenant to the residential lots it is intended
to serve. No commercial activities of any kind shall be allowed within the
confines of the facility, including, but not limited to, drystack boat storage,
fuel sales, slip rentals and the like. Pump-out facilities shall be required.
   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure designed to be used as a year-round
residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal
Manufactured Housing Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15,
1976. In addition the MOBILE HOME shall meet the following additional criteria:
      (1)   Skirting requirements.
         (a)   The perimeter of the mobile home shall, upon installation, have
either (i) a permanent, continuous masonry curtain wall or (ii) a continuous
and opaque manufactured foundation skirting specifically designed for
manufactured homes which is ventilated, pre-packaged, and installed according
to written instructions from the manufacturer (not to include wood or corrosive
materials i.e. aluminum, steel).
         (b)   The following installation requirements for manufactured home
skirting must be met in addition to the supplier's manufactured home skirting
instructions:
            1.   A minimum 2"x 2"x 12" salt-treated stake shall be driven into
the ground abutting the rear side of the channel, flush with the top of the
channel, no more than 12 inches from each corner. Additional minimal 2"x 2"x
12" stakes shall be located at a minimum four feet on center the entire length
of the channel. Minimum two-inch self-tapping screws shall be driven through
the front of the channel, through the skirting panel and into the wooden stake
at each stake location.
            2.   Fasten each skirting panel (top and bottom) with a no. 8, one-
inch self-tapping screw.
            3.   If the finished floor is 40 inches or higher than existing
grade, an additional support consisting of either 2"x 2" salt-treated lumber or
extra channel shall be installed to prevent bowing. Each skirting panel shall
be attached to the support by using a self-tapping screw.
         (c)   The perimeter skirting shall be installed prior to receiving a
certificate of occupancy/compliance.
      (2)   Landing preference. Although not required, it is preferred that all
exterior doors be accessed directly by a minimum 4'x4' landing.
   MODULAR HOME. A residential dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the
standards set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code and composed of
components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to
the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. Among other
possibilities, a MODULAR HOME may consist of two sections transported to the
site in a manner similar to a mobile or manufactured home (except that the
modular home meets the North Carolina State Building Code), or a series of
panels or room sections transported on a truck and erected or joined together
on the site. In addition the MODULAR HOME shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Skirting requirements. Should the MODULAR HOME be designed and
constructed at the factory so as not to require a permanent foundation, it will
be required upon installation on the site to have a continuous, permanent
masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access. The
masonry curtain wall shall be installed prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy/compliance.
      (2)   Landing preference. Although not required, it is preferred that all
exterior doors be accessed directly by a minimum 4'x4' landing.
   MOVING AND STORAGE FACILITIES. Uses engaged in the moving of household or
office furniture, appliances, and equipment from one location to another,
including the temporary indoor storage of those same items. This does not
include self-storage facilities.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use of building or land that does not conform with the
regulations of the district in which such building or land is situated but was
lawful before adoption of this chapter.
   NON-PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER. A landowner not under agreement with the
applicant, facility owner or operator.
   NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the appropriate
state agency, as a facility for unrelated individuals excluding supervisory
personnel, who are handicapped, aged or disabled and are undergoing
rehabilitation, or extended care, and are provided services to meet their
specific needs. This category includes group homes for all ages, halfway
houses, foster and boarding homes.
   NURSING HOME.  A convalescent facility having over five beds meeting all of
the requirements of the State of North Carolina for the boarding and care of
persons who cannot care for themselves.
   OCCUPIED BUILDING. A dwelling, business, school, hospital, church or other
permanent structure used regularly that is occupied or in use and is connected
to water, sewer/septic service and electric utilities.
   ORGANIZATIONS, FRATERNAL OR SOCIAL. An establishment operated by a
corporation or association of persons for social, fraternal or charitable
purposes, but which is not operated for profit or to render a service which is
customarily conducted as a business.
   PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER. A landowner under lease or agreement with the
applicant or wind facility owner pertaining to a wind energy facility. A waiver
of setback, sound, and/or shadow flicker provisions constitutes an agreement
with the wind facility owner under §
157.137(DD).
   PERMITTED STRUCTURE. A structure meeting all the requirements of this
chapter for the zone district in which it is located.
   PERMITTED USE. A use meeting all the requirements of this chapter for the
zone district in which it is located.
   PLANNED BUILDING GROUP. A group of two or more buildings or two or more
mobile homes located on a single parcel of land.
   PROCESSING. Any operation changing the nature of material or material's
chemical composition or physical properties. Does not include operations
described as fabrication.
   RESEARCH & DESIGN, FUSED RECYCLED GLASS. Development of fused recycled
container glass products and the production processes, methodology, marketing,
testing, storage, packaging, specialty equipment and the knowledge to expand
these products to a production level.
   RESIDENTIAL (NON-COMMERCIAL) BOAT/RV STORAGE. Not for profit, provided and
maintained for common use for occupants of a subdivision/development and not
for the general public.
   RETAIL. Sale of a commodity to the ultimate consumer and not customarily
subject to sale again.
   SALES OFFICE, TEMPORARY. A building constructed on-site in accordance with
the North Carolina State Building Code or a manufactured commercial unit (see
definition for “manufactured commercial unit”) and used for the purpose of a
temporary sales office solely in connection with the development where such
development is located.
   SALVAGE OPERATION. The reclamation, dismantling or storage of pre-used
commodities, junk and similar    material for the purpose of resale, processing
and distribution or deposition.
   SEPTAGE. A waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated sewage solids,
liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste origin, pumped from septic tanks,
residential grease traps, or privies. SEPTAGE shall be considered that waste
which has not been treated by a process to significantly reduce pathogens.
   SERVICE STATION. A building or lot where gasoline, oil, grease and
automotive accessories are supplied and dispensed to the motor vehicle trade.
   SETBACK LINE. A line located a minimum horizontal distance from the right-
of-way line of any street or road, parallel thereto, between which and the
right-of-way line no structure (to include steps, eaves, gutters, and similar
fixtures) shall be erected, altered, or maintained except as otherwise provided
herein. SETBACK LINES are also located a minimum horizontal distance from lot
boundary lines parallel thereto, between which and the lot boundary line no
structure (to include steps, eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures) shall be
erected, altered, or maintained except as otherwise provided herein.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. A business which offers its customers or patrons
any device, activity or demonstration depicting specified sexual activities, or
which is intended to appeal to sexual interests, titillation or arousal of the
customer or patron. A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall include an adult
establishment as defined in G.S. § 14-202.10(2) and, in addition, without
limitation: an adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store, adult cabaret,
adult massage parlor, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model
studio, sexual encounter studio, or any combination of the foregoing. Any
business that is not explicitly listed and defined below is not to be
considered for a special use permit by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. As used
in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   ADULT ARCADE (ALSO KNOWN AS 'PEEP SHOW'). Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or token-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained
to show images to persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so
displayed depict or describe specified sexual activities and/or specified
anatomical areas. Booths or viewing rooms shall not be completely enclosed to
prevent management from viewing clientele.
      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment
which receives the majority of its gross income during any calendar month from
the sale or rental of any one or more of the following or has a preponderance
of its inventory consisting of:
         (a)   Books, magazines periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified
sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas; or
         (b)   Video games or computer programs that depict any sexual activity
in a digital or other similar imaging media format; or
         (c)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (3)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar restaurant, or other commercial
establishment that regularly features, exhibits, or displays as one of its
business purposes:
         (a)   Persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities; or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual activities
and/or specified anatomical areas; or
         (d)   Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or
performances that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an
audience or customers.
      (4)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR.  A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electrical or
magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is
administered. This definition does not include the practice of a North Carolina
licensed professional nor an athletic club, physical fitness center, school,
gymnasium, reducing salon, or similar establishment where massage or similar
manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory
service.
      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Commercial establishments where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown as one of its
principal business purposes.
      (6)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features exhibits or displays as one
of its principal business purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nude, or live performances that expose or depict specified anatomical
areas and/or specified sexual activities.
      (7)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  
         (a)   Any place that allows, permits or makes available a person who
appears nude, semi-nude, or who displays specified anatomical areas for the
purpose of being observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any other form of
consideration.
         (b)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the State of North Carolina or a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
            1.   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available
for viewing; and
            2.   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
            3.   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.
      (8)   NUDE OR STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
      (9)   SEMI-NUDE.  The showing of the female breast below a horizontal
line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the
male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage
of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard,
bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.
      (10)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite
sex, or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
      (11)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Includes any of the following:
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
            1.   Human genitals, pubic region;
            2.   Buttock; or
            3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      (12)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence; or
         (b)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or
         (c)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or
         (d)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
         (e)   Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain; or
         (f)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other contact with an
animal by a human being; or
         (g)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
   SHADOW FLICKER. The visible flicker effect when rotating wind turbine blades
cast shadows causing the repeating pattern of light and shadow.
   SIGN. Any words, lettering, parts of letters, pictures, figures, numerals,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, design trade names or trademarks, by
which anything is known such as the designation of an individual, firm,
association, profession, business commodity or product which are visible from
any public way and used to attract attention.
   SIGN, AREA OF.  Sign area shall be computed by the smallest square,
triangle, rectangle, circle or    combination thereof which encompass the
entire sign including lattice work, wall work, frame or supports incidental to
its decoration. In computing the area, only one side of a double-face sign
structure shall be considered.
   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. Any sign which advertises an establishment,
service commodity, good or entertainment sold or offered on premises other than
that on which such sign is located.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign that is not bolted to or otherwise affixed to the
ground or a permanent structure in some other substantially permanent way and
is not built to state building codes and has not been erected pursuant to a
valid building permit.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR. A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for
which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal,
mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
   SOLAR FARM.  A facility used to convert solar energy into electrical power
for interconnection with the power grid for primarily off-site energy
consumption.
   SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a residential,
commercial, municipal, or industrial wastewater treatment plant or water supply
treatment plants not considered to be hazardous by EPA or the N.C. Department
of Environmental Health and Natural Resources, Solid and Hazardous Waste
Branch. SLUDGE shall be considered that waste which has been treated by a
process to significantly reduce pathogens.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in
particular zoning district upon presentation of competent, material, and
substantial evidence establishing compliance with one or more general standards
requiring that judgement and discretion be exercised as well as compliance with
specific standards. This definition includes permits previously referred to as
“conditional use permits.”
   STABLES, COMMERCIAL. Any structure used for commercial purposes relating to
the raising, breeding, or boarding of horses or livestock.
   STEALTH TECHNOLOGY. Minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the
land, property,  buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and
in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless
communication facility by using the least visually and physically intrusive
facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under the
facts and circumstances.
   STORAGE. A depository for commodities or items for the purposes of future
use or safekeeping when such a depository is not a building or structure, the
items or commodities shall be considered outside storage.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords access to abutting property and
is recorded as such in the office of Pasquotank County Registrar of Deeds.
      (1)   STREET, FRONTAGE ROAD. A street that is parallel to a fully or
partially access controlled street which functions to provide controlled access
to adjacent land.
      (2)   STREET, MINOR. A street whose primary function is to provide access
to abutting properties and is designed to discouraged use by through traffic.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, including but not limited to
buildings, which requires location on, above, or below the surface of the land
or attachment to something having permanent location on the land.
   SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land (in addition to the
undivided remaining portion of the original undivided tract) into two or more
lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development (whether immediate or future) and includes all division of land
involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets;
however, the following is not included within this definition and is not
subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this Part:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots if the total number of lots is not increased and
the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the county as shown
in its subdivision regulations;
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres if no
street right-of-way dedication is involved;
      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for widening
or opening streets;
      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership the entire area of
which is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, if no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and if the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the county as shown by its subdivision regulations;
   TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE STRUCTURE. A transportable residential
structure that provides an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision of
care for a mentally or physically impaired person that is primarily assembled
at a location other than its' site of installation. The caregiver shall be a
person of 18 years of age or older who provides daily living care and is a
first or second degree relative of the mentally or physically impaired person
for whom they are providing care.
   THOROUGHFARE, MAJOR. The rights-of-way of Highways 17, 158, and 34.
   TRAILER, OVERNIGHT CAMPING. For purposes of this chapter, the following
shall be considered an overnight camping trailer:
      (1)   CAMPING TRAILER. A canvas, temporary, folding structure, mounted on
wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use. Such structures
shall be considered travel trailers regardless of other titles that may also be
applicable such as camper, mini, mobile homes, etc.
      (2)   MOTOR HOME.  A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel,
recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle.
      (3)   PICK-UP COACH. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation.
      (4)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
(other than a mobile home), designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation and vacation.
   USE. The purpose for which land or structures thereon are designed, arranged
or intended to be occupied or used; or for which it is occupied, maintained,
rented, or leased.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use incidental to and customarily associated with the use
by right and located on the same lot with the use by right, and operated and
maintained under the same ownership with the operation of the use by right.
   USE BY RIGHT. A use which is listed as an unconditionally permitted activity
in this chapter.
   USE, NON-FARM.  Any use of property which is not encompassed by the
definition of a farm as so defined in this Ordinance.
   USE SITUATION, NONCONFORMING. A use of building or land that does not
conform with the regulation of the district in which the building or land is
situated.
   USE, SPECIAL. A use permitted in a zone only after specific findings by the
Board of Adjustment or Pasquotank County Board of Commissioners.
   VARIANCE. A modification or alteration of any of the requirements of this
chapter.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. A place or facility which provides dental, medical or
surgical care for dogs, cats and other domesticated animals. Kennels are not
included within this definition.
   WAREHOUSE. A building or compartment in a building used and appropriated by
the occupant for the deposit and safekeeping or selling of his own goods at
wholesale, and/or for the purpose of storing the goods of others placed there
in the regular course of commercial dealing and trade to be again removed or
reshipped.
   WHOLESALE. Sale of a commodity for resale to the public for direct
consumption.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY, SMALL.  A single system designed to supplement other
electricity sources as an accessory use to existing buildings or facilities,
wherein the power generated is used primarily for on-site consumption. A small
wind energy conversion system consists of a single wind turbine, a tower, and
associated control or conversion electronics, which has a total rated capacity
of 20kW or less.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY, LARGE. A wind energy conversion system consisting of
one or more wind turbine(s), a tower(s), and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a total rated capacity of more than 100kW.
   WIND ENERGY FACILITY, MEDIUM. A wind energy conversion system consisting of
one or more wind turbine(s), a tower(s), and associated control or conversion
electronics which has a total rated capacity of more than 20kW but not greater
than 100 kW.
   WIND ENERGY FARM.  An electric generating facility, whose main purpose is to
supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines and other accessory
structures and buildings, including substations, meteorological towers,
electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures
and facilities.
   WIND FARM OWNER.  The entity or entities having controlling or majority
equity interest in the wind energy facility, including their respective
successors and assigns.
   WIND TURBINE. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and may include a
nacelle, rotor, tower, guy wires and pad transformer.
   WIND TURBINE HEIGHT. The distance measured from grade at the center of the
tower to the highest point of the turbine rotor or tip of the turbine blade
when it reaches its highest elevation.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS. Any personal wireless services as defined in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. The set of equipment and network
components, exclusive of the underlying support structure or tower, including
antennas, transmitters, receivers base stations, power supplies, cabling, and
associated equipment necessary to provide wireless data and telecommunications
services to a discrete geographic area.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER. A new or existing structure, such as a
monopole, lattice tower, or guyed tower that is designed to support or capable
of supporting wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER AND FACILITY HEIGHT. The vertical distance
measured from the base of the tower to the highest point on the wireless
communication facility, including the antenna array and other attachments.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER AND FACILITY SETBACK. The required distance
from the property line of the parcel on which the wireless communication
facility is located to the base of the support structure and equipment shelter
or cabinet and guy anchors.
   YARD. Any open space on the same lot with the building and unoccupied from
the ground upward except by trees, shrubbery, or fences.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot, extending from the
front line of the building to the front lot line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard located behind the rear line of the main building, if
extended, to the perimeter of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and side lot line, extending from
the front building line to the rear building line.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE. A certificate by the Pasquotank County Board of
Commissioners or its authorized agents that a course of action to use or occupy
a tract of land or a building; or to erect, install  or alter a structure,
building or sign situated in the jurisdictional area of the zoning ordinance
fully meets the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 157.060 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the areas included within the boundaries
of the Pasquotank County Zoning jurisdiction (§
157.015), are divided into the following classes of zones:
   R-15      Residential District
   R-15A      Residential District
   R-25      Residential District
   R-25A      Residential District
   R-35A      Residential District
   RMH-15   Residential Manufactured Home District
   RMH-25    Residential Manufactured Home District
   RMH-35   Residential Manufactured Home District
   C-1      Commercial District
   I-1      Industrial District
   I-2      Industrial District
   A-1      Agricultural District
   A-2      Agricultural District
   O&I      Office and Institutional District
   M-F      Multi-Family District
   P-1    Prison District
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.061 R-15, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 15,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except certain home occupations
controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes and manufactured homes are not
permitted. Manufactured homes, Class A are permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.062 R-15A, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 15,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except certain home occupations
controlled by specific limitations Mobile homes, manufactured homes, and
manufactured homes Class A are not permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.063 R-25, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 25,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except when certain home
occupations controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes and manufactured
homes are not permitted. Manufactured homes, Class A are permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.064 R-25A, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 25,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except when certain home
occupations controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes, manufactured
homes, and manufactured homes Class A are not permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.065 R-35A, RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 35,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except certain home occupations
controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes, manufactured homes, and
manufactured homes Class A are not permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.066 RMH-15, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 15,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except when certain home
occupations controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes and manufactured
homes on individual lots are permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.067 RMH-25, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 25,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except when certain home
occupations controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes and manufactured
homes on individual lots are permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.068 RMH-35, RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as low-density residential areas and additional
open areas where similar residential development will be a viable land use. The
minimum lot size is 35,000 square feet. The uses permitted in this district are
designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area and
prohibit all activities of a commercial nature except when certain home
occupations controlled by specific limitations. Mobile homes and manufactured
homes on individual lots are permitted. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.069 C-1, COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as certain areas that are designed to serve both
non-residents and residents using the major state and county roads that run
through the county. This district is designed to accommodate retail or service
establishments customarily patronized by transient traffic as well as non-
transient traffic. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.070 I-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as an area where manufacturing establishments may
be developed. This may include limited retail outlets for products produced on
the premises. The purpose of this district is to permit normal operations of
almost all industries except those that would be detrimental to adjoining
properties. Excluded from this district are those industries which deal
primarily in hazardous products such as explosives. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.071 I-2, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   T This district is defined as an area where manufacturing establishments may
be developed. This may include limited retail outlets for products produced on
the premises. The purpose of this district is to permit taller industrial
buildings and the (normal) operations of almost all industries except those
that would be detrimental to adjoining properties. Excluded from this district
are those industries which deal primarily in hazardous products such as
explosives. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.072 A-1, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as large, open land areas. The regulations of this
district are designed to retain the open characteristics of the land. For that
reason, the permitted uses are limited in number. Residential development shall
be allowed only when division of a tract or parcel of land does not constitute
a subdivision as defined in the Pasquotank County Subdivision Regulations. (See
§§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.073 A-2, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as large, open land areas. The regulations of this
district are designed to retain the open, agricultural characteristics of the
land. For that reason, the permitted uses are very limited in number.
Residential development shall be allowed only when division of a tract or
parcel of land does not constitute a subdivision as defined in the Pasquotank
County Subdivision Regulations. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.074 O&I, OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
    This district provides for the development of offices and community
institutions which have similar development characteristics and require
locations close to the more intensive commercial districts. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.075 M-F, MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT.
    This district provides for multi-family residential uses, such as
apartments, townhouses, or condominiums, and other limited private and public
community uses. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.076 P-1, PRISON DISTRICT.
    This district is defined as an area where prisons and other associated
enterprises operated by the State, Federal or Local Government may be
developed. (See §§
157.090 through
157.094,
157.105 through
157.107, and
157.120 and
157.121 for permitted uses and additional area and yard requirements.)
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
APPLICATION OF GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 157.090 USE.
    No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or
part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally altered except in
conformity with the uses and dimensional regulations of this chapter, or
amendments thereto, for the district in which it is located.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.091 ONLY ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING, ONE PRINCIPAL USE ON LOT AND ORIENTATION
OF A BUILDING.
   (A)   Principal building.
      (1)   Residential.  No more than one principal building shall be
permitted on a lot. This requirement shall not apply to the multi-family zoning
district.
      (2)   Non-residential. More than one principal building may be located on
a lot provided a minimum 20-foot width paved access road is maintained from a
public street to each principal building for use by service or emergency
vehicles. A 20-foot separation shall be maintained between each principal
building.
   (B)   There shall not be more than one principal use (e.g. commercial,
industrial or residential) per building and lot. This requirement shall not
apply to telecommunication/broadcast towers and ancillary structures or outdoor
advertising signs where permitted.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.092 MINIMUM YARDS.
    The minimum yards or other open spaces required by this chapter, including
those provisions regulating intensity of use, for each and every building
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not be encroached upon or
considered as meeting the yard or open space requirements or the intensity of
use provisions for any other building.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.093 LOT SUBDIVISION.
    No lot shall hereafter be so reduced in area as to cause any open space
required by this chapter to be less in any dimension than is herein required by
the minimum yard requirement of the zone in which the lot in question is
situated.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.094 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
    No final certificate of occupancy/compliance will be issued until all
required site improvements have been completed.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 157.105 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Districts in which particular uses or similar uses are permitted as a
use by right with a zoning permit are indicated by "P".
   (B)   Districts in which particular uses or similar uses are permitted as a
special use upon approval of the Planning Board are indicated by "S". See
additional restrictions imposed on certain special uses for    details of each
special use.
   (C)   Districts in which particular uses or similar uses are permitted as a
major special use upon approval of the Board of Commissioners are indicated by
"MS". See additional restrictions imposed on certain special uses for details
of each major special use.
   (D)   Districts in which particular uses or similar uses are permitted with
development standards with a zoning permit are indicated by "D". See §
157.107 Notes to the Table of Permitted Uses for required standards.
   (E)   Districts in which particular uses or similar uses are prohibited are
indicated by a "-" blank.
Table of      R- R-  R- R-  R-  RMH- RMH- RMH-
Permitted SIC 15 15A 25 25A 35A 15   25   35   C-1 I-1 I-2 A-1 A-2 O&I M-F P-1
Uses
Table of Permitted Uses                                SIC  R- R-  R- R-  R-  RMH- RMH- RMH- C- I- I- A- A- O&I M- P-
                                                            15 15A 25 25A 35A 15   25   35   1  1  2  1  2      F  1
AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHING
Agricultural Production (crops)                        0100 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
Agricultural Production (livestock)                    0200 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Animal Aquaculture                                     0273 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Animal Livestock Services                              0751 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Animal Specialty Services                              0752 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Farmers Market                                         5431 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Fish Hatchery                                          0920 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Forestry                                               0810 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
Landscaping and Horticultural Services                 0180 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Veterinary Service, Livestock                          0741 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Veterinary Service, Other
(§                                                    0742 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    D  -  -  D  -  D   -  -
157.107, Note 7)
Wholesale nurseries and greenhouses                    5193 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  P  -   -  -
MINING
Mining, Quarrying, and Sand Pits (see §              -    -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  S  S  S  -   -  -
157.137(O))
RESIDENTIAL USES
Bed and Breakfast Inn
(See §                                               7011 S  S   S  S   S   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Boarding and Rooming House                             7021 S  S   S  S   S   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Camping Trailer/Recreational Vehicle (See §          0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.107 Note 9)
Congregate Care Facility                               0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
Duplexes (See §                                      0000 -  -   P  P   P   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Dwelling Unit Contained Within Another Principal Use
(See §                                               0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
157.137)
Family Care Home                                       0000 P  -   P  -   -   P    P    P    -  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Group Care Home                                        0000 S  -   S  -   -   S    S    S    P  -  -  P  -  P   S  -
Home Occupation
(See §                                               0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    -  -  -  D  -  -   D  -
157.107 Note 5)
Homeless Shelter                                       0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Manufactured Home                                      0000 -  -   -  -   -   P    P    P    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Manufactured Home, Class A                             0000 P  -   P  -   -   P    P    P    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Manufactured Home Park                                 0000 -  -   -  -   -   P    P    P    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Mobile Home                                            0000 -  -   -  -   -   P    P    P    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Modular Home                                           0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    S  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Multifamily Dwelling                                   0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   MS -
Single Family Dwelling                                 0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    S  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Subdivision, Major-Residential                         0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    -  -  -  -  -  -   P  -
Subdivision, Minor-Residential                         0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    -  -  -  P  P  -   P  -
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory Dwelling Unit
(See §                                               0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    -  -  -  D  D  -   -  -
157.107 Note 2)
Accessory Uses and Structures
(customary) (See §                                   0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    D  D  D  D  D  D   D  D
157.107, Note 1)
Automobile Parking on Same Lot as Principal Use        0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
Caretaker Dwelling                                     0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  P  P   -  -
Emergency Shelter                                      0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
Farm Stand (Fruits and Vegetables Produced on same     0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
parcel as offered for sale)
Home Occupation (See §                               0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    D  -  -  D  D  D   D  -
157.107, Note 5)
Private Airstrip                                       0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  D  D  -   -  -
Residential (non-commercial) Boat/RV Storage (See §  0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    -  -  -  -  -  -   D  -
157.107 Note 14)
Residential Private Pier                               0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    -  -  -  P  -  -   P  -
Satellite Dish Antenna
(See §                                               0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    D  D  D  D  D  D   D  D
157.121 Note 3)
Solar Collectors
(See §                                               0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    D  D  D  D  D  D   D  D
157.121 Note 3)
Swimming Pool
(See §                                               0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    D  D  D  D  D  D   D  -
157.121 Note 3)
Temporary Family Health Care Structure                 0000 D  D   D  D   D   D    D    D    -  -  -  D  D  -   -  -
Yard Sale (no more than 2 days per month)              0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  -  -  P  P  -   P  -
Table of      R- R-  R- R-  R-  RMH- RMH- RMH-
Permitted SIC 15 15A 25 25A 35A 15   25   35   C-1 I-1 I-2 A-1 A-2 O&I M-F P-1
Uses
Table of Permitted Uses                          SIC  R- R-  R- R-  R-  RMH- RMH- RMH- C- I- I- A- A- O&I M- P-
                                                      15 15A 25 25A 35A 15   25   35   1  1  2  1  2      F  1
RECREATIONAL & ENTERTAINMENT
Amphitheater                                     7920 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Amusement, Water Parks, or Fair Grounds          7996 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  MS -  -   -  -
Athletic Fields                                  0000 S  S   S  S   S   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Auditorium, Coliseum or Stadium                  0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Batting Cages                                    7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Billiard Parlor                                  7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Bingo Games                                      7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Bowling Center                                   7933 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Circuses, Carnivals, Fairs & Side Shows, less    7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
than 30 days per year
Coin Operated Amusement                          7933 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Country Club with Golf Course                    7997 -  -   S  S   S   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   S  -
Dance School                                     7911 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Equestrian Facility                              7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Go-Cart Raceway                                  7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Golf Course                                      7992 S  S   S  S   S   S    S    S    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Golf Course, Miniature                           7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Golf Driving Range                               7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Indoor Recreation Establishments Commercially    7997 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Operated
Internet Sweepstakes Cafe/Electronic Gaming      7132 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Marina, Commercial                               4493 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  S  S  -  -  -   -  -
Marina, Residential                              4493 S  S   S  S   S   S    S    S    -  -  -  -  -  -   S  -
Motor Sport Activities
(See §                                         7948 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  MS -  -   -  -
157.137)
Paint Ball Gaming Facility                       0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Physical Fitness Center                          7991 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Private Campground/RV Park
(See §                                         7033 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.107 Note 9)
Private Club or Recreation Facility              7997 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Public Park or Recreation Facility               7990 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Shooting Range, Indoor
(See §                                         7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Shooting Range, Outdoor
(See §                                         7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Skating Rink                                     7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Sports and Recreation Club, Indoor               7997 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Swim and Tennis Club                             7997 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Theater, Adult (See §                          0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Theater, Indoor                                  7832 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Theater, Outdoor                                 7833 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Ambulance Service                                4119 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  p  -  p   -  -
Cemetery or Mausoleum
(See §                                         0000 S  S   S  S   S   S    S    S    -  -  -  S  -  S   S  -
157.137)
Church                                           8661 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
College, University, or Technical Institute
(See §                                         8220 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  S  S  S  -  P   -  -
157.137)
Correctional Institution                         9223 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  S
Day Care Center, Adult
(See §                                         8322 S  -   S  -   -   -    -    -    D  -  -  D  -  D   -  -
157.137)
Day Care Center, Child
(See §                                         8320 S  -   S  -   -   -    -    -    D  S  S  D  -  D   -  -
157.137)
Elementary or Secondary School                   8211 S  S   S  S   S   -    -    -    -  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
Fire Station                                     9224 -  -   P  P   P   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  P   -  -
Government Offices
(See §                                         9000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  S  S  -  -  P   -  -
157.137)
Hospital                                         8062 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  -  -  S  -  P   -  -
Jail operated by local government                9223 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  S  -  -  -  -   -  P
Library                                          8231 -  -   S  S   S   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
Museum or Art Gallery                            8412 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Nursing and Convalescent Home                    8050 S  -   S  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  P   S  -
Orphanage                                        8361 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  P   -  -
Law Enforcement Station                          9221 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
Post Office                                      0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Psychiatric Hospital                             8063 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Retreat Center                                   0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
School Administration Facility                   9411 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Wastewater Treatment Facility (government owned  0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
and operated)
Water Treatment Facility (government owned or    0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
operated)
BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL AND PERSONAL SERVICES
Accounting, Auditing, or Bookkeeping             8721 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
Administrative or Management Services            8740 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Advertising Agency or Representative             7310 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Advertising, Outdoor Services                    7312 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Automobile Parking (Commercial)                  7521 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Automobile Rental                                7510 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Automobile Repair Services (See §              7538 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    D  D  -  D  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 3)
Automobile Towing and Storage Services (See §  7549 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    D  D  D  -  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 3)
Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union          6000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Barber or Beauty Shop                            7241 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  P   -  -
Boat Repair (See §                             3730 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    D  D  D  -  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 3)
Building Maintenance Services                    7349 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Car Wash                                         7542 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Clothing Alteration or Repair                    7219 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Computer Maintenance and Repair                  7378 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Computer Services and Data Centers               7370 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Economic, Sociological, or Educational Research  8732 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  -  P   -  -
Employment Agency, Personnel Agency              7360 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Engineering, Architect, or Survey Service        8710 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Equipment Rental and Leasing                     7350 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Equipment Repair, Heavy                          7690 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Equipment Repair, Light                          7690 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Finance or Loan Office                           6100 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Funeral Home or Crematorium                      7261 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Furniture Repair/Refinishing                     7641 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Hotel or Motel                                   7011 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Insurance Agency                                 6411 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Kennels or Pet Grooming
(See §                                         0752 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    D  -  -  D  -  S   -  -
157.107 Note 7)
Landscape and Horticultural Services             0780 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Laundromat, Coin Operated                        7215 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Laundry or Dry Cleaning Plant                    7211 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  p  P  -  -  -   -  -
Law Office                                       8111 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Massage Parlor, Adult                            7299 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Medical, Dental, or Related Office               8000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Medical or Dental Laboratory                     8071 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Motion Picture Production                        7810 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Office Uses Not Otherwise Classified             0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Pest or Termite Control Services                 7342 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Photocopying and Duplicating Services            7334 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Photofinishing Laboratory                        7384 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Photography, Commercial                          7335 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Photography Studio                               7221 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Real Estate Office                               6500 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Refrigerator or Large Appliance Repair (no       7623 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
outside storage)
Rehabilitation or Counseling Service             8300 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P    P   -  -
Research, Development, or Testing Services       8730 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Septic Tank Services                             7699 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Shoe Repair or Shoeshine Shop                    7251 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Stock, Secutity, or Commodity Broker             6200 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Taxidermist                                      7699 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Television, Radio , or Electronics Repair        7620 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Tire Recapping                                   7534 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Truck Driving School                             8249 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Truck and Utility Trailer Rental and Leasing     0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Truck Washing                                    7542 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Venue Event Center
(See §                                         7299 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  S  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Vocational, Business, or Secretarial School      8240 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Watch or Jewelry Repair Shop                     7631 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Welding Shop                                     7692 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
RETAIL TRADE
ABC Store (liquor)                               5921 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Antique Store                                    5932 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Appliance Store                                  5722 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Arts and Crafts                                  0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Auto Supply Sales                                5531 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Bakery                                           5461 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Bar, Nighhtclub, Tavern
(See §                                         5813 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Boat Sales                                       5551 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Bookstore                                        5942 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Bookstore, Adult
(See §                                         0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Building Supply Sales                            5211 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Camera Store                                     5946 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Candy Store                                      5441 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Clothing, Shoe, and Accessory Store              5600 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Computer Sales                                   5734 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Convenience Store
(See §                                         5411 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Dairy Products Store                             5451 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Department, Variety, or General Merchandise      5300 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Drugstore                                        5912 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Fabric or Piece Goods Store                      5949 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Farm Supplies and Equipment Sales                0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Floor Covering, Drapery, or Upholstery           5710 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Florist                                          5992 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Food Store                                       5400 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Fuel Oil Sales                                   5980 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Furniture Sales                                  5712 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  S  -  -  -  -   -  -
Garden Center or Retail Nursery                  5261 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Gift or Card Shop                                5947 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Hardware Store                                   5251 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Home Furnishings, Miscellaneous                  5719 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Jewelry Store                                    5944 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Live Entertainment Business, Adult (See §      0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Luggage or Leather Goods Store                   5948 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Manufactured Home Sales                          5271 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  S  -  -   -  -
Miscellaneous Retail Sales                       5999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -    -  -   -  -
Motor Vehicle Sales (new and used)               5511 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Motorcycle Sales                                 5571 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Musical Instrument Sales                         5736 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Newsstand                                        5994 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  P   -  -
Office Machine Sales                             5999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Optical Goods Sales                              5995 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Paint and Wallpaper Sales                        5231 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Pawnshop or Used Merchandise Store               5932 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Pet Store                                        5999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Record and Tape Store                            5735 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Recreational Vehicle Sales                       5561 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Restaurant and Catering
(See §                                         5812 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Service Station, Gasoline Sales                  5541 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Shopping Center                                  0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Sporting Goods Store, Bicycle Shop               5941 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Stationery Store                                 5943 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Television, Radio, or Electronics Sales          5731 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Tire Sales                                       5531 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Tobacco Store                                    5993 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Truck Stop                                       5541 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Video Tape Rental and Sales                      7841 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
WHOLESALE TRADE
Agricultural Chemicals, Pesticides, or           5191 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Fertilizers
Agricultural Products, Other                     5159 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Ammunition                                       5099 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Animals and Animal Products, Other               5159 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Apparel, Piece Goods and Notions                 5130 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Beer, Wine, or Distilled Alcoholic Beverages     5180 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Books, Periodicals, and Newspapers               5192 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Chemicals and Allied Products                    5169 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Drugs and Sundries                               5122 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Durable Goods, Other                             5099 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Electrical Goods                                 5060 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Farm Supplies, Other                             5191 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Flowers, Nursery Stock, and Florist Supplies     5193 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Forest Products                                  5099 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Furniture and Home Furnishings                   5020 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Grain and Field Beans                            5153 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Groceries and Related Products                   5140 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Hardware                                         5072 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Livestock                                        5154 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Lumber and Other Construction Materials          5030 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Lumber, Millwork, and Veneer                     5031 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Machinery, Construction and Mining               5082 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies               5080 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Machinery, Farm and Garden                       5083 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Market Showroom (furniture, apparel, etc.)       0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Metals                                           5051 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Minerals                                         5052 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Motor Vehicles                                   5012 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Motor Vehicles, Parts and Supplies               5010 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes                  5014 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Paint and Varnishes                              5198 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Paper and Paper Products                         5110 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Petroleum and Petroleum Products                 5170 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  S  -  -  -   -  -
Plastic Materials                                5162 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  S  -  -  -   -  -
Plumbing and Heating Equipment                   5070 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Professional and Commercial Equipment and        5040 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Supplies
Research and Design, Fused Recycled Glass
(See §                                         3231 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 13)
Resins                                           5162 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Scrap and Waste Materials                        5093 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -- -  P  -  -  -   -  -
Sporting and Recreational Goods and Supplies     5091 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Tobaccco and Tobacco Products                    5194 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Toys, Hobby Goods and Supplies                   5092 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Wallpaper and Paint Brushes                      5198 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
TRANSPORTATION, WAREHOUSING, AND UTILITIES
Airport and Flying Field, Commercial             4500 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  S  -  S   -  -
Bulk Mail and Packaging                          4212 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Bus Terminal                                     4100 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Communication or Broadcasting Facility           4800 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Construction or Demolition Debris Landfill       0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Courier Service                                  4215 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Farm Product Warehousing and Storage             4221 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  P  -   -  -
Land Clearing and Inert Debris Landfill          0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
Heliport                                         4522 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  S  -  -   -  -
Moving and Storage Service
(See §                                         4214 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Radioactive Waste (Transportation, Storage, and  4953 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Disposal)
Railroad Terminal or Yard                        4010 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Recycling Processing Centers                     0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  S  -  -  -   -  -
Refrigerated Warehousing                         4222 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  S  -   -  -
Refuse and Raw Material Hauling                  4212 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Septage Disposal
(See §                                         4953 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  S  S  S  -   -  -
157.137)
Solar Farm
(See §                                         0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS -  -  MS MS -   -  -
157.137)
Solid Waste Disposal, Sanitary Landfill (non-
hazardous waste)                                 4953 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
(See § 
157.137)
Solid Waste Disposal, Collection Sites,
Convenience Centers, and Transfer Sites (non-    4953 S  S   S  S   S   -    -    -    S  S  S  S  -  S   S  -
hazardous waste)
RV and Boat Storage                              0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Taxi Terminal                                    4121 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Trucking or Freight Terminal                     4213 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
TV/HDTV/AM/FM Broadcast Tower (See §           0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  S  S  S  S  S   -  -
157.137)
Utility Company Office                           0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  P   -  -
Utility Equipment and Storage Yards (See §     0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    D  D  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 2)
Utility Lines and Related Appurtenances          0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
Utility Substation
(See §                                         0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
157.106, Note 8)
Warehouse (general storage, enclosed)            4220 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Warehouse (self-storage)                         4225 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Wastewater Treatment Plant (Private)             4952 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
Wireless Communication Tower Under 60 feet tall  0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  P  P   -  -
Wireless Communication Tower Over 60 feet tall
(See §                                         0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  S  S  S  S  S   -  -
157.137)
Wind Energy Facility, Small
(See §                                         0000 S  S   S  S   S   -    -    -    S  S  S  S  S  S   -  S
157.137)
Wind Energy Facility, Medium
(See §                                         0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS MS MS MS MS MS  -  MS
157.137)
Wind Energy Facility, Large
(See §                                         0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  MS MS -   -  -
157.137)
MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL
Aerostats                                        3721 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Aircraft and Parts                               3720 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Ammunition, Small Arms                           3482 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
Animal Feeds                                     2048 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
(including dog and cat)
Animal Rendering                                 0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  -  S  -  -   -  -
Apparel and Other Finished Products              2300 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Arms and Weapons                                 3480 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    MS P  P  MS -  -   -  -
Asbestos, Abrasive and Related Products          3290 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  S  -  -  -   -  -
Asphalt Plant                                    2951 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Audio, Video, and Communications Equipment       3600 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Bakery Products                                  2050 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Batteries                                        3691 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Beverages                                        2086 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Bicycle Assembly, Parts, and Accessories         3751 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Boat and Ship Building                           3730 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Brooms and Brushes                               3991 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Burial Caskets                                   3995 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Cabinet and Woodworking Shop (see §            2341 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Chemicals and Allied Products
(see §                                         5169 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 2)
Coffee                                           2095 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Concrete, Cut Stone, and Clay Products           3200 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Contractors (no outside storage)                 0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  P   -  -
Contractors, General Building                    1500 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Contractors, Heavy Construction                  1600 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Contractors, Special Trade                       1700 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Costume Jewelry and Notions                      3960 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Dairy Products                                   2020 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Drugs                                            2830 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Electrical Components                            3670 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Electrical Equipment                             3600 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Electrical Industrial Apparatus, Manufacturing   3620 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Explosives                                       2892 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
Fabricated Metal Products                        3400 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Fabricated Valve and Wire Products               3490 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Fats and Oils, Animal                            2077 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Fats and Oils, Plant                             2070 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Fish, Canned, Cured, or Frozen                   2091 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Floor Coverings (except carpet)                  3996 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Food and Related Products                        2090 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Furniture and Fixtures (no outside storage)      2500 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Furniture and Fixtures Assembly                  0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Glass                                            3200 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Glass Products from Purchased Glass              3231 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Grain Mills Products                             2040 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  P  -  -   -  -
Heating Equipment and Plumbing Fixtures          3430 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Hemp Products                                    3999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Household Appliances                             3630 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Ice                                              2097 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Industrial and Commercial Machinery              3500 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Instruments and Related Products                 3823 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Jewelry and Silverware                           3910 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Leather and Leather Products                     3100 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
(no tanning)
Leather and Leather Products                     3100 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
(tanning)
Lighting and Wiring Equipment                    3640 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Lumber and Wood Products, Raw Materials          2411 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Manufactured Housing and Wood Buildings          2450 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Measurement, Analysis, and Control Instruments   3800 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Meat and Poultry, Packing and Processing         2010 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Medical, Dental, and Surgical Equipment          3840 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Metal Coating and Engraving                      3470 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Metal Fasteners                                  3450 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
(screws, bolts, etc.)
Metal Processing                                 3350 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Millwork, Plywood and Veneer                     2430 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries, not      0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  S  -  -  -   -  -
elsewhere listed
Motor Vehicle Assembly                           3710 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories              3714 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Motorcycle Assembly                              3751 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Musical Instruments                              3930 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Paper Products                                   2670 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Paperboard Containers and Boxes                  2650 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Pens and Art Supplies                            3950 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Petroleum and Related Products (see §           2900 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  D  D  -  -  -   -  -
157.107, Note 2)
Pharmaceutical Preparations                      2834 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  -  -  -   -  -
Photographic Equipment                           3861 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Photographic Supplies                            3861 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Pottery and Related Products                     3260 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Preserved Fruits and Vegetables                  2030 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Primary Metal Products and Foundries             3300 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Printing and Publishing                          2700 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Pulp and Paper Mills                             2610 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  P  -  -  -   -  -
Rubber and Plastic                               3000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Salvage Yards, Auto Parts
(See §                                         5015 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
157.137(N))
Salvage Yards, Scrap Processing
(See §                                         5903 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  MS MS -  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Sawmill or Planing Mill                          2420 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Signs                                            3993 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Soaps and Cosmetics                              2840 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  S  P  P  -  -   -  -
Sporting Goods and Toys                          3940 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  P  P  -  -   -  -
Sugar and Confectionery Products                 2060 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Surface Active Agents                            2843 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  S  -  -  -   -  -
Textile Manufacturing                            2200 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Tires and Inner Tubes                            3011 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  -  S  -  -  -   -  -
Tobacco Product Manufacturing                    2110 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  -  -  -   -  -
Wood Containers                                  2440 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
Wood Products, Miscellaneous                     2490 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    -  P  P  S  -  -   -  -
OTHER USES
Arts and Crafts Shows                            0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Billboards, Outdoor Advertising Signs            0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  S  S  -  -  -   -  -
Christmas Tree Sales                             0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  P  -  -   -  -
Conventions, Trade Shows                         0000 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Fraternal and Social Organizations
(See §                                         8641 S  S   S  S   S   S    S    S    P  -  -  S  -  -   S  -
157.137)
Horse Shows                                      7999 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  P  -  -   -  -
Maker Space                                      5051 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    S  P  -  -  -  -   -  -
Microbrewery                                     2082 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  P  -  S  -  -   -  -
Outdoor Flea Markets                             5932 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Private Club or Lodge
(See §                                         8641 S  S   S  S   S   S    S    S    P  -  -  S  -  -   S  -
157.137)
Tattoo Parlor                                    7299 -  -   -  -   -   -    -    -    P  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
Temporary Field Office/Storage Unit (See §     0000 S  S   S  S   S   S    S    S    P  P  P  -  -  P   P  P
157.137)
Temporary Sales Office
(See §                                         0000 P  P   P  P   -   -    -    -    -  -  -  -  -  -   -  -
157.137)
Temporary Sign                                   0000 P  P   P  P   P   P    P    P    P  P  P  P  P  P   P  P
 
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.106 FORMULATION OF PERMITTED USE TABLE.
   (A)   The Standard Industrial Classification Manual - 1987 was utilized in
the preparation of this table and shall be referred to as a guide for purposes
of interpretation by the Zoning Administrator. SIC codes are used to refer to
SIC Classifications. Entries with 0000 in the Reference SIC column do not
correspond to any classification in the SIC Manual.
   (B)   When a use is not listed in the Permitted Use Table, the Zoning
Administrator shall classify it with that use in the table most similar to it.
The SIC Manual shall serve as a guide in classifying any unlisted use. If the
Zoning Administrator should determine that a use is not listed and is not
similar to a use in the Permitted Use Table, then said use is prohibited.
   (C)   Rental and leasing of any commodity shall be permitted under the same
classification and in the same districts as are sales of that commodity, unless
rental or leasing of that commodity is listed separately in the Permitted Use
Table.
   (D)   If an industrial plant or facility involves two (or more)
manufacturing activities with different SIC Codes on the same zone lot, the
industrial plant shall be permitted only in those zoning districts where the
more restricted activity is permitted.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.107 NOTES TO THE TABLE OF PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Note 1. Accessory Buildings or Uses.
      (1)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes shall not be permitted as an
accessory building.
      (2)   Open storage. In the Commercial District open storage as an
accessory use shall be permitted provided it does not infringe on required
parking space requirements. In the Industrial Districts open storage as an
accessory use shall be permitted provided it is enclosed by a fence not less
than six feet in height.
      (3)   Residential occupancy. No permanent residential occupancy shall be
allowed as an accessory use in Commercial and Industrial Districts.
      (4)   Steel containers previously used for the shipping of goods shall be
permitted for use as an accessory building in the Commercial and Industrial
Districts provided that such a unit located on the same site for more than six
months must be anchored.
   (B)   Note 2.   Accessory Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit permitted on the
same parcel as a single family dwelling, but shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal building. This can include garage apartments and
guesthouses, but does not include manufactured homes. Accessory dwelling units
are permitted as indicated in the Table of Permitted Uses and shall meet the
following provisions:
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units shall only be permitted on lots that are
43,000 square feet or greater in size.
      (2)   An accessory dwelling unit may be attached to the single-family
dwelling or combined with a detached private residential garage/workshop.
      (3)   Only one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot and the home
must be located on the same lot as the principal building.
      (4)   The accessory dwelling unit cannot exceed 75% of the heated square
feet of the principal building or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
      (5)   A detached accessory dwelling unit must be located in the side or
rear yard of the principal building and be separated by at least 20 feet from
the principal building and all other structures on the subject property and
adjoining lots.
      (6)   A detached accessory dwelling unit cannot be subdivided from the
single-family dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit shall be owned by the
same person that owns the single-family dwelling.
      (7)   No accessory dwelling units are allowed on the same lot as two-
family or multi-family dwelling units.
      (8)   Accessory dwelling units must comply with all requirements of
Albemarle Regional Health Services, Environmental Health Division and the NC
State Building Code.
      (9)   Manufactured homes shall not be used as an accessory dwelling unit.
   (C)   Note 3. Automobile/Boat Repair and Automobile Towing/Storage.
Automobile/boat repair may be permitted in districts designated in the Table of
Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and provided:
      (1)   All new sites shall be no less than 43,000 square feet in size;
      (2)   Structures shall have minimum side and rear yards of 30 feet and a
minimum front yard of 40 feet; and
      (3)   All storage of wrecked or inoperable vehicles shall be enclosed by
a six-foot high opaque fence.
      (4) No wrecked or inoperable vehicles may be stored for more than 120
days from the date the vehicle is accepted for repair.
   (D)   Note 4. Storage of flammables. The storage of flammables shall not be
permitted or considered a use-by-right except in an Industrial District and
when such authorization for said use is given by the Pasquotank County Fire
Marshall relative to compliance of proposed storage facilities with State and
Pasquotank County fire regulations.
   (E)   Note 5. Home occupation.
      (1)   Home occupations are permitted only as an incidental use and are
limited to the following:
         (a)   The office or studio of a physician, artist (not inclusive of a
studio of a commercial photographer), general or trades contractor, musician,
insurance agent, lawyer, real estate broker, teacher or other like professional
person residing on the premises, provide no chattels or goods, wares or
merchandise are commercially created, displayed, exchanged or sold;
         (b)   Workshops that do not employ individuals outside the immediate
household;
         (c)   Customary home occupations such as millinery, dressmaking,
laundering or pressing and tailoring conducted by a person residing on the
premises;
         (d)   Rooming and/or boarding of not more than three persons; for
which a rent is charged;
         (e)   Single operator beauty shop or barber shop; and
      (2)   Provided furthermore the home occupations listed above shall be
permitted subject to the following limitations:
         (a)   No display of products;
         (b)    No mechanical equipment shall be installed or used except such
that is normally used for domestic or professional purposes and which does not
cause noises or interference in radio and television reception;
         (c)   No commercial accessory buildings or outside storage shall be
used in connection with the home occupation;
         (d)   Not over 25% of the total floor area or 500 square feet of the
principal residence, whichever is greater shall be used for a home occupation;
         (e)   Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home
occupation except any physician, dentist or other professional licensed by the
State of North Carolina shall be allowed to have one nurse or assistant who is
not a resident of the dwelling.
   (F)   Note 6. Industries. The following industrial uses shall not be
allowed:
      (1)   The manufacturing, processing, fabrication and/or bulk storage of
acetylene gas (except for use on premises), ammunition, explosives, fireworks,
gunpowder, junk or matches;
      (2)   The manufacturing, processing fabrication of acids (except non-
corrosive acids), ammonia, ammonium nitrate, animal by-products, bleaching
powder, cellulose, chlorine, reosote and reosote treatment, detergents,
enamels, lacquers, "lime", linoleum, oil cloth, paints, paper pulp, pigments,
lime plastic, rubber (except tire recappers), soaps, tannery products,
turpentine, varnishes, whiting and/or wood fillers. The fabrication of plastic
is exempt from this prohibition.
   (G)   Note 7. Kennel operations. If the rear lot lines or side lot lines of
a kennel operation, which is permitted in the C-1 Commercial District directly
abuts a residential district or a lot used for residential purposes, then such
operation shall be completely enclosed within a building except for outside
runs. Animals shall not be stored outside overnight.
   (H)   Note 8. Retail outlets in the industrial districts. Limited retail
outlets may be developed in conjunction with certain industries whereby
products sold are limited to those produced on the premises. As a permitted
use, such retail space shall be limited to a maximum of 25% of the gross floor
space of the principal manufacturing facility.
   (I)   Note 9. Overnight camping trailer.  The use of an overnight camping
trailer as a permanent residence shall be specifically prohibited. The use of
an overnight camping trailer as a temporary residence outside of a travel
trailer park shall be specifically prohibited.
   (J)   Note 10. Private airstrips. Private airstrips are permitted as an
accessory use as listed in the Table of Permitted Uses. In addition, they shall
meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The sides of the airstrip shall be located a minimum of 600 feet
from all property lines.
      (2)   The ends of the airstrip shall be located a minimum of 1,200 feet
from all property lines.
      (3)   One structure may be constructed for storage of planes. The
structure cannot be used or rented for storage of planes that do not belong to
the property owner or lessee.
   (K)   Note 11. Screening.  
      (1)   Screening shall be provided to buffer utility facilities from
surrounding uses. Screening shall be located along the outer perimeter of the
lot or parcel or surround the portion of the parcel being utilized for a
utility facility with the exception of an entrance with a maximum width of 30
feet. The site may be serviced by two entrances. Screening shall not impede
sight lines at intersections.
      (2)   Screening shall consist of a densely planted and maintained
vegetative buffer. Planted vegetation shall reach a minimum height of eight
feet within three years. Vegetation existing on the site at the time of
development may be substituted for and satisfy some of these requirements
providing that it substantially fulfills the purposes of this section.
      (3)   All trees, shrubs and other plant materials are to be maintained on
a continuing basis. Such maintenance shall include pruning, mowing, weeding,
mulching, fertilizing, and watering as required to maintain a good appearance
and growing conditions. Diseased plant materials shall be treated or removed
immediately. Dead or diseased plant materials which are removed shall be
replaced within one growing season.
   (L)   Note 12. Temporary sales office.
      (1)   Structure shall meet setback requirements applicable to permanent
buildings within the zoning district where such temporary sales office is
located.
      (2)   Structure shall not be used for residential purposes. No sleeping
quarters shall be provided.
      (3)   Lighting shall be shielded so as not interfere with adjoining
property owners or traffic traveling the public highways.
      (4)   Signs identifying the business may be attached to the structure. In
addition, one stand-alone sign not to exceed three feet by three feet (printed
area) may be located on the site.
      (5)   Parking requirements shall be met in accordance with §
157.150 "Off-Street Parking and Off-Street Loading Requirements".
      (6)   Landscaping shall consist of trees or shrubbery in front of the
temporary sales office with grass established throughout the lot boundaries. A
landscape plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the building permit
application. Landscaping shall be established prior to a certificate of
occupancy/compliance being issued by the Building Inspector. If weather
conditions are not prudent for planting landscaping the zoning enforcement
officer may provide additional time for planting.
      (7)   Zoning permits issued by the Zoning Administrator or his designee
for the temporary sales office shall be valid for 12 months and may be renewed
for additional 12 month increments providing the building and grounds are being
maintained and used in conformity with this section.
      (8)   The temporary sales office shall be removed from the site upon the
sale and transfer of 95% of the lots within the development unless the
temporary sales office is on-site construction and a building permit is
obtained to convert the structure to a residence meeting North Carolina State
Building Codes.
      (9)   Failure to maintain compliance with these regulations will result
in a notice by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to correct violations within 30
days. Failure to correct violations will result in an order to remove the
temporary sales office within 15 days.
   (M)   Note 13. Research & design, fused recycled glass.
      (1)   No outdoor storage of raw materials will be permitted. Raw
materials shall be contained and covered (ex. silos, receiving hopper, etc.).
      (2)   Outdoor storage of finished test products prior to shipment is
permitted on a temporary basis provided it is in an enclosed fenced area.
      (3)   All equipment shall be stored internally.
      (4)   Finished products may be located outside for the purpose of testing
(ex. exposure and ultraviolet light impact). Product shall be located in an
area enclosed by fence.
      (5)   No product emissions will be permitted.
   (N)   Note 14. Residential (non-commercial) boat/rv storage. The facility
shall be:
      (1)   Within or adjacent to the development,
      (2)   Enclosed with security fencing,
      (3)   Paved or concrete surface,
      (4)   Maintained at all times to keep free of litter and nuisance grass,
and
      (5)   Separated from adjoining residential uses by a minimum 30-foot
buffer. Buffer may be reduced to 20 feet if the area is landscaped. Buffer
width in all instances shall not be less than designated drainage easements.
(Fencing and landscaping are not permitted within drainage easements per §
157.121 Note 3, (3).)
   (O)   Note 15. Temporary Family Health Care Structure.
      (1)   A temporary family health care structure used for providing care
for a mentally or physically impaired person on property occupied by a
caregiver shall be considered a permitted accessory use in the zoning districts
indicated within the Table of Permitted Uses.
      (2)   Only one temporary family health care structure shall be allowed on
a lot or parcel of land. Temporary family health care structures shall comply
with all setback requirements that apply to the primary residence.
      (3)   A temporary family health care structure shall be 300 gross square
feet or less and not installed on a permanent foundation. In addition, it shall
be connected to water, septic, and electric utilities serving the lot and shall
comply with all applicable State Building Codes.
      (4)   Temporary family health care structures installed pursuant to this
section shall be removed within 60 days in which the mentally or physically
impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of the
assistance provided for in this section.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
TABLE OF AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
§ 157.120 TABLE OF AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
Area, Yard and Height Requirements
         Minimum Lot                                               Maximum
         Size (See   Minimum Yard Regulations                      Height of
         Note 8)     (see Notes 2, 3, 7 and 8)                     Structure
District                                                           (see Note 8)
         Minimum     Lot Width at Front Yard Side Yard  Rear Yard
         Area in     Front        Setback in Setback in Setback in In Feet
         Square Feet Setback Line Feet       Feet       Feet
Area, Yard and Height Requirements
                                                                     Maximum
              Minimum Lot Minimum Yard Regulations                   Height of
              Size (See   (see Notes 2, 3, 7 and 8)                  Structure
              Note 8)                                                (see Note
District                                                             8)
              Minimum     Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard  Rear Yard
              Area in     at Front  Setback in Setback in Setback in In Feet
              Square Feet Setback   Feet       Feet       Feet
                          Line
A-            43,000
1             septic      140       40         10         30         35
Agricultural  system
A-            43,000
2             septic      140       40         10         30         35
Agricultural  system
              43,000
              septic
R-15          system      140                                      
Residential   15,000      100       30         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
R-15A         system      140                                      
Residential   15,000      100       30         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
R-25          system      140                                      
Residential   25,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
R-25A         system      140                                      
Residential   25,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
R-35A         system      140                                      
Residential   35,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
RMH-15        system      140                                      
Residential   15,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
RMH-25        system      140                                      
Residential   25,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
RMH-35        system      140                                      
Residential   35,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
C-            system      140                                      
1 Commercial  15,000      100       30         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
I-            system      140                                      
1 Industrial  25,000      125       40         10         30         56
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
I-            system      140                                      
2 Industrial  25,000      125       40         10         30         400
              central
              sewer
              43,000
O&I Office    septic
and           system      140                                      
Institutional 15,000      100       30         10         30         56
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
M-F Multi-    system      140                                      
Family        25,000      125       40         10         30         35
              central
              sewer
              43,000
              septic
P-1 Prisons   system      140       100        100        100        56
              25,000      125
              central
              sewer
 
(Ord. passed 6- 21-2021)
§ 157.121 NOTES TO THE TABLE OF AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Note 1. Special use requirements take precedence. Area, yard and
height requirements as specified in the issuance of a special use permit shall
take precedence over area, yard and height requirements as set forth in the
Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements.
   (B)   Note 2. Variance for prior lots of record. Notwithstanding the other
setback provisions of this chapter, a building or structure may be constructed
and occupied by one family on any lot recorded prior to adoption of this
chapter and meeting all of the requirements of the Pasquotank County Sanitarian
and maintaining minimum side yards of five feet, a front yard of 25 feet and a
rear yard of 20 feet.
   (C)   Note 3. 
      (1)    Corner lots. A minimum setback of 20 feet shall be maintained
between any principal building and the side street. This requirement shall not
be applied so as to reduce the building width of a residentially zoned corner
lot of record at the time of passage of this chapter to less than 40 feet, nor
to prohibit the erection of any accessory building where this requirement
cannot reasonably be complied with as determined by the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   Retaining walls. The setback and yard requirements of this chapter
shall not apply to a retaining wall not more than five feet high, as measured
from the lowest ground elevation to the top of the wall. The Board of
Adjustment may permit a retaining wall greater than five feet height where it
finds that due to the topography of the lot such a wall is necessary.
      (3)   Fences and walls and plantings. In residential zones, fences and
walls not over four feet high may project into or may enclose any front yard.
Side and rear yards may be enclosed by fences or walls up to six feet high. In
the Industrial and Commercial zones a solid or open fence or wall may be
erected to a maximum height of ten feet. However, no fence, wall, or plantings
may be established on or in a public street right-of-way or within deeded
drainage/utility easements as required by Albemarle Regional Health Services
and Pasquotank County.
      (4)   Open storage.  Any open storage not enclosed within the confines of
a building, such as boxes, crates, trash-piles, machinery and merchandise with
open display, that results from the commercial operation it is part of, shall
be enclosed or hidden from view along any property lines adjacent to or in a
residential zone by a wall, fence and/or screening. This provision shall apply
in any commercial or industrial use abutting or within a residential zone.
      (5)   Accessory structures.  Accessory structures (detached garages,
storage buildings, swimming pools, etc.) to residential uses may be constructed
provided:
         (a)   It shall not be located closer than ten feet to any adjoining
lot line;
         (b)   It shall not be located within a deeded drainage/utility
easement as required by Albemarle Regional Health Services or Pasquotank
County;
         (c)   On a corner lot it shall not be located closer to the street
side yard property line than one-half of the required front yard setback; and
         (d)   A minimum distance of ten feet shall be maintained between the
residential structure and the accessory building. Carports and swimming pools
are excluded from this requirement.
      (6)   Solar collectors. Roof-mounted or ground mounted solar collectors
are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts. In order to be
classified as an accessory use, the area of the system shall not exceed the
footprint of the principal structure and shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Solar collectors shall be configured to avoid glare and heat
transference to adjacent properties.
         (b)   The system shall not be located within ten feet of any side or
rear lot line.
         (c)   Solar collectors located within a front yard shall meet the
minimum setbacks required in §
157.120.
   (D)   Note 4. Structures excluded from height limitations. Chimneys, flag
poles, steeples, water towers, observation towers, electrical transmission
towers, communication towers, silos, and roof structures for housing stairways,
heating and air conditioning equipment, ventilating fans or similar equipment
may be erected without regard to the maximum height limitation. No structure
may be constructed above the height limit herein specified for purposes of
providing for human occupancy.
   (E)   Note 5. Exclusions from setback requirements.
      (1)    Signs.
      (2)   Utility lines and related appurtenances (water, sewer, electrical,
cable TV, etc).
      (3)   Underground drain tile systems and sewerage drainage systems
approved by Albemarle Regional Health Services.
   (F)   Note 6. Reduced lot width and front yard setback requirements.
      (1)   Lot width at front setback line. Subdivisions that have received
sketch plan approval by the Pasquotank County Planning Board prior to January
1, 2001 shall be required to maintain a minimum 100 feet width at the front set
back line.
      (2)   Front yard setback. Subdivisions that have received sketch plan
approval by the Pasquotank County Planning Board prior to January 1, 2001 shall
be required to maintain a minimum 30 feet horizontal distance from the street
right-of-way line.
   (G)   Note 7. Minimum lot size for parcels with individual septic systems.
      (1)   Minimum 43,000 square foot lots are not required when the following
criteria are met:
         (a)   Development site has been reviewed and approved for individual
septic systems by Albemarle Regional Health Services prior to July 19, 2004.
         (b)   Development site is located in a zoning classification that
permits development.
      (2)   In these situations development sites located in a R-15, R-15A,
RMH-15, C-1 or O&I zoning classification lot sizes shall be a minimum 15,000
sq. ft.; in an A-1, R-25, R-25A, RMH-25, I-1, I-2, M-F or P-1 zoning
classification shall be a minimum 25,000 sq. ft.; in a R-35A or RMH-35 zoning
classification shall be a minimum 35,000 sq. ft.; and in an A-2 zoning
classification shall be a minimum 40,000 sq. ft. Minimum lot sizes may be
increased in each zoning classification based upon site evaluations by
Albemarle Regional Health Services.
   (H)   Note 8. The height of residential structures shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the lowest adjacent grade to the mid-point of the
highest roof height.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
PROVISIONS FOR USES ALLOWED AS SPECIAL USES
§ 157.135 OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSES OF SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   Special use permits add flexibility to the Zoning Ordinance. Subject to high
standards of planning and design, certain property uses may be allowed in the
several districts where these uses would not otherwise be acceptable. By means
of controls exercised through the special use permit procedures, property uses
which would otherwise be undesirable in certain districts can be developed to
minimize any negative effects they might have on surrounding properties.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.136 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Special use permit uses are those uses that, by virtue of their more
limited size, impact, or relationship to the overall health, safety, and
general welfare of the community, will be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board after a public hearing. These uses are identified as special uses in §§
157.105 through
157.107.
   (B)   Major special use permit uses are those uses that, by virtue of the
size, impact, or relationship to the overall health, safety, and general
welfare of the community, will be reviewed and approved by the Board of
Commissioners after a public hearing. These uses are identified as major
special uses in §§
157.105 through
157.107.
   (C)   The owner or owners, or their duly authorized agent, of the property
included in the petition for a special use permit or a major special use permit
shall submit an application to the Pasquotank County Planning Department at
least 30 days prior to the date of review by the approving Board. An
application fee established by the County Commissioners shall be paid to the
County of Pasquotank, to cover necessary administrative costs and advertising
expenses. Such application shall include all of the requirements pertaining to
it in this subchapter.
   (D)   (1)   Upon receiving the petition for a special use permit and holding
a quasi-judicial hearing, the Board may grant or deny the special use permit
requested in accordance with principles, conditions, safeguards, and procedures
specified in the regulations. The special use permit, if granted shall include
such approved plans as may be required.
      (2)   In granting the special use permit the Board shall find:
         (a)   That the use will not materially endanger the public health or
safety if located where proposed and approved;
         (b)   That the use meets all required conditions and specifications;
         (c)   That the use will not substantially injure the value of
adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; and
         (d)   That the location and character of the use, if developed
according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the
area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the plan of
development for the county.
    (E)   In granting the permit the approving Board may designate reasonable
and appropriate conditions and safeguards in addition and in connection
therewith, as will in its opinion, assure that the use in its proposed location
will be harmonious with the area in which it is proposed to be located and with
the spirit of this chapter. All such additional conditions shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting at which the permit is granted and also on the
certificate of the special use permit or on the plans submitted therewith. All
specific conditions shall run with the land and shall be binding on the
original applicants for the special use permit, their heirs, successors and
assigns. A special use permit, issued by the Planning Board or Board of
Commissioners shall become null and void if construction or occupancy of the
proposed use as specified on the special use permit is not commenced within 12
months of the date of issuance. Time extensions for the special use permit may
be granted by the approving Board provided applications for extensions are
submitted in writing to the Planning Department prior to expiration. Although
the Board may grant more than one extension of a permit, no single extension
shall exceed a period of six months unless otherwise stated. A Board decision
on an extension may be appealed in conformity with the requirements of division
(G) below in this section.
   (F)   If the Board denies the permit, the Board shall enter the reasons for
its action in the minutes of the meeting at which the action is taken.
   (G)   Every decision by a Board issuing or denying a special use permit
shall be subject to review by the Superior Court by proceeding in the nature of
certiorari. Any petition for review by the Superior Court shall be filed with
the Clerk of Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of the Board is
filed in the Office of the Clerk to the Board of Commissioners or after a
written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy with the Clerk or Chairman of the Board at the
time of the hearing of the case, whichever is later.
   (H)   In addition to the specific conditions imposed by the regulations of
this chapter and whatever additional conditions the Board deems reasonable and
appropriate, special uses shall comply with the height, yard, area, parking,
sign, and all other pertinent regulations for the use district in which they
are permitted unless otherwise specified.
   (I)   In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the
approving Board or with any other conditions imposed upon the special use
permit, the permit shall thereupon immediately become void and of no effect. No
building permits for further construction or certificates of occupancy under
this special use permit shall be issued, and all completed structures shall be
regarded as nonconforming uses subject to the provisions of §§
157.105 through
157.107 provided, however, that the county shall not be prevented from
thereafter rezoning said property for its most appropriate use.
   (J)   The original applicant(s), their successors or their assignee may make
minor changes in the location and/or size of the structure provided the
necessity for these changes is clearly demonstrated. Minor changes shall be
reviewed by the Planning and Building Inspection Departments. Upon approval of
the previously mentioned departments, the Zoning Administrator may approve the
requested minor changes. Such approval shall not be granted should the proposed
revisions cause or contribute to:
      (1)   A change in the character of the development,
      (2)   A change of design for, or an increase in the hazards to pedestrian
and vehicle traffic circulation, or
       (3)   A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from roads and/or
property lines.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.137 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED ON CERTAIN SPECIAL USES.
   The Board of Adjustment or the Board of Commissioners may grant permission
for the establishment of the following uses, subject to any specific conditions
either set forth below or which the Board may deem necessary to satisfy the
conditions set forth in §
157.136.
   (A)   Adult Day Care Center. An adult day care facility may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the dimensional requirements of the
district and provided:
      (1)   Off-street parking meets the requirements of §§
157.150 through
157.159 of this chapter;
      (2)   A paved or otherwise improved driveway, with ingress and egress
directly onto a public street, is constructed in such a manner as to provide
entrance to and exit from the property without backing onto the street right-
of-way;
      (3)   No outside sign in excess of four square feet in area shall be
permitted; and
      (4)   The construction and operation of such facilities shall comply with
the provisions of the General Statutes of the State of North Carolina and any
other applicable Federal, State, or local codes.
   (B)   Bars, cabarets, and discos. May be permitted in districts designated
in the Table of Permitted Uses, provided: bars, cabarets, and discos which,
because of their very nature, are recognized as having potential objectionable
operational characteristics, particularly when located near a residential area,
church, child nursery, school, college or university. Therefore, a minimum
separation of 1,000 feet from the nearest property line of any residential
zoning district, residential use property, church, child nursery, school,
college or university shall be required for purposes of such establishments.
   (C)   Bed and Breakfast Inn. Bed and breakfast inns may be permitted in
districts designated in the Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the
requirements of those districts, and where the buildings are principally used
as private residences, or in accessory structures as defined in §§
157.046 and
157.121(C)(5) of this chapter. Such accommodations are intended to offer
temporary lodging in a private home which usually has architectural and/or
historical interest, rather than the provision of food service or the offering
of facilities for long-term occupancy, such as provided by boarding houses,
inns, and similar guest lodging. Plans for such a use must be submitted to the
Planning Department at the time of request for a special use permit.
   (D)   Cabinet and Woodworking Shop. A cabinet and woodworking shop may be
permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided:
      (1)   No other principle use exists on the property;
      (2)   Maximum lot size of two acres;
      (3)   No more than 25% lot coverage including structure and impervious
surfaces;
      (4)   Must be screened from adjacent residential uses by a vegetative
buffer ten feet in width and which reaches a minimum of six feet in height
within a three-year time period; and
      (5)   A maximum of ten employees.
   (E)   Cemetery. A cemetery may be permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, provided it shall meet the minimum requirements of the
North Carolina Cemetery Commission.
   (F)   Child Day Care Center. A child day care center may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the dimensional requirements of the
district and provided:
      (1)   Off-street parking meets the requirements of §§
157.150 through
157.159;
      (2)   A paved or otherwise improved driveway, with ingress and egress
directly onto a public street, is constructed in such a manner as to provide
entrance to and exit from the property without backing onto the street right-
of-way;
      (3)   The entire play area is enclosed with a fence having a minimum
height of four feet and constructed in such a manner that maximum safety is
ensured.
      (4)   No outside sign in excess of two square feet in area shall be
permitted in residential districts; and
      (5)   The construction and operation of such facilities shall comply with
the provisions of the General Statues of the State of North Carolina and any
other applicable Federal, State, or local codes.
   (G)   Colleges, universities, professional schools, and technical
institutions. Such appropriate educational facilities may be developed in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of those districts and a
case by case review by the Planning Department concerning:
      (1)   Appropriateness and feasibility, including parking, ingress and
egress;
      (2)   Aesthetics; and
      (3)   Compatibility with surrounding land uses.
   (H)   Convenience food store. A convenience food store may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district in which
it is to be located and provided that:
      (1)   The total amount of land devoted to such use shall not exceed one
acre.
      (2)   The gross square footage of the structure shall not exceed 3,000
square feet.
      (3)   The use shall be limited to providing convenience food sales and
gasoline sales to the surrounding residential area, provided that vehicular
services such as, but not limited to, auto repair, sale of auto accessories,
washing, etc. shall not be permitted.
      (4)   A convenience food store shall not be permitted within the interior
of a residential subdivision.
      (5)   Specifications for a proposed principal use sign shall be submitted
with the application for the special use permit.
      (6)   Off-street parking shall meet the requirements outlined in §§
157.150 through
157.159 for retail use.
      (7)   Fuel sales may be approved provided such sales shall be limited to
one pump island located a minimum distance of 30 feet from any street right-of-
way and 40 feet from any side or rear lot line.
   (I)   Duplexes.  Duplexes may be permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and that
the proposed development is in keeping with the rural, low-density requirements
of the district.
   (J)   Event Center. An event center may be permitted in districts designated
in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided:
      (1)   Hours of operation shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later
than 1:00 a.m. when the use abuts a residential use or a residentially zoned
lot;
      (2)   All weddings and events shall adhere to the Pasquotank County Noise
Ordinance and no outside amplified sound is permitted past 11:00 pm;
      (3)   Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one parking
space per four seats or one parking space per four persons of maximum building
occupancy, whichever is greater. Parking surfaces are not required to be paved,
however, parking stops are required;
      (4)   Exterior lighting shall be such that it is not directed onto any
adjacent residential lot;
      (5)   Environmental Health requirements for sewage disposal and water
supply shall be met at all times;
      (6)   Landscaping and buffer yards shall be provided in accordance with
§§
157.150 through
157.159, Development Standards; and
      (7)   On agriculturally zoned property, one on-premise sign is allowed
with a maximum height of eight feet and maximum size of 32 square feet. Sign
setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet from rights-of-way, property lines, and
structures.
   (K)   Fraternal and social organizations. Fraternal and social organizations
may be allowed in the districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district where
located and provided that:
      (1)   The lot size shall be no less than 20,000 square feet for new
construction and no less than 15,000 square feet for the conversion of existing
buildings;
      (2)   The usable floor space shall be no less than 250 square feet per
resident;
      (3)   Off-street parking shall meet the requirements outlined in §§
157.150 through
157.159 of this chapter; and
      (4)   The parking lot shall be provided with a continuous visual buffer
with a minimum height of six feet. The buffer shall be a combined fence and
evergreen hedge or shrubbery screen.
   (L)   Hospital or nursing and personal care facilities. A hospital or
nursing and personal care facility may be permitted in districts designated in
the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the districts and
provided that:
      (1)   The lot size shall be no less than two acres; and
      (2)   The structure shall have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet and
a front yard of at least 25 feet greater than that required of single family
residences within the district in which located.
   (M)   Indoor shooting ranges. Indoor Shooting Ranges may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of that district.
   (N)   Junkyards, scrap processing. A junkyard or scrap processor may be
permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject both to the requirements of that district, and
to the requirements of the "Ordinance Regulating the Operation or Maintenance
of Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards in Pasquotank County" (April, 1987, and
any subsequent amendments), the latter having certain restrictions regarding
fencing and proximity to residential areas. In addition, the following
requirements will apply:
      (1)   All fluids from vehicles, transmission, brake fluid, gasoline, etc.
shall be drained from any vehicle before the vehicle is stored. The fluids
shall be drained into approved containers and be disposed of according to
approved environmental procedures and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
regulations.
      (2)   A cement pad shall be installed for fluid drainage to prevent soil
pollution or contamination.
      (3)   If at any inspection, fluids are determined to have been placed or
drained in the ground/soil, the permit shall be revoked immediately.
      (4)   Unless specifically approved otherwise, vehicles shall not be
stacked.
      (5)   If stacking is specifically approved, the stacked vehicles are to
be shielded in such a manner that they cannot be seen from any adjacent
residentially zoned or residentially used properties.
      (6)   The vehicle storage area shall be contained entirely within a six-
foot high solid fence with a vegetative buffer planted along the outside of the
fence along the entire perimeter of the property.
      (7)   The maximum number of vehicles stored on the site at any one time
may be restricted to a specific number.
      (8)   The vehicle storage area shall not exceed more than 50% of the
property.
   (O)   Mining and quarrying. Mining and quarrying may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the I-1, I-2, A-1,and
A-2 districts with a special use permit except as provided below. The special
use permit shall be issued only if the applicant has received the State of
North Carolina mining permit and complies with the general standards and
following specific standards:
      (1)   Any mine or quarry activity affecting more than one acre (including
excavation, area where overburden is placed, area used for processing or
treatment and settling ponds, access roads, etc.) shall be subject to these
regulations and require a special use permit. In the event that one acre or
less is disturbed, excluding haul roads, such use shall be permitted by right
with a zoning permit in all zoning districts subject to a minimum 100 foot
excavation area setback from all property lines, a maximum 3 to 1 slope above
the water, a maximum 2 to 1 slope in the water, an average minimum depth of
four feet, and a $1,000 bond posted with the Planning and Inspections
Department to ensure proper reclamation of the mine.
      (2)   If at any time a state agency suspends or revokes any permits it
has issued for the mining and quarrying operation, the revocation or suspension
shall cause the special use permit to become void;
      (3)   All state permits and applications for state permits associated
with the mining and quarrying activity, including permit modifications, shall
be filed within ten working days of issuance or submittal in the Planning and
Inspections Department by the applicant;
      (4)   The special use permit shall be valid for a period of ten years
from the date it is granted. In the event the property owner desires to
continue the mining and quarrying operation thereafter, he shall again petition
the Board of Adjustment for a new permit;
      (5)   The hours of operation of all mining and quarrying related
facilities and activities on the mining or quarrying site shall be established
by the Board of Adjustment to minimize:
         (a)   Traffic delays and interruptions on public roads; and
         (b)   Noise levels and sound disturbances to adjoining property owners
and the community at large;
      (6)   Appropriate buffers and screens for mining and quarrying activities
shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment in order to minimize the
negative impacts on adjoining properties and street right-of-ways. The use of
earth berms for visual screening shall be encouraged where appropriate;
      (7)   No activities associated with the mine or quarry, including but not
limited to excavation activities, vehicular access (except for driveways
providing access to the site) and detention ponds, shall be located within 100
feet of any property line and 300 feet of any residence, school, church,
hospital, commercial or industrial building, public road, or cemetery. Setbacks
will be reduced by 50% when there is a visual screen of at least six feet in
height between the mining or quarrying activity and the adjoining use. Further,
the Board of Adjustment may reduce non-modified setbacks by 50% when the mining
or quarrying activity adjoins a vacant parcel or farmland. Where mining or
quarrying activities remove four feet or less of soil and maintain at least one
foot above the seasonal high water table, the mining or quarrying activity
setback shall not be less than 25 feet from any property line or use;
      (8)   When shared with other uses, roads entering mining or quarrying
areas shall be properly graded and drained in order to minimize potholes and
standing water;
      (9)   Where two or more accesses to the mining or quarrying operation
exist, traffic shall be routed to the access having the least negative impact
on adjoining properties;
      (10)   All trucks hauling mined or quarried materials (i.e., sand, clay,
topsoil) shall be covered with a tarpaulin when materials extend above the
raised board of the truck;
      (11)   Overburdened to be used for future reclamation shall be placed
where it will not be disturbed by normal mining or quarrying activities and
shall be stabilized to reduce wind and water erosion. Use of overburden for
earth berms is encouraged to reduce the impact of the mining or quarrying
operation on adjoining properties;
      (12)   No bulk waste, hazardous waste, commercial waste, garbage,
construction or demolition waste shall be placed on site;
      (13)   Discharging of water from the mine or quarry site shall be
permitted subject to obtaining a state permit. The county may take random
samples and have the results tested for settable solids, turbidity, and pH at
the operator's expense. Such testing shall not exceed six tests per year.
Discharging without proper state permits will result in initiating procedures
to revoke the special use permit.
      (14)   No trespassing signs shall be posted around the site being mined
or quarried at a maximum distance of 250 feet apart indicating that a mining or
quarrying operation is being conducted on the property;
      (15)   Reclamation shall be conducted simultaneously with mining and
quarrying operations. Annual reclamation reports shall be submitted to the
Planning and Inspections Department within ten days of being filed with the
state;
      (16)   Drainage patterns shall not be altered so as to cause flooding
off-site while the permit is valid and after reclamation;
      (17)   All provisions of state and local permits issued for the operation
shall be met; and
      (18)   Application/mapping requirements. In addition to all other
application submittal requirements established in this chapter, the applicant
shall provide the following:
         (a)   Name of mine/quarry;
         (b)   Mine/quarry manager, address and phone number;
         (c)   Mining/quarrying methods;
         (d)   Steps taken to maintain haul roads when appropriate;
         (e)   Description of day to day operations;
         (f)   Statement of timing of reclamation;
         (g)   Description of project stages at beginning, halfway through, and
reclamation (size, timing, status of site);
         (h)   Description of sedimentation control measures and drainage
patterns;
         (i)   All state permits issued and all materials turned in to obtain
such permits;
         (j)   Proposed use after mining/quarrying along with site plans and a
description of how sewage will be handled;
         (k)   Boundaries of pit(s);
         (l)   Location of haul roads; and
         (m)   Buffers, existing vegetation on site and berms.
   (P)   Motor sport activities. Motor sport activities may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided that:
      (1)   The hours of operation shall be determined by the Board of
Commissioners based upon surrounding land use and the proposed business
activities (frequency, duration, time of day, etc).
      (2)   All activities shall comply with Pasquotank County Noise Ordinance
and the following:
         (a)   Consideration for adjacent property uses shall be considered
when installing loudspeakers. Location, height, etc. shall be approved by the
Board of Commissioners.
         (b)   Hours of use of the PA system shall be 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.;
unless amended by the Board to accommodate the nature of the business.
      (3)   Access.   
         (a)   Ingress/igress and roads leading to event sites and parking
areas shall:
            1.   Be constructed with a minimum 24-foot width and minimum six-
inch depth stone;
            2.   Have a paved apron at the connection to the state road
extending 50feet into the site beginning at the state road edge of pavement to
minimize loose rocks on the road;
            3.   Be properly maintained with the use of dust control measures
as needed; and
            4.   A second entrance, constructed to the same standards, must be
provided for emergency situations.
            5.   Board of Commissioners may require a traffic study and
increase entrance standards.
         (b)   Supply documentation from NCDOT that a turning lane has been
requested if the site has direct access to a primary road.
      (4)   Required fencing/protection barriers.
         (a)   A controlled access, as approved by the Board of Commissioners,
shall be combined with a treed buffer and enclose all property used for the
activity, excludes parking areas.
         (b)   Opaque fence, minimum six feet in height shall be installed
along portions of the facility that abut residentially used/zoned property
(modified chain link fences are not acceptable).
         (c)   Fencing/protection barriers shall be established between
spectators and participants. Detailed drawings and specifications for materials
shall be included with site plan for approval.
      (5)   Parking.
         (a)   All parking shall be contained within the property boundaries
(no parking on road shoulders); and
         (b)   Parking control shall be provided by the applicant for special
events.
      (6)   Dust control.
         (a)   Dust control shall be provided in the form of a fast growing
evergreen vegetated buffer around dirt areas (fast growing trees include but
not limited to chryptomania, Nellie Stevens Holly, Legostrum). Trees shall be
minimum six feet in height at time of planting. Location of vegetated buffer
and species shall be identified on the site plan and maintained at all times to
remain compliant with the conditional use permit.
         (b)   Irrigation systems and/or water trucks shall be used during
events to control dust. The irrigation system shall be shown on the site plan.
      (7)   Setbacks.
         (a)   All activities shall be located no closer than 500 feet to each
property line;
         (b)   All activities shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet to any
residentially used or residentially zoned property.
      (8)   Adequate trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be provided.
      (9)   Restrooms facilities shall be provided as required by Albemarle
Regional Health Services and/or NC State Building Code. These requirements
shall be submitted at the time of application for the special use permit.
      (10)   Outdoor lighting shall be 90 degree cut-off and the site plan
shall indicate the style and location of all outdoor lighting.
      (11)   The use permit shall be valid for a period of three years from the
date it is granted. If operation of the motor sport activity is desired to
continue, the applicant must petition the Board of Commissioners for a new
permit before the current permit expires.
   (Q)   Moving and storage service. Moving and storage services are permitted
as indicated by the
Table of Permitted Uses. Establishments that require a special use permit in
the A-1, Agricultural District shall also meet the following requirements:
      (1)   All new sites shall be no less than two acres in size.
      (2)   No outside bulk storage shall be permitted.
      (3)   The property where the business is located shall have road frontage
on a state maintained road.
      (4)   The maximum lot coverage permitted for the site shall be 24%.
   (R)   Outdoor recreation establishments commercially operated. These
establishments may be permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided that:
      (1)   Outdoor lighting shall be 90 degree cut-off and the location of all
outdoor lighting shall be shown on the site plan;
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners may set the hours of operation to keep
in harmony with surrounding land uses; and
      (3)   The Board of Commissioners may increase the setback requirements.
   (S)   Outdoor shooting ranges. Outdoor shooting ranges may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided that:
      (1)   All shooting areas shall be setback a minimum distance of 100 feet
from any street right-of-way;
      (2)   The firing range shall have a natural earth embankment a minimum of
15 feet high placed behind all targets within the shooting area;
      (3)   The firing range shall be posted “No Trespassing - Danger -
Shooting Range” at 100- foot intervals around the perimeter;
      (4)   At least one qualified individual in the sponsoring club or
organization shall be certified for shooting range supervision. Each facility
shall adopt safety rules and regulations as determined by the sponsoring club
or organization.
   (T)   Private club or lodge. A private club or lodge may be permitted in
districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided that:
      (1)   All new sites shall be no less than two acres in size:
      (2)   Structures shall have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet and a
front yard of at least 25 feet greater than that required for single family
residences within the district located; and
      (3)   Provisions for food, refreshment, and entertainment for club
members and their guests may be allowed in conjunction with such use if the
Board of Adjustment determines that said provisions will not constitute a
nuisance.
      (4)   Off-street parking shall meet the requirements outlined in §§
157.150 through
157.159 of this chapter; and
      (5)   The parking lot shall be provided with a continuous visual buffer
with a minimum height of six feet. The buffer shall be a combined fence and
evergreen hedge or shrubbery screen.
   (U)   Residential marina. This type of use may be permitted in districts
designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, provided:
      (1)   A buffer shall be provided along all property lines abutting
residential property;
      (2)   Night lighting by design and construction shall be contained on the
site; and
      (3)   A site plan shall be submitted for review and approval.
   (V)   Residential support center. A residential support center may be
permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the districts and
provided that:
      (1)   The structure shall have a minimum side yard of 20 feet and front
yard of 50 feet, and;
      (2)   A paved driveway, with ingress and egress directly onto a public
street, is constructed in such a manner as to provide entrance to exit from the
property without backing onto the street right-of-way.
   (W)   Restaurant/catering. Restaurant/Catering may be permitted in districts
designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided:
      (1)   Restaurant seating shall be limited to 75 seats.
      (2)   Off-street parking shall meet the requirements outlined in §§
157.150 through
157.159 for restaurants and other eating places.
      (3)   A paved or otherwise improved driveway, with ingress and egress
directly onto a public street, is constructed in such manner as to provide
entrance to and exit from the property without backing onto the street right-
of-way.
      (4)   Setback requirements. In addition to minimum setback dimensions
specified in §§
157.120 and
157.121,
Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements, there shall be no structure or
parking within 25 feet of side or rear lot boundary lines.
      (5)   Night lighting by design and construction shall be contained on
site.
      (6)   Proposed restaurant/catering structures located within 100 feet of
a parcel used for residential purposes as its principal use or located within
100 feet of an adjacent residential zoning district shall provide a vegetated
buffer to screen the commercial activity from the residential use.
   (X)   Sanitary landfill. A sanitary landfill may be permitted in districts
designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided that:
      (1)   No refuse shall be deposited within 100 feet of the nearest
property line; and
      (2)   The operation of said fill shall be carried out in accordance with
the requirements of the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources.
   (Y)   Septage disposal. Septage disposal may be permitted in districts
designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses subject to the requirements of the district and
provided:
      (1)   The operation and responsibility of said use shall be carried out
in accordance with all standards and rules prescribed by the N. C. Department
of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources and the County Health Department.
   (Z)   Sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business may be
permitted on parcels accessed by US 17 South and US 17 North (either by direct
access, frontage road, or minor street) in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the districts and
provided that:
      (1)   Structures in which sexually oriented businesses are located shall
not be:
         (a)   Located within 1,320 feet of any building that occupies an
existing sensitive use such as churches or other religious uses, educational
facilities, child or adult daycare facilities, health care facilities, library,
and recreational facilities. This is not intended to be an all inclusive list.
         (b)   Located within 1,320 feet of a residential zoning district.
         (c)   Located within 1,320 feet of an existing structure used for
residential purposes.
         (d)   Located within 500 feet of an existing structure in which a
sexually oriented business is located.
         (e)   Located within 500 feet of an existing structure in which a
restaurant is the principal business.
      (2)   Measurements shall be made along the street right-of-way beginning
at a point perpendicular to the nearest portion of the building or structure
where a sexually oriented business is conducted or is proposed to be conducted
to a point that is perpendicular to the nearest portion of an existing building
or structure occupying a use listed in division (1) above or to a residential
zoning district.
      (3)   Signs. One sign is permitted per sexually oriented business
establishment and said sign shall conform to the following:
         (a)   Maximum size shall be four feet by four feet.
         (b)   Shall depict name of business and business hours only.
         (c)   No photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations.
         (d)   No flashing or obtrusive lights.
      (4)   Sleeping quarters. No sexually-oriented business shall have
sleeping quarters.
      (5)   Prohibition against youth. No person under the age of 18 years
shall be permitted on the premises.
      (6)   Hours of operation. Except for adult motels, sexually oriented
businesses shall be permitted to operate daily only between the hours of 11:00
a.m. through 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday.
      (7)   Setback requirements. In addition to the minimum setback dimensions
specified in §§
157.120 and
157.121,
Table of Area, Yard, and Height Requirements, there shall be no structure or
parking located within 25 feet of side yard lot boundary lines and within 30
feet of rear yard lot boundary lines.
      (8)   All parking areas and exterior entrance/exits shall be fully
illuminated with night-lighting to deter criminal activities. Lighting shall be
shielded so as not interfere with adjoining property owners or traffic
traveling the public highways.
      (9)   Major special use permit required.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually
oriented business without a special use permit issued by the Board of
Commissioners.
         (b)   Application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator. Information shall be submitted to clearly indicate
that items in divisions (1) through (8) listed above are being properly
addressed. Specific information to be submitted shall include:
            1.   A map certified by a registered land surveyor in the State of
North Carolina indicating sufficient information to verify that the proposed
location for the sexually oriented business meets minimum requirements of item
(1) listed above.
            2.   A site plan accurately drawn to a scale no larger than 1"=100'
for the proposed location for the sexually oriented business shall be submitted
to indicate that minimum building setbacks defined in §§
157.120,
157.121 and item (Z)(7) above and parking requirements defined in §§
157.150 through
157.159.
            3.   A scaled drawing of the sign that will be used for identifying
the sexually oriented business.
            4.   A statement defining the type of sexually oriented business
for which the conditional use permit application is submitted. The statement
shall include a description of the product and/or services to be provided.
   (AA)   Solar farms. Solar farms are permitted in districts as designated in
the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   No solar farm shall exceed a maximum of 1,500 acres. The size of a
solar farm shall be calculated based on the parcel size(s) where the
development is located.
      (2)   Solar farms shall observe a minimum separation of one mile from any
other solar farm that has received a use permit approval. This separation shall
be measured from the closest points of the property lines where solar farms are
located and proposed.
      (3)   Structures shall not exceed 25 feet in height, as measured from
grade at the base of the structure to its highest point;
      (4)   All structures and security fencing shall meet the following
setbacks:
         (a)   One hundred fifty feet front property line setback;
         (b)   Fifty feet side and rear property line setback;
         (c)   One hundred fifty feet setback from adjacent residential
property lines or residential zoning districts;
         (d)   One hundred feet minimum setback from adjacent water bodies,
wetlands, or any other additional setback required by the Army Corps of
Engineers or CAMA;
         (e)   One-half mile setback from Highway 17, Future I-87 and Halstead
Boulevard Extended.
      (5)   All exterior sides of the security fence shall be screened with a
landscape buffer that meets one of the following criteria:
         (a)   Existing on-site mature vegetation at a minimum height of ten
feet and depth of 50 feet remains between the security fence and adjacent
property including rights-of-way; or
         (b)   A single row of evergreens in combination with mature
vegetation, installed at a height of five feet achieving opaqueness and a
minimum height of 10 feet in five years; or
         (c)   A double row of off-set evergreens absent existing mature
vegetation, installed at a height of five feet achieving opaqueness and a
minimum height of ten feet in five years; or
         (d)   A berm combined with evergreen vegetation installed at a height
of five feet achieving opaqueness and a minimum height of ten feet in five
years.
      (6)   Solar farms shall be developed in accordance with an approved site
plan that includes the following information:
         (a)   The location of the solar farm facility (including the
arrangement of any existing or proposed buildings, structures, or panels);
         (b)   The distance from any proposed solar farm facility or structure
to the surrounding property lines;
         (c)   Any existing or proposed signs, fencing, lighting, construction
and permanent parking areas, driveways, landscaping, vegetative screening or
required buffers. All parking must be located outside of the state right-of-
way;
         (d)   Horizontal and vertical (elevation) to-scale drawings with
dimensions of proposed solar collector structures.
      (7)   Solar energy components must have a UL listing and must be designed
with anti-reflective coating(s).
      (8)   Landscape buffers, ground cover, security fences, gates, and
signage must be maintained in good condition until the solar farm is dismantled
and removed from the site. Grass, weeds, and other ground cover must not exceed
12 inches in height at any time.
      (9)   An engineered drainage plan meeting the minimum requirements of the
Pasquotank County Stormwater Design Manual shall be required with the submittal
of the major special use permit application. solar farms are required to be
constructed according to their approved drainage plan.
      (10)   Decommissioning.
         (a)   A decommissioning plan shall be required as part of the major
special use permit application. this plan shall be prepared by a third party
engineer and must be signed off by the party responsible for decommissioning
and all landowners of property included in the project. The following items are
required to be addressed or included in the decommissioning plan:
            1.   A description of any agreement (e.g. lease) with all
landowners regarding decommissioning;
            2.   The identification of the party currently responsible for
decommissioning;
            3.   The type of panels and material specifications being utilized
at the site;
            4.   All costs for the removal of solar panels, buildings, cabling,
electrical components, roads, fencing, and any other associated facilities down
to 36 inches below grade;
            5.   All costs associated with the grading and re-seeding of
disturbed earth from the project.
         (b)   Prior to the issuance of the building permit, the
decommissioning plan shall be recorded by the applicant in the Pasquotank
County Registry of Deeds.
         (c)   The decommissioning plan and estimated cost of removal shall be
updated every five years or upon change of ownership of either the property or
the project's owner. Any changes or updates to the plan shall be recorded in
the County's Registry of Deeds.
         (d)   The owner of the solar farm shall provide a bond, cash escrow,
or irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the county in an amount equal to
one and a quarter times the estimated decommissioning cost. Should the solar
farm owner elect to use a letter of credit, it shall be issued by a federally
chartered bank with a branch office in northeastern North Carolina in favor of
Pasquotank County. The institution issuing the guarantee shall provide to the
county a notice no less than 90 days in advance of any renewal, cancellation,
termination, or expiration of the guarantee. The bond or letter of credit shall
remain in full force and effect until any necessary site restoration is
completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed
prior to the issuance of the major special use permit.
         (e)   Solar farms shall have 12 months to complete decommissioning of
the facility if no electricity is generated for a continuous period of 12
months. For purposes of this section, this 12 month period shall not include
delay resulting from force majeure.
         (f)   The decommissioning bond shall be drawn and paid for an amount
equal to the estimated removal costs of the solar facility in the event the
responsible party fails to decommission the solar facility pursuant to the
requirements of this section and the major special use permit.
      (BB)   Temporary field office/storage unit. A temporary field office/
storage unit may be permitted in districts designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the requirements of the district and
provided:
      (1)   Residential subdivision must consist of a minimum ten lots;
      (2)   No more than one unit per ten lots will be permitted;
      (3)   Location for each unit(s) shall be located within the subdivision
so that it is aesthetically pleasing for both the development and all lots
within the subdivision and the adjoining properties. Unit(s) shall not be
located on residential lots that adjoin a state maintained road;
      (4)   Duration for special use permit will be one year. The applicant may
reapply for the special use permit to be extended in increments of no more than
one year. Applications for extensions must be submitted prior to expiration
date of the special use permit; and
      (5)   Unit(s) must be anchored in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications and inspected by the County Building Inspector. Henceforth, a
building permit must be obtained for each unit before it is placed onsite.
   (CC)   Wind energy facilities. Wind energy facilities may be permitted in
districts as designated in the
Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the following requirements:
      (1) Permit applications for a wind energy facility shall contain the
following:
         (a)   A narrative describing the wind energy facility, including an
overview of the project;
         (b)   The proposed total rated capacity of the wind energy facility;
         (c)   The specific number, representative types and height or range of
heights of wind turbines to be constructed; including their rated capacity,
dimensions and respective manufacturers,
and a description of ancillary facilities;
         (d)   Identification and location of the properties on which the
proposed wind energy facility will be located;
         (e)   A site plan showing the planned location of all wind turbines,
property lines, setback lines, access roads and turnout locations, substation
(s), electrical cabling from the wind energy facility to the substation(s),
ancillary equipment, building(s), transmission and distribution lines. The site
plan must also include the location of all structures and property lines,
demonstrating compliance with all applicable setbacks;
         (f)   Any environmental assessment required by the state or federal
law;
         (g)   Other relevant information as may be requested by Pasquotank
County, including but not limited to a shadow flicker analysis, to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
         (h)   Decommissioning plans that describe the anticipated life of the
wind power project, the estimated decommissioning costs in current dollars, the
method for ensuring that funds will be available for decommissioning and
restoration, and the anticipated manner in which the wind power project will be
decommissioned and the site restored;
         (i)   Documentation of agreement between participating landowner(s)
and the applicant; and
         (j)   Signature of the applicant.
      (2)   Throughout the permit process, the applicant shall promptly notify
Pasquotank County of any proposed changes to the information contained in the
permit application that would materially alter the impact of the project.
      (3)   Changes to the approved application that do not materially alter
the initial site plan may be administratively approved by the Pasquotank
Planning Department.
      (4)   A temporary anemometer or meteorological tower, for the purpose of
gathering data on wind speeds and directions, may be installed with the
issuance of a zoning permit and must be setback from all property lines at a
distance equal to one linear foot for every foot of height. Zoning permits
shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewable in the event that
more data is needed to determine the viability of a wind energy project. Prior
to the issuance of a building permit for an anemometer or meteorological tower,
a decommissioning bond or letter of credit shall be required in an amount equal
to the estimated removal cost of the structure.
      (5)   Setbacks shall be calculated by multiplying the required setback
number by the wind turbine height and measured from the center of the wind
turbine base to the property line, nearest point on a public road right-of-way,
or nearest point on the foundation of a dwelling or occupied building.
      (6)   Setback requirements from occupied buildings and property lines may
be waived by adjacent property owners so long as such waiver is in provided in
writing, signed by the property owner and recorded in the Pasquotank Register
of Deeds office.
 
                        Minimum Setback Requirements       
                     Occupied       Occupied      Property
Facility Minimum Lot Buildings*     Buildings*    Lines (Non-   Public Maximum
Type     Size        (Participating (Non-         Participating Roads  Height
                     Property)      Participating Property)
                                    Property)
Small                0.0            1.5           1.0           1.5    120 feet
Facility
Medium   5 acres     1.1            2.0           1.5           1.5    250 feet
Facility
Large    25 acres    1.1            2.5           1.5           1.5    600 feet
Facility
   * For the purposes of this Section, farm or accessory structures shall not
be considered as occupied buildings.
      (7)   Sound and shadow flicker.
         (a)   Audible sound from a wind energy facility shall not exceed 55
dBA, as measured at any occupied building on the property of a non-
participating landowner.
         (b)   Shadow flicker at any occupied building on a non-participating
landowner's property caused by a large wind energy facility must not exceed 30
hours per year.
         (c)   Sound and/or shadow flicker provisions may be waived by a
property owner so long as such waiver is in writing, signed by the property
owner and recorded in the Pasquotank County Register of Deeds office.
      (8)   Installation and design.
         (a)   The installation and design of the wind energy facility shall
conform to the applicable industry standards, including those of the American
National Standards Institute, and take into consideration of local conditions.
         (b)   All structural, electrical and mechanical components of the wind
energy facility shall conform to relevant and applicable local, state, and
national codes.
         (c)   The visual appearance of a wind turbine shall at a minimum:
            1.   Be a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white or gray;
            2.   Not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority that
regulates air safety; and
            3.   Not display advertising (including flags, streamers or
decorative items), except for identification of the wind turbine manufacturer,
facility owner and operator.
      (9)   Decommissioning.
         (a)   The wind energy facility owner shall have 12 months to complete
decommissioning of the wind energy facility if no electricity is generated for
a continuous period of 12 months. This period may be extended by the Pasquotank
County Board of Commissioners, if evidence is provided that the delay is due to
circumstances beyond the facility owner/operator's reasonable control.
         (b)   Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines,
buildings, cabling, electrical components, roads, and any other associated
facilities down to 36 inches below grade.
         (c)   Disturbed earth shall be graded and re-seeded, unless the
landowner requests in writing that the access roads or other land surface areas
are not to be restored.
         (d)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owner of a large
wind energy farm shall provide a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in favor
of the county in an amount equal to the estimated removal cost of the wind
energy farm, less the salvage value of the equipment prior to construction. If
the wind farm owner elects to use a letter of credit, it shall be issued by a
federally chartered bank with a branch office in northeastern North Carolina.
The bond or letter of credit shall remain in full force and effect until any
necessary site restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition
comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance of the use permit.
   (DD)   Wireless communication towers and facilities. Wireless communication
towers and facilities are allowed in accordance with Section 7.01. Table of
Permitted Uses and with the requirements listed below. The removal or
replacement of transmission equipment on an existing wireless communication
tower that does not result in a substantial modification of the wireless
facility and/or ordinary maintenance of existing wireless facilities shall be
permitted by right. These regulations shall not apply to noncommercial amateur/
ham radio towers.
      (1)   Towers and antennas shall be required to maintain a setback from
all property lines a distance equal to 50% of the height of the tower. Towers
shall be setback from existing structures and public rights-of-way a distance
equal to the height of the tower and antenna(s) plus 10%. Guy wires and utility
buildings shall conform to the principal structure setback provisions within §§
157.120 and 157.121, Table of Area, Yard and Height Requirements.
      (2)   Performance security. The applicant and the owner of record of any
proposed wireless telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its
cost and expense, be jointly required to execute and file with the county a
bond, or other form of security acceptable to the county as to type of security
and the form and manner of execution, in an amount set forth in the
commissioners fee schedule, and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by
the county to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of
this chapter. The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full
force and effect until any necessary site restoration is completed to restore
the site to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the issuance
of the original zoning permit.
      (3)   Abandoned or unused towers.
         (a)   Abandoned or unused towers and antennas located on land owned or
leased by the utility owner shall be removed by the utility owner within 365
days of cessation of operations;
         (b)   If the tower/antenna is not removed within the required 365 days
of cessation of operations, the county will attempt to contact the utility
owner and order the removal of the tower/antenna within 60 days of receipt of
the notice. If the county is not successful in contacting the utility owner,
the county will notify the landowner that the tower/antenna must be removed
within 60 days of receipt of the notice; and
         (c)    Upon successful notification to either the utility owner or the
landowner and failure to remove the tower/antenna as ordered, the county may
remove the tower/antenna and tax the costs of removal to the landowner or place
a lien upon the property for the costs of removal if such cost is above the
amount of the performance security.
      (4)   Towers and antennas proposed for local business internal
communication purposes only shall be exempt from the one mile search radius
required.
      (5)   Antennas placed on existing structures shall be considered
accessory uses that are permitted by right subject to a zoning permit provided
they are no higher than 20 feet above the structure to which they are attached
and a qualified and licensed engineer certifies the existing structure can
suitably accept the antenna. No additional setbacks shall be required for
antennas placed on existing structures, excluding existing towers. Antennas
that are placed on existing towers cannot be placed above that which exists
unless required setbacks can be met.
      (6)   No new or existing tower and antenna service shall interfere with
public safety telecommunications. Further, where it can be shown that
telecommunication service interferes with reception received by surrounding
properties, the permit holder shall be responsible for taking reasonable steps
to eliminate that interference in accordance with Federal Communications
Commission regulations.
      (7)   Prior to obtaining a building permit, the applicant shall submit
proof of compliance with Federal Aviation Administration and Federal
Communications Commission regulations and any other documentation to
demonstrate compliance with state building code regulations.
      (8)   Every tower, affixed to the ground, and guy wires shall be
protected to discourage climbing by unauthorized persons. The base of the tower
along with any individual guy wires shall be enclosed by a commercial grade
chain link fence (or some other fence of equal or greater quality) a minimum of
eight feet in height, and in addition to, shall include a minimum of two
strands of barbed-wire and/or razor wire affixed to the top of the fence.
      (9)   The permit, when issued, shall include a condition that the
accumulative electromagnetic radiation levels maintain compliance with
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), regarding emission
of electromagnetic radiation. The tower or antenna owner shall provide
documentation of accumulative emission levels to FCC standards.
      (10)   When deemed appropriate to minimize the potential impact on
surrounding properties, landscaping may be required around the tower, antenna,
guy wires, and associated buildings. In addition, the following shall be
required:
         (a)   Existing mature tree growth and natural vegetation on the site
shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided however, that vegetation
that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment
facility may be trimmed or removed;
         (b)   Grading for the new tower or antenna shall be minimized and
limited only to the area necessary for the new facility.
      (11)    All telecommunication facilities and accessory or associated
facilities shall maximize the use of building materials, colors and textures
designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and /or to
harmonize with the natural surroundings, this shall include the utilization of
stealth technology.
      (12)    Wireless communication towers may not be illuminated or marked
except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
      (13)   Towers and antennas shall not display any signage, logos, decals,
symbols or any messages of a commercial or noncommercial nature, except for a
small message containing provider identification and emergency telephone
numbers and such other information as may be required by local, state or
federal regulations governing tower and antenna facilities.
      (14)    No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers or the
like are permitted.
      (15)     Shared facilities and collocation. 
         (a)   All new tower and antenna facilities (other than those proposed
for local business utilization) shall be engineered, designed and constructed
to be capable of sharing the facility with other applicants, to collocate with
other existing tower and antenna facilities and to accommodate the future
collocation of other tower and antenna facilities. A permit for a tower shall
not being issued until the applicant proposing a new tower and antenna facility
shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good faith attempt to locate
its antenna facility on an existing structure. Competitive conflict and
financial burden alone are not deemed to be adequate reasons against
collocation.
         (b)   All towers and antenna facilities (other than those proposed for
local business utilization) with a support structure up to a height of 150 feet
shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three antenna
arrays. All towers and antenna facilities with support structures 150 feet or
greater in height shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least
four antenna arrays.
         (c)   Collocation agreements. All applicants for towers and antenna
facilities (other than those proposed for local business utilization) are
required to submit a statement with the application for a zoning permit
agreeing to allow and reasonably market collocation opportunities to other
tower and antenna facility users. The statement shall include the applicant's
policy regarding collocation of other providers and the methodology to be used
by the applicant in determining reasonable rates to be charged other providers.
      (16)    A proposal for a new wireless communication tower shall not be
approved unless the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on existing or approved towers, buildings or alternative
structures within a one-mile search radius of the proposed wireless
communications facility due to one or more of the following reasons:
         (a)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of
the existing or approved tower, building or structures, as documented by a
qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer, and the existing
or approved tower, building or structure cannot be reinforced, modified or
replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
         (b)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially
impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower,
building or other structure as documented by a qualified and licensed North
Carolina professional engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
         (c)   Existing or approved towers, buildings or other structures
within the search radius, or combinations thereof, cannot accommodate the
planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by
a qualified and licensed North Carolina professional engineer.
         (d)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
planned telecommunication equipment upon an existing or approved tower,
building or other structure.
      (17)   All applications for wireless communications towers shall include
the following:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee
of the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be situated. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is
proposed, the written consent of the owner shall be evidenced in the
application.
         (b)   The legal description, parcel identification number, and address
of the parcel of land upon which the tower is proposed to be situated.
         (c)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of
other towers or usable antenna support structures within a one mile radius of
the proposed new tower site, including county-owned property.
         (d)   A site plan that must be signed and sealed by a qualified and
licensed North Carolina professional engineer. All plans shall include a
certification that the tower is designed to be structurally sound and in
conformance with the state building code, and any other standards outlined in
this chapter.
         (e)   Color, photo simulations showing the proposed site of the tower
with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed tower as it would appear
viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways.
         (f)   A copy of the Federal Communications Commission license
applicable for the intended use of the structure.
         (g)   Certification from the Federal Aviation Administration that the
proposed wireless communication facility will not propose a hazard to air
navigation.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 157.150 OFF-STREET PARKING AND OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required number. Off-street parking space (either garage or properly
graded open space) shall be provided in accordance with §
157.151. In cases where different parking and/or loading requirements are
specified in §
157.135, Provisions for Special Uses, those ratios shall have precedence over
the parking requirements specified in this section.
   (B)   Parking, stacking and loading space required. If a change in use
causes an increase in the required number of off-street parking, stacking or
loading spaces, such additional spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; except that if the change in use would require an
increase of less than 5% in the required number of parking spaces, no
additional off-street parking shall be required. If existing land uses are
converted to another type of land use or re-classified by this chapter, then
the off-street ratios as contained herein must be complied with.
   (C)   Parking compliance and certificate of occupancy. The certificate of
occupancy/compliance for the use of any building, structure or land where off-
street parking or loading space is required shall be withheld by the Pasquotank
County Building Inspector until provisions of this section are fully met. If at
any time such compliance ceases, any certificate of occupancy/ compliance which
shall have been issued for the use of the property shall immediately become
void and of no effect.
   (D)   Handicapped spaces. Spaces for the physically handicapped shall be
provided as required by the NC Building Code.
   (E)   Maintenance. All parking, stacking, and loading facilities shall be
permanently maintained by the owners or occupants as long as the use they serve
exists.
     (F)   Access. All parking, stacking and loading facilities shall have
vehicular access to a public street or approved private street. Where parking
or loading areas are provided adjacent to a public street, ingress or egress
thereto shall be made only through driveways or openings not exceeding 25 feet
in width at the curb line of said street, except where the Administrator or
Enforcement Officer finds that a greater width is necessary to accommodate the
vehicles customarily using the driveway. Upon the recommendation of the
Technical Review Committee, driveways shall not be closer than 100 feet to an
existing intersection.
   (G)   Number of parking spaces and stacking spaces required.
      (1)   The minimum number of required off-street parking and stacking
spaces is indicated in §
157.151.
      (2)   Whenever the number of parking spaces required by §
157.151 results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-
half or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be
counted as one parking space.
      (3)   For any use not specifically listed in §
157.151, the parking and stacking requirements shall be those of the most
similar listed use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   The parking spaces required by this chapter may not be used for any
purpose other than parking.
      (5)   Sales, storage, repair, dismantling and service of motor vehicles
shall not be permitted within required parking areas, including parking spaces
and drive aisles.
      (6)   Lots containing more than one use must provide parking and loading
areas in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses.
   (H)   Design standards for parking, stacking and loading areas.
      (1)   Parking facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to:
         (a)   Allow unobstructed movement into and out of each parking space
without interfering with fixed objects or vehicles;
         (b)   Minimize delay and interference with traffic on public streets
and access drives;   
         (c)   Maximize sight distances from parking lot exits and access
drives; and
         (d)   Allow off-street parking spaces in parking lots to have access
from parking lot driveways and not directly from streets. No parking, other
than those used for residential uses, shall be provided that would necessitate
an automobile backing onto any street right-of-way.   
         (e)   Minimize the impact on drainage facilities. No parking space or
loading area shall be located within a drainage easement. Driveways may be
located across drainage easements where needed to provide access to a right-of-
way.
      (2)   Dimensional requirements.
         (a)   Parking space dimensions shall be a minimum of ten feet by 20
feet.
         (b)   Drive aisles shall be a minimum of 12 feet for one-way traffic
and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
         (c) Stacking spaces shall be 12 feet by 20 feet.
      (3)   Improvements.
         (a)   Paving.
            1.   Required parking spaces, access drives, and loading areas
shall be graded, paved and maintained with concrete, asphalt, or similar
material of sufficient thickness and consistency to support anticipated traffic
volumes and weights. However, upon the approval of the TRC, access drives, and
loading areas may be surface with either a permeable (turf block) or semi-
permeable gravel, cobble stone or a semi-permeable tar/gravel mixture)
material. Such materials shall provide a durable and dustless surface, minimize
runoff, and dispose of accumulated water.
               a.   Where permeable or semi-permeable materials are used, a
retaining border, such as concrete curbing or other suitable material, shall be
provided around parking lot area edges to aid in stabilizing the surface
material.
               b.   Parking lots shall not drain onto adjacent property except
in approved stormwater retention facilities or drainage easements.
            2.   Paved aprons for access drives shall be installed and
maintained from the right-of-way to a point at least ten feet beyond the right-
of-way line for all parking and loading facilities, whether paved or unpaved.
            3.   Paving shall not be required for the following uses provided
they are constructed with a permeable (turf block) or semi-permeable(gravel,
cobble stone or a semi-permeable tar/gravel mixture) surface:
               a.   Parking facilities used on an irregular basis for churches,
private clubs or other similar nonprofit organizations.
               b.   Parking facilities for residential uses where six or fewer
spaces are required.
               c.   Parking areas in the I-1 and I-2, Industrial Districts.
               d.   Parking areas for tracked heavy construction equipment,
skid-mounted equipment.
               e.   Parking areas for agricultural uses in the A-1 or A-2,
Agricultural Zoning Districts.
            4.   Where parking facilities are paved, curb and gutter or an
equivalent drainage system shall be provided along the periphery of the parking
lot, except where it is determined by the TRC that such system is not practical
for storm drainage purposes. Where gravel parking lots are permitted, cross
ties shall be provided around the perimeter of the parking lot.
            5.   All parking facilities shall be graded, properly drained,
stabilized, and maintained to minimize dust and erosion.
            6.   All parking spaces and stacking lanes shall be clearly
identified with paint lines, bumper guards, curbs, or similar treatment.
            7.   All parking spaces shall be provided with wheel guards or
curbs located so that no part of the parked vehicle will extend beyond the
property line or encroach more than two feet into a required planting area.
            8.   Concrete pads for stationary refuse containers shall be
provided beneath and in the approach to each container.
            9.   Parking lots shall be designed and constructed such that
walkways shall maintain a minimum unobstructed width of four feet (vehicle
encroachment is calculated as two feet beyond curb).
   (I)   Off-site parking. When required off-street parking is permitted to be
located off-site, it shall begin within 200 feet of the lot containing the
principal use.
   (J)   Combined parking. 
      (1)   Separate uses. The required parking for separate or mixed uses may
be combined in one facility.   
      (2)   Shared parking. A maximum of 50% of the parking spaces required for
a church, theatre, auditorium or assembly hall or other similar use may also
serve as required spaces for another use located on the same lot. Shared spaces
may also be located off-site as allowed in this section. In either case, the
Zoning Administrator must determine that the various activities will have peak
parking demand at different periods of the day or week. Otherwise, no off-
street parking required for one building or use shall be applied toward the
requirements of any other building or use.   
      (3)   Reassignment. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be
leased or otherwise assigned to another use except as provided in division (2)
above.
   (K)   Loading areas.
      (1)   Location. Off-street loading areas shall be located on lots with
the same zoning classification as the use they serve.
      (2)   Design standards.
         (a)   Minimum number of loading spaces required.
            1.   Retail operations, including restaurant and dining facilities
within hotels and office buildings:
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) Number of Spaces
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)                             Number of Spaces
0 - 10,000                                             0
10,001 - 40,000                                        1
40,001 - 100,000                                       2
100,001 - 160,000                                      3
160,001 - 240,000                                      4
240,001 - 320,000                                      5
320,001 - 400,000                                      6
For each additional 90,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof    1
 
            2.   Office buildings and hotels.
 
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)                              Number of Spaces
0 - 20,000                                              0
20,001 - 40,000                                         1
40,001 - 75,000                                         2
75,001 - 150,000                                        3
150,001 - 250,000                                       4
For each additional 250,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof 1
 
            3.   Industrial and wholesale operations.
 
Gross Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)                   Number of Spaces
0 - 100,000                                  0
For each 100,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof 1
 
         (b)   Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide, 65 feet long,
and 14 feet in clearance. Loading areas shall be improved in accordance with
the requirements of §
157.150(H)(3).
         (c)   All off-street loading areas shall be arranged and marked to
provide for orderly and safe unloading and loading, and shall not hinder the
free movement of vehicles and pedestrians. All loading and unloading maneuvers
shall take place on private property. No backing in from a street or
maneuvering on the street right-of-way shall be permitted.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.151 MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
Use Spaces Required
Use                                                                               Spaces
                                                                                  Required
Business, Professional and Personal Services                                       
                                                                                  3/service bay
                                                                                  plus 1/wrecker
                                                                                  or service
Automobile repair services                                                        vehicle plus
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift
                                                                                  1/200 sq. ft.
                                                                                  of gross floor
                                                                                  area plus
                                                                                  stacking for 4
Banks and financial institutions                                                  vehicles at
                                                                                  each drive-
                                                                                  through window
                                                                                  or automatic
                                                                                  teller machine
Barber and beauty shops                                                           3/operator
                                                                                  1/every
                                                                                  employee
                                                                                  during the
                                                                                  largest shift
Businesses which do not cater to retail customers or trade                        plus 1 space
                                                                                  for every
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in the
                                                                                  operation
Car Washes                                                                         
                                                                                  *Stacking for
                                                                                  30 vehicles or
                                                                                  10/approach
                                                                                  lane,
                                                                                  whichever is
   Full-service                                                                greater plus 3
                                                                                  spaces in the
                                                                                  manual drying
                                                                                  area plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift
                                                                                  *3 stacking
                                                                                  spaces/
   Self-service                                                                approach lane
                                                                                  plus 2 drying
                                                                                  spaces/stall
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on largest
Delivery services                                                                 shift plus 1/
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in the
                                                                                  operation
                                                                                  1/200 square
Equipment rental and leasing                                                      feet gross
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  1/4 seats in
                                                                                  main chapel
                                                                                  plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
Funeral homes                                                                     the largest
                                                                                  shift plus l/
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in the largest
                                                                                  operation
Hotels and Motels Containing...                                                    
   5,000 square feet or less ancillary space, i.e. restaurant, meeting rooms,  1.1/rental
lounge or lobby or a restaurant/lounge 3,000 sq. ft. or less                      unit
 
   More than 5,000 sq. ft. of ancillary space, i.e. restaurant, meeting rooms, 1.25/rental
lounge or lobby or a restaurant/lounge containing over 3,000 sq. ft.              unit
                                                                                  1/300 sq. ft.
                                                                                  of sales,
                                                                                  grooming, or
                                                                                  customer
Kennels or pet grooming                                                           waiting area
                                                                                  plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift
                                                                                  1/4 pieces of
Laundromat (coin operated)                                                        rental
                                                                                  equipment
                                                                                  *2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift plus 1/
                                                                                  vehicle used
Laundry and dry cleaning plants or substation                                     in the
                                                                                  operation plus
                                                                                  stacking for 4
                                                                                  vehicles/
                                                                                  pickup station
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
Laboratories                                                                      shift plus 1/
                                                                                  250 sq. ft. of
                                                                                  office space
                                                                                  3/examining
                                                                                  room plus 1/
Medical, dental, or related offices                                               employee
                                                                                  including
                                                                                  doctors
                                                                                  1/1000 sq. ft.
Motion picture production                                                         of gross floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  1/250 sq. ft.
Offices not otherwise classified                                                  of gross floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on largest
Repair of bulky items (appliances, furniture, boats and the like)                 shift plus 1/
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in operation
Theaters (indoor)                                                                 1/4 seats
Truck wash                                                                        *3 stacking
                                                                                  spaces/stall
                                                                                  4/doctor plus
Veterinary service                                                                1/employee
                                                                                  including
                                                                                  doctors
                                                                                  1/100 sq. ft.
                                                                                  of classroom
Vocational, business or secretarial schools                                       space plus 1/
                                                                                  250 sq. ft. of
                                                                                  office space
                                                                                  1/250 sq. feet
                                                                                  gross floor
Services and repairs not otherwise classified                                     area plus 1/
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in the
                                                                                  operation
                                                                                  *Stacking for
                                                                                  4 vehicles at
                                                                                  each bay,
                                                                                  window, lane,
Drive-thru not otherwise classified                                               ordering
                                                                                  station or
                                                                                  machine in
                                                                                  addition to
                                                                                  the use
                                                                                  requirement***
Educational and Institutional Uses                                                 
                                                                                  1/employee on
Ambulance services; fire stations; law enforcement stations                       the largest
                                                                                  shift
Churches                                                                          1/4 seats in
                                                                                 main chapel
                                                                                  7/classroom
                                                                                  plus 1/4 beds
                                                                                  in main campus
                                                                                  dorms plus 1/
                                                                                  250 square
Colleges and universities                                                         feet of office
                                                                                  space plus 1/
                                                                                  5 fixed seats
                                                                                  in assembly
                                                                                  halls and
                                                                                  stadiums
                                                                                  1/10 inmates
                                                                                  plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
Correctional institutions                                                         largest shift
                                                                                  plus 1/vehicle
                                                                                  used in the
                                                                                  operation
                                                                                  1/employee
                                                                                  plus 1/10
Day care, child or adult                                                          clients served
                                                                                  with parking
                                                                                  located on-
                                                                                  site
                                                                                  3/room used
Elementary and middle schools                                                     for offices
                                                                                  plus 3/
                                                                                  classroom
                                                                                  1/150 square
                                                                                  feet of public
Government offices; post offices                                                  service area
                                                                                  plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
                                                                                  largest shift
                                                                                  1/4 in-patient
                                                                                  or out-patient
                                                                                  beds plus 2/
Hospitals                                                                         3 employees on
                                                                                  largest shift
                                                                                  plus 1/staff
                                                                                  doctor
                                                                                  1/450 square
                                                                                  feet of gross
                                                                                  floor area for
Libraries; museums and art galleries                                              public use
                                                                                  plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift
                                                                                  1/4 beds plus
                                                                                  1/employee and
                                                                                  visiting
Nursing and convalescent homes                                                    specialist
                                                                                  plus 1/vehicle
                                                                                  used in the
                                                                                  operation
                                                                                  3/room used
Senior high schools                                                               for offices
                                                                                  plus 7/
                                                                                  classroom
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift plus 1/
                                                                                  200 sq. ft. of
Manufacturing and Industrial Uses                                                 retail sales
                                                                                  or customer
                                                                                  service area
                                                                                  plus 1/vehicle
                                                                                  used in the
                                                                                  operation
Residential Uses                                                                   
                                                                                  1/bedroom plus
Bed and breakfast                                                                 2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift
Multi-family Dwellings (including condominiums)                                    
1 bedroom units                                                                   1.5/unit
2 bedroom units                                                                   1.75/unit
3 or more bedroom units                                                           2.00/unit
Single-family detached and two-family dwellings; manufactured homes; townhouse    2/dwelling
dwellings; manufactured home parks                                                unit on the
                                                                                  same lot
                                                                                  1/4 beds plus
                                                                                  1/employee
Residential care facilities                                                       plus 1/vehicle
                                                                                  used in the
                                                                                  operation
Recreational Uses                                                                  
                                                                                  1/200 square
Amusement parks; fairgrounds; skating rinks                                       feet of
                                                                                  activity area
Athletic fields                                                                   25/field
                                                                                  1/5 persons
                                                                                  based upon the
Auditorium; assembly hall; convention center; stadium                             design
                                                                                  capacity of
                                                                                  the building
                                                                                  1/4 spectator
Automobile raceways                                                               seats plus 1/
                                                                                 employee on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift
Batting cages, golf driving ranges; miniature golf; shooting ranges (indoor and   1/cage, tee,
outdoor)                                                                          or firing
                                                                                  point
Billiard parlors; tennis courts                                                   3/table or
                                                                                  court
Bowling centers                                                                   4/lane
Clubs; coin-operated amusement; physical fitness centers and similar indoor       1/200 sq. ft.
recreation                                                                        of gross floor
                                                                                  area
Commercial stables                                                                1/2 stalls
                                                                                  1/200 sq. ft.
Dance studios                                                                     gross floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  1/go-cart plus
Go-cart raceways                                                                  1/employee on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift
Retail Trade**                                                                     
                                                                                  1/3 persons
                                                                                  based upon the
                                                                                  design
                                                                                  capacity of
Bars, night clubs, taverns                                                        building plus
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift, located
                                                                                  on the same
                                                                                  zone lot
                                                                                  1/200 sq. ft.
                                                                                  gross floor
Convenience stores                                                                area plus 2
                                                                                  stacking
                                                                                  spaces at pump
                                                                                  islands
Department stores, food stores                                                    1/200 sq. ft.
                                                                                 gross floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on largest
Fuel oil sales                                                                    shift plus 1/
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in the
                                                                                  operation
                                                                                  1/1,000 sq.
Furniture; floor covering sales                                                   ft. gross
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  5 spaces plus
                                                                                  1/10,000 sq.
Motor vehicle, motorcycle, or recreational vehicle sales or rental; manufactured  ft. of display
home sales                                                                        area plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift
                                                                                  *l/4 seats
                                                                                  plus 2/
                                                                                  3 employees on
                                                                                  the largest
                                                                                  shift and 10
Restaurants                                                                       total stacking
                                                                                  spaces with
                                                                                  minimum 5
                                                                                  spaces at or
                                                                                  before
                                                                                  ordering
                                                                                  station***
                                                                                  1/200 sq. ft.
Retail sales not otherwise classified                                             gross floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  1/500 sq. ft.
Retail sales of bulky items (appliances, building materials and the like)         gross floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  *3/service bay
                                                                                  plus 1/wrecker
                                                                                  or service
                                                                                  vehicle plus
Service stations, gasoline sales                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                 on largest
                                                                                  shift plus 4
                                                                                  stacking
                                                                                  spaces at pump
                                                                                  islands
Transportation, Warehousing and Utilities                                          
                                                                                  1/4 seats plus
Airport, bus and railroad terminals                                               2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift
Communications towers; demolitions debris landfills; heliports; utility lines or  No required
substations                                                                       parking
                                                                                  1 space/5,000
Self-storage warehouses                                                           sq. ft.
                                                                                  devoted to
                                                                                  storage
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
Transportation, warehousing and utility uses not otherwise classified             shift plus 1/
                                                                                  vehicle used
                                                                                  in the
                                                                                  operation
Wholesale Trade                                                                    
                                                                                  1/1,000 sq.
Market showroom                                                                   ft. gross
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  2/3 employees
                                                                                  on the largest
                                                                                  shift plus 1/
                                                                                  200 sq. ft. of
Wholesale uses                                                                    retail sales
                                                                                  or customer
                                                                                  service area
                                                                                  plus 1/vehicle
                                                                                  used in the
                                                                                  operation
Other Uses                                                                         
                                                                                  1 /1,000 sq.
                                                                                  ft. of lot
Flea markets; other open air sales                                                area used for
                                                                                  storage, sales
                                                                                  and display
Shopping centers **                                                                
                                                                                  1/200 sq. ft.
                                                                                  gross floor
                                                                                  area in main
                                                                                  building(s)
   <250,000 sq. ft. gross floor area                                           (excluding
                                                                                 theaters) plus
                                                                                  parking as
                                                                                  required for
                                                                                  outparcels or
                                                                                  theaters
                                                                                  1,250 spaces
                                                                                  plus 1/225 sq.
   >250,000 sq. ft. gross floor area                                           ft. gross
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  above 250,000
                                                                                  sq. ft.
 
/ = Per
* = NCDOT may require additional stacking spaces on state or federal highways.
** = For retail uses and shopping centers, storage areas are not calculated as
gross floor area.
*** = Stacking spaces for drive-thru shall not block access to parking spaces.
§ 157.152 LANDSCAPING AND BUFFER YARDS.
   (A)    These regulations shall apply to all newly developed properties other
than single family residential uses. They shall also apply to expansions or
changes in the uses listed above, which result in the expansion of gross floor
area or land surface area over 25%.
   (B)   Bona-fide agricultural operations shall be exempt from landscaping and
bufferyard requirements.
   (C)   Landscaping material over three inches in height shall not be
installed in any of the following locations:
      (1)   Within a radius of eight feet around any fire hydrant;
      (2)   Within a public right-of-way; or
      (3)   Within a drainage and utility easement.
   (D)   In instances where the area represented by a site plan is
significantly less than the total area of the lot of record, the Zoning
Administrator may permit a reduction in the required buffer. This reduction may
only be allowed on the portion of the property that is not proposed for
development, and shall only be granted if the Zoning Administrator finds that
surrounding properties will not be negatively affected by the buffer reduction.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.153 LANDSCAPE AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREET YARD BUFFERS.
   (A)    A 30-foot street buffer is required adjacent to all public and
private right-of-ways.
   (B)   Parking, merchandise display and off-loading areas are prohibited in
the street yard buffer.
   (C)   The required bufferyard shall contain a minimum of one canopy tree for
each 50 linear feet of street frontage.
   (D)   The bufferyard shall also contain evergreen shrubs, planted four feet
on center.
   (E)   The portion of the planter yard containing trees and shrubs shall be
covered with a ground cover or natural mulch of a minimum depth of three
inches. The remaining area shall be planted with grass.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.154 LANDSCAPING WITHIN PARKING AREAS.
   (A)    At least 30% of an open parking lot area shall be covered by tree
shade within 15 years of initial planting. Such tree shading shall be
accomplished by providing one shade tree island of no less than one parking
space in size (10 feet by 20 feet) for every ten parking spaces.
   (B)   Each island shall contain at least one canopy tree. In addition, bark,
mulch, grass, low ground cover, shrubbery, or other live plant material shall
be used within each landscape planting area.
   (C)   Landscape islands may be counted as a parking space when computing the
total number of spaces required by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.155 PROPERTY LINE BUFFERS.
    Multi-family and nonresidential uses located adjacent to a residential use,
residential zoning district or agricultural zoning district shall provide the
following buffer yard:
   (A)   A minimum 30 foot perpetually maintained natural or planted buffer
yard along all property lines directly abutting a residential use, residential
zoning district or agricultural zoning district.
   (B)   The buffer yard shall contain three canopy trees, five understory
trees and 25 shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer yard.
   (C)   All portions of the buffer yard not planted with trees and shrubs or
covered by a wall or other barrier shall be planted with grass, groundcover, or
natural mulch of a minimum depth of three inches.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.156 ADDITIONAL BUFFER YARDS AND SCREENING.
   (A)    Any outside storage of junk, refuse, salvage, or discarded materials
shall be screened from adjacent rights-of-way and adjacent properties.
   (B)   Solid waste collection dumpsters located adjacent to a residence,
residentially zoned lot, or in view of a street right-of-way shall be screened
from the view of adjoining properties and street rights-of-way.
   (C)   Screening as required by this section, shall be accomplished by an
opaque wood or masonry fence or wall that is at least eight feet in height.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.157 FEATURES ALLOWED WITHIN BUFFER YARDS.
   (A)    Utility lines, water and wastewater lines, septic system reserve
areas, drainage facilities, sidewalks, driveways, and other similar
improvements may be located within buffer yards provided that the total width
of the buffer yard is maintained and no screening required by this chapter is
reduced or eliminated.
   (B)   Signs are permitted within buffer yards provided that the placement of
such signs will not violate other provisions of the zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Buffer yards may not be used for parking, loading, storage, or any
activity that is either part of or accessory to the proposed use.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.158 PLANT MATERIALS.
   (A)    The preservation of existing trees and vegetation is encouraged and
may be used to satisfy the requirements within this chapter, provided that the
vegetation meets or exceeds screening requirements.
   (B)   Plants must be installed in a manner that maximizes screening
objectives and meets the needs of the particular species of plants for root
space, water, light and circulation.
   (C)   Plants must be of the following minimum heights at the time of
planting:
      (1)    Canopy trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and two
inches in caliper (measured six inches above grade).
      (2)   Understory trees shall be a minimum of four feet high and one inch
in caliper (measured six inches above grade).
      (3)   Shrubs shall be at least 1.5 feet in height and be of a variety
that has an average mature height of at least three feet.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.159 PLANT INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)    All landscaping and screening materials must be installed prior to a
final inspection by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   When extreme weather conditions do not permit planting, installation
of plant material may be delayed until the start of the next growing season. In
cases where planting is delayed, the developer must submit a landscape
performance bond equal to the cost of plant materials, installation costs, plus
25%. The bond must be received prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
and shall not be held by the Zoning Administrator for a period longer than six
months.
   (C)   All landscaping and screening must be maintained. Any required
landscape materials, including shrubs and trees which may die, must be replaced
within 90 days in compliance with the minimum standards of this chapter.
Failure to maintain required landscaping and buffers shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
§ 157.170 DEFINITIONS.
    Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the terms defined below are
used in this subchapter in the following manner:
   DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY. A nonconforming situation that occurs when the
height, size, or minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between
an existing building or buildings and other buildings or lot lines does not
conform to the regulations applicable to the district in which the property is
located.
   EXPENDITURE. A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to
fulfill some obligation. Whenever the term is used hereafter, it also includes
binding, contractual commitments to make further expenditures, as well as any
other substantial changes in position.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot existing at the effective date of this chapter or
any amendment to it (and not created for the purpose of evading the
restrictions of this chapter) that cannot meet the minimum area or lot-width
requirements of the district in which the lot is located.
   NONCONFORMING PROJECT. Any structure, development, or undertaking that is
incomplete at the effective date of this chapter and would be inconsistent with
any regulation applicable to the district in which it is located if completed
as proposed or planned.
   NONCONFORMING SITUATION. A situation that occurs when, on the effective date
of this chapter or any amendment to it, an existing lot or structure or use of
an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of the regulations
applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is located. Among
other possibilities, a non-conforming situation may arise because a lot does
not meet minimum acreage requirements, because structures do not satisfy
maximum height or minimum floor-space limitations, because the relationship
between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and setback
requirements) is not in conformity with this chapter or because land or
buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is
used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations
applicable to the district in which the property is located. (For example, a
commercial office building in a residential district may be a nonconforming
use.) The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the
property. (For example, all the activity associated with running a bakery in a
residentially zoned area is a nonconforming use.)
   THIS CHAPTER. Includes any amendments. Whenever the effective date of this
chapter is referred to, the reference includes the effective date of any
amendment to it.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.171 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS AND COMPLETION OF
NONCONFORMING PROJECTS.
   (A)    Nonconforming situations that were otherwise lawful on the effective
date of this chapter may be continued, subject to the restrictions and
qualifications set forth in §§
157.172 through
157.177.
   (B)   Nonconforming projects may be completed only in accordance with the
provisions of §
157.177.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.172 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)    When a nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the
regulations (other than the area or width requirements) applicable to the
district in which the lot is located, such a use may be made as of right.
Otherwise, the nonconforming lot may be used only in accordance with a use
permit issued by the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall issue such a permit
if it finds that (i) the proposed use is one permitted by the regulations
applicable to the district in which the property is located, and (ii) the
property can be developed as proposed without any significant negative impact
on the surrounding property or the public health, safety, or welfare. In
issuing the permit authorized by this paragraph, the Board may allow deviations
from applicable dimensional requirements (such as setback lines and yard size
minimums) if it finds that no reasonable use of the property can be made
without such deviations.
   (B)   Whenever this chapter creates a nonconforming lot and the owner of the
nonconforming lot also owns land adjacent to it, and a portion of this other
land can be combined with the nonconforming lot to create a conforming lot
(without hereby creating other nonconformities), the owner of the nonconforming
lot, or his successor in interest, may not take advantage of the provisions of
division (A) of this section.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.173 EXTENSION OR ENLARGEMENT OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.
   (A)    Except as specifically provided in this section, it shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent
of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation.
   (B)   Subject to division (D) of this section, a nonconforming use may be
extended throughout any portion of a completed building that, when the use was
made nonconforming by this chapter, was manifestly designed or arranged to
accommodate such use. However, subject to §
157.177 of this subchapter (authorizing the completion on nonconforming
projects in certain circumstances), a nonconforming use may not be extended to
additional buildings or to land outside the original building.
   (C)   Subject to §
157.177 of this chapter (authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects
in certain circumstances), a nonconforming use of open land may not be extended
to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming.
   (D)   The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a
nonconforming situation exists may be increased and the equipment or processes
used at a location where a nonconforming situation exists may be changed if
these or similar changes amount only to changes in the degree of activity
rather than changes in kind of activity and no violations of other paragraphs
of this section occur.
   (E)   Physical alteration of structures or the placement of new structures
on open land are unlawful if they result in:
      (1)   An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming
use;
      (2)   Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions such
as yard requirements, height limitations, or density requirements; or
      (3)   The enclosure of previously unenclosed area, even though those
areas were previously used in connection with the nonconforming activity. An
area is unenclosed unless at least 75% of the perimeter of the area is marked
by a permanently constructed wall or fence.
   (F)   Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of property where
nonconforming situations exist are permitted and encouraged. Major renovations
-- i.e., work estimated to cost more than 10% of the appraised value of the
structure to be renovated (and not required by the partial or total destruction
of a structure [see division (H) below of this section] -- may be done pursuant
to a special use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment. The Board of
Adjustment shall issue such a permit if it finds that the work will not result
in a violation of any other divisions of this section (particularly division
(C)) or make the property more incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
   (G)   Notwithstanding division (E) above, any structure used for single-
family residential purposes and maintained as a nonconforming use may be
replaced with a similar structure of a larger size, so long as the replacement
does not create new nonconformities with respect to yard size and setback
requirements. In particular, a manufactured/mobile home may be replaced with a
larger manufactured/mobile home, and a "single-wide" manufactured/mobile home
may be replaced with a "double-wide." This paragraph is subject to the
limitations stated in §
157.175 on abandonment and discontinuance of nonconforming situations.
   (H)   A structure that is nonconforming in any respect or a structure that
is used in a nonconforming manner may be reconstructed or replaced if partially
or totally destroyed, subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   The total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use may not be
increased, except that a larger, single-family residential structure may be
constructed in place of a smaller one and a larger manufactured/mobile home
intended for residential use may replace a smaller one;
      (2)    The reconstructed building may not be more nonconforming with
respect to dimensional restrictions such as yard requirements, height
limitations, or density requirements, and such dimensional nonconformities must
be eliminated if they can reasonably be accomplished without unduly burdening
the reconstruction process or limiting the right to continue the nonconforming
use of such building;
      (3)   The reconstructed building may not enclose areas that were
previously unenclosed, even though those areas were used in connection with the
nonconforming activity. An area is unenclosed unless at least 75% or more of
the perimeter of the area is marked by a permanently constructed wall or fence.
      (4)   Except for single-family residential structures (including mobile
homes), if the estimated cost of the reconstruction work exceeds 10% of the
appraised value of the structure, the work may be done only after issuance of a
special use permit by the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall issue the permit
if it finds that the work will be done in accordance with this paragraph and
that the reconstructed building will not make the property more incompatible
with the surrounding property than it was before the destruction occurred.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.174 CHANGE IN KIND OF NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)    A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use. Thereafter,
the property may not revert to a nonconforming use.
   (B)   A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use only
in accordance with a use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment. The Board
shall issue such a permit if it finds that the proposed use will be more
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood than the use in operation at the
time the application is made for the permit. If a nonconforming use is changed
to any use other than a conforming use without obtaining a special use permit
pursuant to this division (B) that change shall constitute a discontinuance of
the nonconforming use, with consequences as stated in §
157.175 of this subchapter.
   (C)   If a nonconforming use and a conforming use, or any combination of
conforming and nonconforming uses, or any combination of nonconforming uses
exist on one lot, the use made of the property may be changed substantially
(except to a conforming use), only in accordance with a use permit issued by
the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall issue such a permit if it finds that
the proposed use will be more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood than
the use or combination of uses in operation at the time the permit is applied
for.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.175 ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.
   (A)    When a nonconforming use is (i) discontinued for a consecutive period
of 180 days, or (ii) discontinued for any period of time without a present
intention to reinstate the nonconforming use, the property involved may
thereafter be used only for conforming purposes, except as provided in division
(B) of this section. Present intention to reinstate the use shall not be
considered if the abandoned property lacks maintenance or continuity of public
services such as water, electricity, and trash removal.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment may issue a special use permit to allow a
nonconforming use that has been discontinued for more than 180 consecutive days
to be reinstated if it finds that (i) the nonconforming use has been
discontinued for less than two years, and (ii) the discontinuance resulted from
factors that, for all practical purposes, were beyond the control of the person
maintaining the nonconforming use.
   (C)   If the principle activity on property where a nonconforming situation
other than a nonconforming use exists is (i) discontinued for a consecutive
period of 180 days, or (ii) discontinued for any period of time without a
present intention of resuming that activity, then that property may thereafter
be used only in conformity with all of the regulations applicable to the
district in which the property is located, unless the Board of Adjustment
issues a special use permit to allow the property to be used (for a
nonconforming purpose) without correcting the nonconforming situation. The
Board shall issue such a permit if it finds that the nonconforming situation
cannot be corrected without undue hardship or expense, and the nonconforming
situation is of a minor nature that does not adversely affect the surrounding
property or the general public to any significant extent.
   (D)   For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a
nonconforming situation is lost pursuant to this section, all of the buildings,
activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally considered as a
whole. But if a nonconforming use is maintained in conjunction with a
conforming use, discontinuance of a nonconforming use for the required period
shall terminate the right to maintain it thereafter.
   (E)   When a structure or operation made nonconforming by this chapter is
vacant or discontinued at the effective date of this chapter, the 180-day
period for purposes of this section begins to run at the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.176 TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.
    Subject to all other terms and conditions of §§
157.170 through
157.177 of this chapter, nonconforming situations shall not be subject to
specific time limitations for permanent discontinuation.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.177 COMPLETION OF NONCONFORMING PROJECTS.
   (A)    All work on any nonconforming project for which a permit has not been
issued shall cease on the effective date of this chapter. Thereafter, work on
nonconforming projects may begin, or may continue, only pursuant to a special
use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment (except as provided in division
(A)(2) of this section). The Board shall issue such a permit if it finds that
the applicant has in good faith made substantial expenditures or incurred
substantial binding obligations or otherwise changed his position in some
substantial way in reasonable reliance on the land-use law as it existed before
the effective date of this chapter and thereby would be unreasonably prejudiced
if not allowed to complete his project as proposed. In considering whether
these findings may be made, the Board shall be guided by the following:
      (1)   To the extent that expenditures are recoverable with a reasonable
effort, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having made those
expenditures. For example, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having
made expenditure to acquire a potential development site if the property
obtained is just as valuable under the new classification as it was under the
old, for the expenditure can be recovered by resale of the property.
      (2)   An expenditure shall be considered substantial if it is significant
both in dollar amount and in terms of the total estimated cost of the proposed
project, and the ordinary business practices of the developer.
      (3)   A person shall be considered to have acted in good faith if actual
knowledge of a proposed adoption of land-use law affecting the proposed
development site could not be attributed to him.
      (4)   Even though a person had actual knowledge of a proposed adoption of
land-use law affecting a development site, the Board may still find that he
acted in good faith if he did not proceed with his plans in a deliberate
attempt to circumvent the effects of the proposed ordinance. The Board may find
that the developer did not proceed in an attempt to undermine the proposed
ordinance if it determines that:
         (a)   At the time the expenditures were made, either there was
considerable doubt about whether any ordinance would ultimately be passed, or
it was not clear that the proposed Ordinance would prohibit the intended
development; and
         (b)   The developer had legitimate business reasons for making
expenditures.
   (B)   The requirements of division (A) of this section shall not apply to a
nonconforming project if the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies that actual
construction of that project began at least 180 days before the effective date
of this chapter and that the work is at least 75% complete at the effective
date of this chapter.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall not consider any application for the
special use permit authorized by division (A)(1) of this section that is
submitted more than 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, unless it
waives this requirement for good cause shown.
   (D)   If the Board of Adjustment issues a special use permit pursuant to
division (A) of this section, it may attach such reasonable conditions to the
permit as it finds necessary to reduce the extent to which the nonconforming
project is incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood. In particular, the
Board may require that work on the nonconforming project be continuously
maintained, if possible, and that the project be completed as expeditiously as
possible.
   (E)   When it appears from the developer's plans or otherwise that the
nonconforming project was intended to be or reasonably could be completed in
stages, segments, or other discrete units, the Board of Adjustment shall not
allow the nonconforming project to be constructed or completed in a fashion
that is larger or more extensive than is necessary to allow the developer to
recoup and obtain a reasonable rate of return on the expenditures he has made
in connection with that nonconforming project.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 157.190 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)    The Planning Director or their designee shall administer this
chapter.
   (B)   The Planning Director or their designee shall enforce this chapter.
They may be provided with assistance of such other persons as the County
Commissioners may direct.
   (C)   Should an on-site inspection be required in order to verify a
violation, the Enforcement Officer must enter the premises during reasonable
hours and upon presenting credentials. In addition, the Officer must have the
consent of a premises owner or an administrative search warrant to inspect
areas not open to the public.
   (D)   If the Enforcement Officer shall find that any of the provisions of
this chapter are being violated, they shall notify in writing the property
owner and permittee (if applicable) indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. The notice of violation shall be
delivered by hand, email, or first-class mail and may also be posted on the
county's website or the property where the violation is located. In addition,
the NOV shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions,
alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work
being done; or shall take other action authorized by this chapter to insure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. The Enforcement
Officer providing the notice of violation shall certify to the file that the
notice was provided as required.
   (E)   The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof
and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates
in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that is contrary to
the requirements of this chapter may be held responsible for the violation and
suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided.
   (F)   If a development approval is revoked due to noncompliance, the
revocation must follow the same process as was used for the approval.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.191 TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall be established to assist the
staff, Planning Board and the Board of Commissioners in the review of site
development plans. The purpose of the TRC is to review, comment and make
recommendations regarding the technical aspects of all major site plans and
subdivision plats.
   (B)   Membership of the TRC shall be composed of, but not limited to,
representatives from the Planning and Inspections Department, Water Department,
Fire Marshal's office, CAMA, NCDOT, Elizabeth City-Pasquotank School System,
Sheriff's Department, Environmental Health Department, Emergency Medical
Services, Soil and Water Conservation, and area utility providers.
   (C)   The Planning Director, or his designated representative, shall serve
as chair of the TRC. The Chair shall be responsible for all proceedings and
decisions made by the TRC.
   (D)   The TRC shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet
frequently enough so that it can take action in conforming with the review
procedures delineated in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.192 SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   No zoning certificate or building permit shall be issued until a site
plan has been approved for the development. A site plan shall not be required
if an adequate site plan is already on file, there is no change in the parking
requirements, or there is no increase in impervious surface area.
    (B)   Additions to existing buildings that exceed 10% of the gross floor
area of the building or require an additional five or more parking spaces shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator upon recommendation of the Technical
Review Committee.
   (C)   Site plans that require approval from the Technical Review Committee,
must be submitted at least 21 days prior to the regular Technical Review
Committee meeting.
   (D)   If a site plan is granted conditional approval by the Technical Review
Committee, the applicant shall revise and resubmit the site plan. The Zoning
Administrator shall review the revised site plan and, if it meets all the
approval conditions and is otherwise substantially unaltered, shall signify on
the plan the approval. If the site plan is not revised within 60 days to meet
the approval conditions, or the applicant notifies the Zoning Administrator
that he is unwilling to revise the site plan, it shall be deemed denied.
   (E)   Copies of all required state permits must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator prior to the approval of a site plan.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.193 ZONING CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   No building or structure or any part thereof designed or intended to
be used for other than bona fide farm or agricultural purposes shall be erected
or repaired until a zoning certificate or certificate of occupancy therefore
has been issued by the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Each application for a zoning certificate or building permit shall be
accompanied by a plat, showing accurate dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
accurate dimension of the building to be erected, its location on the lot, and
such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of
this chapter such as evidence of the County Sanitarian's approval of the sewage
disposal system. A careful record of such applications and plats, together with
a record of the action taken thereon shall be kept in the Office of the
Pasquotank County Planning & Inspections. An application fee established by the
County Commissioners shall be paid to the county to cover necessary
administrative costs.
   (C)   No permit for excavation for or erection of any building or part of a
building, or for repairs to or alteration of a building, or the relocation of a
building from the lot on which it is situated shall be issued until after a
statement of its intended use has been filed by the applicant.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.194 BUILDING PERMITS.
   After the adoption of this chapter no new uses other than bona fide farms
shall be established unless a building permit is applied for and issued by the
Building Inspector. No permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter except after written order from the Board of
Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.195 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE.
    No land shall be used or occupied, except for bona fide farm purposes, and
no building or structure erected, altered, used or changed in use for other
than farm purposes until a certificate of occupancy/compliance shall have been
issued by the Enforcement Officer stating that the building and/or the proposed
use has been determined to be in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. A like certificate shall be issued for the purpose of changing any
existing use, as well as for maintaining, renewing, changing, or extending any
nonconforming use. A certificate of occupancy/compliance for the whole or part
of a building, shall be applied for prior to occupancy and shall be issued
within five days after the erection of alterations of such building or part
shall have been found in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable codes and ordinances. A record of all such certificates shall
be kept on file in the Office of the Pasquotank County Planning & Inspections
and shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or
tenancy interest in the building or land.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.196 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE GUIDELINES FOR AREAS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN.
    Prior to issuance of any initial zoning permit, zoning change permit, or
special use permit, the zoning enforcement officer and local AEC Permit Officer
in consultation with the State AEC Field Consultant, shall determine whether
the proposed use or structure is located within an area of environmental
concern. this determination shall result from an on-site investigation. if the
proposed use or structure is located in an area of environmental concern, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and local AEC Permit Officer shall certify that the
proposed use or structure complies with development standards of the State
Guidelines for Areas of Environmental Concern prior to issuing any zoning
permit.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.197 VESTED RIGHTS.
   (A)   Site-specific vesting plan. A site-specific vesting plan consists of a
plan submitted in which the applicant requests vesting pursuant to this
section, describing with reasonable certainty on the plan the type and
intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels of property. The plan may be
in the form of, but not be limited to, any of the following plans or approvals:
a subdivision plat, a preliminary or general development plan, a special use
permit, or any other land-use approval designation as may be utilized by the
county. Unless otherwise expressly provided by the county, the plan shall
include the approximate boundaries of the site; significant topographical and
other natural features affecting development of the site; the approximate
location on the site of the proposed buildings, structures, and other
improvements; the approximate dimensions, including height, of the proposed
buildings and other structures; and the approximate location of all existing
and proposed infrastructure on the site, including water, sewer, roads, and
pedestrian walkways. What constitutes a site-specific vesting plan under this
section that would trigger a vested right shall be finally determined by the
county pursuant to a development regulation, and the document that triggers the
vesting shall be so identified at the time of its approval. A variance does not
constitute a site-specific vesting plan, and approval of a site-specific
vesting plan with the condition that a variance be obtained does not confer a
vested right unless and until the necessary variance is obtained. If a sketch
plan or other document fails to describe with reasonable certainty the type and
intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property, it may not
constitute a site-specific vesting plan.
   (B)   Establishment of vested right. A vested right is established with
respect to any property upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, of a
site-specific vesting plan as provided in this section. Such a vested right
confers upon the landowner the right to undertake and complete the development
and use of the property under the terms and conditions of the site-specific
vesting plan, including any amendments thereto.
   (C)   Approval and amendment of plans.  
      (1)   If a site-specific vesting plan is based on an approval required by
this chapter, the county shall provide whatever notice and hearing is required
for that underlying approval. A duration of the underlying approval that is
less than two years does not affect the duration of the site-specific vesting
plan established under this section. If the site-specific vesting plan is not
based on such an approval, a legislative hearing with notice as required by
G.S. § 160D-602 shall be held.
      (2)   The county may approve a site-specific vesting plan upon any terms
and conditions that may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare. Conditional approval results in a vested right, although
failure to abide by the terms and conditions of the approval will result in a
forfeiture of vested rights. A site-specific vesting plan is deemed approved
upon the effective date of the county's decision approving the plan or another
date determined by the Board of Commissioners upon approval. An approved site-
specific vesting plan and its conditions may be amended with the approval of
the owner and the county as follows: any substantial modification must be
reviewed and approved in the same manner as the original approval; minor
modifications may be approved by staff, if such are defined and authorized by
the zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Continuing review. Following approval or conditional approval of a
site-specific vesting plan, the county may make subsequent reviews and require
subsequent approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the
original approval, provided that these reviews and approvals are not
inconsistent with the original approval. The county may, pursuant to G.S. §
160D-403(f), revoke the original approval for failure to comply with applicable
terms and conditions of the original approval or the applicable chapter
regulations.
   (E)   Duration and termination of vested right.
      (1)   A vested right for a site-specific vesting plan remains vested for
a period of two years. This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or
modifications to a site-specific vesting plan unless expressly provided by the
local government.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (E)(1) above, the county
may provide for rights to be vested for a period exceeding two years but not
exceeding five years where warranted in light of all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the size and phasing of development, the level
of investment, the need for the development, economic cycles, and market
conditions or other considerations. These determinations are in the sound
discretion of the county and shall be made following the process specified for
the particular form of a site-specific vesting plan involved in accordance with
division (A) of this section.
      (3)   Upon issuance of a building permit, the provisions of G.S. § 160D-
1111 and G.S. § 160D-1115 apply, except that a permit does not expire and shall
not be revoked because of the running of time while a vested right under this
section is outstanding.
      (4)   A right vested as provided in this section terminates at the end of
the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no
valid building permit applications have been filed.
   (F)   Subsequent changes prohibited; exceptions.
      (1)   A vested right, once established as provided for in this section,
precludes any zoning action by the county which would change, alter, impair,
prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as
set forth in an approved site-specific vesting plan, except under one or more
of the following conditions:
         (a)   With the written consent of the affected landowner.
         (b)   Upon findings, by ordinance after notice and an evidentiary
hearing, that natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of
the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site-
specific vesting plan.
         (c)   To the extent that the affected landowner receives compensation
for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including,
but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all
architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consulting fees incurred
after approval by the county, together with interest as provided under G.S. §
160D-106. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the
property which is caused by the action.
         (d)   Upon findings, by ordinance after notice and an evidentiary
hearing, that the landowner or the landowner's representative intentionally
supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations that made a
difference in the approval by the county of the site-specific vesting plan or
the phased development plan.
         (e)   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or
regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site-specific
vesting plan or the phased development plan, in which case the county may
modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or
federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and
an evidentiary hearing.
      (2)   The establishment of a vested right under this section does not
preclude the application of overlay zoning or other development regulations
which impose additional requirements but do not affect the allowable type or
intensity of use, or ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and
are applicable to all property subject to development regulation by the county,
including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and
mechanical codes. Otherwise applicable new regulations become effective with
respect to property which is subject to a site-specific vesting plan upon the
expiration or termination of the vesting rights period provided for in this
section.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the establishment of
a vested right does not preclude, change, or impair the authority of the county
to adopt and enforce development regulations governing nonconforming situations
or uses.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 157.210 CREATING THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
    The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the seven persons appointed by the
Board of Commissioners to serve on the Planning Board. The Board of
Commissioners shall provide for the appointment of the Pasquotank County Board
of Adjustment/Planning Board pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D to exercise the
powers and duties prescribed herein.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.211 JURISDICTION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
    The Board of Adjustment shall have authority on any appeal relative to the
provisions of this chapter originating from within the area encompassed by the
legal description of the jurisdiction of this chapter as described in §
157.015.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.212 RULES FOR PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
    The Board shall adopt rules governing its organization and for all
proceedings before it. Such rules shall provide and require the following in
addition to such other rules and regulations the Board shall adopt:
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment/Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and
Vice-Chairman on an annual basis.
   (B)   The County Planning Director or his designee shall serve as the
Secretary of the Board. The Secretary shall keep minutes of the proceedings.
All meetings shall be open to the public. The minutes shall contain relevant
facts and testimony of each appeal, the vote of each member on each appeal,
abstention from voting and attendance.
   (C)   A member of the Board or any other body exercising the functions of a
Board of Adjustment shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial
matter in a manner that would violate affected persons' constitutional rights
to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible conflicts include, but are not
limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is
not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close
familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected
person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection
is raised to a member's participation and that member does not recuse himself
or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
   (D)   Boards shall follow quasi-judicial procedures in determining appeals
of administrative decisions, special use permits, certificates of
appropriateness, variances, or any other quasi-judicial decision.
   (E)   No appeal may be heard unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall
consist of four-fifths (4/5) of the membership of the Board.
   (F)   Notice of evidentiary hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter
shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request
is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the subject
of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all
parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing;
and to any other persons entitled to receive notice as provided by the local
development regulation. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the local
government may rely on the county tax listing to determine owners of property
entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least
ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within
that same time period, the local government shall also prominently post a
notice of the hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an
adjacent street or highway right-of-way. The Board may continue an evidentiary
hearing that has been convened without further advertisement. If an evidentiary
hearing is set for a given date and a quorum of the Board is not then present,
the hearing shall be continued until the next regular board meeting without
further advertisement.
   (G)   The Administrator or staff to the Board shall transmit to the Board
all applications, reports, and written materials relevant to the matter being
considered. The administrative materials may be distributed to the members of
the Board prior to the hearing if at the same time they are distributed to the
Board a copy is also provided to the appellant or applicant and to the
landowner if that person is not the appellant or applicant. The administrative
materials shall become a part of the hearing record. The administrative
materials may be provided in written or electronic form. Objections to
inclusion or exclusion of administrative materials may be made before or during
the hearing. Rulings on unresolved objections shall be made by the Board at the
hearing.
   (H)   (1)   The applicant, the local government, and any person who would
have standing to appeal the decision under G.S. Chapter 160D shall have the
right to participate as a party at the evidentiary hearing. Other witnesses may
present competent, material, and substantial evidence that is not repetitive as
allowed by the Board.
      (2)   Objections regarding jurisdictional and evidentiary issues,
including, but not limited to, the timeliness of an appeal or the standing of a
party, may be made to the Board. The Board Chair shall rule on any objections,
and the Chair's rulings may be appealed to the full Board. These rulings are
also subject to judicial review pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D. Objections based
on jurisdictional issues may be raised for the first time on judicial review.
   (I)   The official who made the decision or the person currently occupying
that position, if the decision maker is no longer employed by the local
government, shall be present at the evidentiary hearing as a witness. The
appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in a notice of
appeal. If any party or the local government would be unduly prejudiced by the
presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board shall
continue the hearing.
   (J)   The Chair of the Board or any member acting as Chair and the Clerk to
the Board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming
before the Board. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before
the Board determining a quasi-judicial matter, willfully swears falsely is
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   (K)   Subpoenas. The Board making a quasi-judicial decision under this
chapter through the Chair or, in the Chair's absence, anyone acting as Chair
may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence. To request
issuance of a subpoena, the applicant, the local government, and any person
with standing under G.S. Chapter 160D may make a written request to the Chair
explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses or evidence to be
compelled. The Chair shall issue requested subpoenas he or she determines to be
relevant, reasonable in nature and scope, and not oppressive. The Chair shall
rule on any motion to quash or modify a subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas
made by the Chair may be immediately appealed to the full Board. If a person
fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this division (K), the
Board or the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of
Justice for an order requiring that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall
have jurisdiction to issue these orders after notice to all proper parties.
   (L)   When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D or any other
appeal in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on the record
below, and the scope of review shall be as provided in G.S. Chapter 160D.
   (M)   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board shall be necessary to
grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be required to decide any
other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of
certiorari. For the purposes of this division (M), vacant positions on the
Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter
under G.S. § 160D-109(d) shall not be considered members of the Board for
calculation of the requisite majority if there are no qualified alternates
available to take the place of such members.
   (N)   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within
a reasonable time. When hearing an appeal, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any
order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board
shall have all the powers of the official who made the decision. Every quasi-
judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and substantial
evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to
writing, reflect the Board's determination of contested facts and their
application to the applicable standards, and be approved by the Board and
signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A quasi-
judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the clerk
to the Board or such other office or official as the development regulation
specifies. The decision of the Board shall be delivered within a reasonable
time by personal delivery, electronic mail, or first-class mail to the
applicant, landowner, and any person who has submitted a written request for a
copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person required to
provide notice shall certify to the local government that proper notice has
been made, and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of
fraud.
   (O)   Judicial review. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to
review by the superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari
pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D. Appeals shall be filed within the times
specified in G.S. Chapter 160D.
   (P)   Fees for filing appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall be
established by the Board of Commissioners, in order to cover necessary
administrative costs and advertising expense. Applications to the Board of
Adjustment may be withdrawn at any time. Application fees are nonrefundable.
   (Q)   Submittals for review by the Board of Adjustment shall be presented to
the appropriate county officials 30 days prior to the regularly scheduled Board
of Adjustment meeting.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.213 POWERS OF BOARD.
   (A)   Review of enforcement officers' decision. Where it is alleged that
there is any error in any order, decision, or requirements of the Enforcement
Officers appointed by the Board of Commissioners, the Board shall have the
power to hear and decide any appeal taken from the order, decision or
requirements, of the Enforcement Officer(s) and to grant a variance to the
appellant to rectify any error of the Enforcement Officer. A concurring vote of
four members of the Board shall be required to reverse any order, decision, or
determination of the Enforcement Officer or to decide in favor of the applicant
any matter which the Board is required to pass under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Variance.
      (1)   A variance may be granted to authorize, upon appeal in specific
cases, such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to
the public interest where owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. In
considering all proposed variances to this chapter, the Board shall, before
making any finding in a specified case, first determine that the proposed
variances will not constitute any change in the district boundaries shown on
the zoning map and will not impair any adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property, or adversely affect the use or physical attributes of
property within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
      (2)   Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided
that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance.
      (3)   No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance.
      (4)   Before a variance is granted, the Board of Adjustment shall make
the following findings:
         (a)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
         (b)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
         (c)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant
or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.
         (d)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose,
and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured and substantial
justice is achieved.
      (5)   The Board may grant a variance in the dimensional yard requirements
of this chapter only where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or
shape of a specific piece of property which was a lot of record as of the
effective date of this chapter, or where due to the topographical conditions of
a piece of property the strict application of the said dimensional requirements
of this chapter would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship
of such nature as described in the preceding paragraph.
      (6)   The fact that property may be utilized more profitably will not be
considered as a justification for granting a variance by the Board.
      (7)   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board of Adjustment shall
be necessary to grant a variance. For the purposes of this division, vacant
positions on the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-
judicial matter under G.S. § 160D-109(d) shall not be considered members of the
Board for calculation of the requisite majority.
   (C)   Additional power. In addition to the general powers conferred upon the
Board in the foregoing, the Board shall have authority to make the following
exception to the general provisions of this chapter:
      Where a use district boundary line crosses a lot, the Board, after a
public hearing in which it has determined that the spirit and intent of this
chapter has been carried out, may permit a use of either classification on the
whole lot, but not to exceed a distance of 150 feet from the boundary line. In
addition, the remaining parcel shall not be less than the minimum required for
the district in which it is located.
   (D)   Recommendations to Planning Board and Board of Commissioners. The
Board shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners for any changes
in this chapter that are in the best interest of the county and the general
public.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.214 APPEAL TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Appeals from the enforcement and interpretation of this chapter and
appeals for variances may be taken to the Board of Adjustment by any person
aggrieved by a decision of any officer, department, board or bureau of the
county. Notice of an appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall be filed with the
Enforcement Officer within 30 from receipt of the written notice of the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer. Any other person with standing to appeal has 30 days from receipt from
any source of actual or constructive notice of the determination within which
to file an appeal. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, notice given
pursuant to this section by first-class mail is deemed received on the third
business day following deposit of the notice for mailing with the United States
Postal Service.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of action appealed
from, unless the Enforcement Officer files a certificate stating that by
reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
interfere with enforcement of this chapter because the violation is transitory
in nature, or would cause imminent peril to life and property. The Enforcement
Officer shall have one copy of said certificate delivered by registered mail or
by personal service to the appellant and to each member to the Board within ten
calendar days from the date the appeal is filed with the Enforcement Officer.
The certificate shall also be placed on file in the office of the Enforcement
Officer for public inspection and recorded in the minutes of the next meeting
of the Board. Where said certificate is filed by the Enforcement Officer,
proceedings in furtherance of the original order shall not be stayed otherwise
than a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record within the
county. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with
the official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board
shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after the request is filed.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, appeals of
decisions granting a development approval or otherwise affirming that a
proposed use of property is consistent with the development regulation does not
stay the further review of an application for development approvals to use the
property; in these situations, the appellant or local government may request
and the Board may grant a stay of a final decision of development approval
applications, including building permits affected by the issue being appealed.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.215 APPEAL FROM DECISION OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
    Any person or persons aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Adjustment
may within 30 days or after a written copy thereof is given, but not
thereafter, present to the Superior Court of Pasquotank County a petition for a
writ of certiorari, duly verified, setting forth that such a decision is
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality, whereupon
such a decision of the Board shall be subject to review as provided by law.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
§ 157.230 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The Board of Commissioners, in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this subchapter, may adopt a zoning ordinance and zone property, and may amend
this chapter, which means amending the text of this chapter and rezoning
property (that is, amending the classifications of property appearing on the
official map of zoning districts). The Board shall adopt any amendments to
these development regulations by ordinance. Rezonings may require a
comprehensive plan amendment. The term AMENDMENT shall include amendments,
supplements, changes and modifications to, and repeals of, this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.231 PLANNING BOARD REVIEW.
   (A)   Before an amendment to this chapter may be adopted, it must be
presented or referred to the County Planning Board for the Planning Board's
recommendation. The Planning Board shall be given at least 30 days in which to
make a recommendation. Whenever territory is added to an existing designated
zoning area, it shall be treated as an amendment to this chapter for that area.
   (B)   When conducting a review of proposed zoning text or map amendments,
the Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed action is
consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any other
officially adopted plan that is applicable. The Planning Board shall provide a
written recommendation to the governing board that addresses plan consistency
and other matters as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board, but a comment by
the Planning Board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the
comprehensive plan shall not preclude consideration or approval of the proposed
amendment by the Board of Commissioners. If a zoning map amendment qualifies as
a "large-scale rezoning" under G.S. Chapter 160D, the Planning Board statement
describing plan consistency may address the overall rezoning and describe how
the analysis and policies in the relevant adopted plans were considered in the
recommendation made.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.232 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
    An amendment may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners, the Planning
Board, the Board of Adjustment, or by the petition of any owner of a legal or
equitable interest in land located in the county.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.233 AMENDMENT BY PETITION.
   (A)   A petition requesting an amendment shall be presented to the Planning
Board on a form prescribed by the Planning Board. The petition shall contain
such information, and shall be presented in such a manner as specified by the
Planning Board. The petition shall be submitted to the Pasquotank County
Planning Department 30 days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Board
meeting. The Planning Board, after considering the petition, shall prepare a
recommendation to be considered by the Board of Commissioners. The
recommendation should contain all information considered by the Planning Board
in its deliberations and reasons for its recommendation. In cases of petitions
requesting rezoning of property or an amendment to the zoning ordinance text an
application fee established by the County Commissioners shall be paid by the
applicant to the County of Pasquotank to cover necessary administrative costs
prior to placement of the petition on any agenda of the Planning Board.
Petitions presented to the Planning Board may be withdrawn at any time.
Application fees are nonrefundable.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall cause a public notice to be published
identifying the nature of the petition and date, time, and place at which the
Planning Board will review the request. The notice shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in Pasquotank County at least ten days
prior to the scheduled Planning Board meeting. The notification may be in the
form of an item included on the Planning Board agenda.
   (C)   For zoning map amendments, the Zoning Administrator shall mail
individual notices, by first class mail, to the affected landowner, as shown on
the county tax listing, and to abutting property owners in all directions from
the affected parcel. Notices shall be deposited in the mail at least ten days
prior to the scheduled Planning Board meeting.
   (D)   If an amendment petition is denied by the Board of County
Commissioners, a rezoning petition similar to that denied for the same property
or a portion of the same property within one year of the Board's actions shall
not be accepted, except that:
      (1)   There has been a significant change in the zoning classification of
adjacent properties; or
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners has adopted a plan that changes public
policy regarding how the property affected by the amendment should be
developed; or
      (3)   Public facilities such as roads, water mains, sewer lines, or other
infrastructure are constructed or expanded to serve the property or to
accommodate the intensity of development allowed under the proposed
classification.
   Note: Change in ownership of the subject property does not qualify for an
exception to the one-year restriction.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.234 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Before amending this chapter, the Board of Commissioners shall hold a
public hearing on the amendment, at which parties interested in the proposed
amendment shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the hearing shall be
provided and the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this
subchapter. Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Board, the
Administrator shall coordinate with the County Manager's office the scheduling
of a public hearing and publication of a notice of the public hearing for any
amendment to this chapter.
   (B)   If any resident or property owner in the county submits a written
statement regarding a proposed amendment, modification, or repeal to a zoning
regulation, including a text or map amendment, to the Clerk to the Board at
least two business days prior to the proposed vote on such change, the Clerk to
the Board shall deliver such written statement to the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.235 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Mailed notice. For zoning map amendments, the owners of affected
parcels of land and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of
land shall be mailed a notice of the hearing on the proposed amendment by
first-class mail at the last addresses listed for such owners on the county tax
abstracts. For the purpose of this section, properties are "abutting" even if
separated by a street, railroad, or other transportation corridor. This notice
must be deposited in the mail at least ten but not more than 25 days prior to
the date of the hearing. The person or persons mailing such notices shall
certify the fact that the notices were duly mailed, and the date of mailing, to
the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Large-scale zoning map amendments. First-class mail notice shall not
be required if the zoning map amendment proposes to change the zoning
designation of more than 50 properties, owned by at least 50 different property
owners, and if the county elects to use the expanded published notice provided
for in this division (B). In this instance, the county may elect to make the
mailed notice required of this section or, as an alternative, elect to publish
notice of the hearing as required by G.S. § 160D-601, provided that each
advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size. The
advertisement is effective only for property owners who reside in the area of
general circulation of the newspaper that publishes the notice. Property owners
who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address
listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall
be notified by mailed notice.
   (C)   Posted notice. When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the local
government shall prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site proposed
for the amendment or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-way. The
notice shall be posted within the same time period specified for mailed notices
of the hearing. When multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map
amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required but the local
government shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to
interested persons.
   (D)   Published notice. For any public hearing, the County Zoning
Administrator shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the county. The notice shall be published once a week
for two successive calendar weeks, and shall be published for the first time
not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the scheduled hearing date.
In computing such period, the day of publication shall not be counted, but the
day of the hearing shall be counted.
   (E)   Notice to military bases. If the adoption or modification would result
in changes to the zoning map or would change or affect the permitted uses of
land located five miles or less from the perimeter boundary of a military base,
the local government shall provide written notice of the proposed changes by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the commander of the military base
not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date fixed for the
hearing. If the commander of the military base provides comments or analysis
regarding the compatibility of the proposed development regulation or amendment
with military operations at the base, the Board of Commissioners shall take the
comments and analysis into consideration before making a final determination on
the ordinance.
   (F)   Content of notices. All published and mailed notices for public
hearings shall identify the date, time, and place of the public hearing and the
nature and character of the proposed action.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.236 CONSISTENCY AND REASONABLENESS STATEMENTS.
   (A)   When adopting or rejecting a zoning text or map amendment, the Board
of Commissioners shall approve a brief statement describing whether its action
is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive plan. The
requirement for a plan consistency statement may also be met by a clear
indication in the minutes of the Board that at the time of action on the
amendment the Board was aware of and considered the Planning Board's
recommendations and any relevant portions of an adopted comprehensive plan. If
a zoning map amendment is adopted and the action was deemed inconsistent with
the adopted plan, the zoning amendment shall have the effect of also amending
any future land-use map in the approved plan, and no additional request or
application for a plan amendment shall be required. A plan amendment and a
zoning amendment may be considered concurrently.
   (B)   If a zoning map amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under
G.S. § 160D-602(b), the governing board statement describing plan consistency
may address the overall rezoning and describe how the analysis and policies in
the relevant adopted plans were considered in the action taken.
    (C)   Additional reasonableness statement for rezonings.  
      (1)   When adopting or rejecting any petition for a zoning map amendment,
a statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners. This statement of reasonableness may
consider, among other factors:
         (a)   The size, physical conditions, and other attributes of the area
proposed to be rezoned;
         (b)   The benefits and detriments to the landowners, the neighbors,
and the surrounding community;
         (c)   The relationship between the current actual and permissible
development on the tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be
permissible under the proposed amendment;
         (d)   Why the action taken is in the public interest; and
         (e)   Any changed conditions warranting the amendment.
      (2)   If a zoning map amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning"
under G.S. Chapter 160D, the Board statement on reasonableness may address the
overall rezoning.
   (D)   Single statement permissible. The statement of reasonableness and the
plan consistency statement required by this section may be approved as a single
statement.
   (E)   Should a zoning map amendment be approved that is not consistent with
the Future Land Use Map, the Future Land Use Map shall be deemed amended. The
Zoning Administrator shall note the approved amendment on the Future Land Use
Map. If the Future Land Use Map was adopted as a CAMA plan, then the amendment
will not be deemed effective until the change is approved through the CAMA
plan-amendment process.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.237 PENDING APPLICATIONS.
   If an amendment is adopted while an application for development or zoning
approval is pending, the applicant may choose to comply with the original or
new version of the ordinance, pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.238 DOWN-ZONING.
   No amendment to the zoning ordinance or the official zoning map that down-
zones property shall be permitted without the written consent of all property
owners whose property is the subject of the down-zoning amendment, unless the
down-zoning amendment is initiated by the county. For purposes of this section,
DOWN-ZONING means a zoning ordinance that affects an area of land in one of the
following ways:
   (A)   By decreasing the development density of the land to be less dense
than was allowed under its previous usage.
   (B)   By reducing the permitted uses of the land that are specified in a
zoning ordinance or land development regulation to fewer uses than were allowed
under its previous usage.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.239 MORATORIA.
   (A)   Authority.  The Board of Commissioners may adopt temporary moratoria
on any development approval required by law, except for the purpose of
developing and adopting new or amended plans or development regulations
governing residential uses. The duration of any moratorium shall be reasonable
in light of the specific conditions that warrant imposition of the moratorium
and may not exceed the period of time necessary to correct, modify, or resolve
such conditions.
   (B)   Hearing required. Except in cases of imminent and substantial threat
to public health or safety, before adopting a development regulation imposing a
development moratorium with a duration of 60 days or any shorter period, the
Board of Commissioners shall hold a legislative hearing and shall publish a
notice of the hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the area not
less than seven days before the date set for the hearing. A development
moratorium with a duration of 61 days or longer, and any extension of a
moratorium so that the total duration is 61 days or longer, and any extension
of a moratorium so that the total duration is 61 days or longer, is subject to
the notice and hearing requirements of §
157.235.
   (C)   Exempt projects. Absent an imminent threat to public health or safety,
a development moratorium adopted pursuant to this section does not apply to any
project for which a valid building permit issued pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D
is outstanding, to any project for which a special use permit application has
been accepted as complete, to development set forth in a site-specific vesting
plan approved pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D, to development for which
substantial expenditures have already been made in good-faith reliance on a
prior valid development approval, or to preliminary or final subdivision plats
that have been accepted for review by the county prior to the call for a
hearing to adopt the moratorium. Any preliminary subdivision plat accepted for
review by the county prior to the call for a hearing, if subsequently approved,
shall be allowed to proceed with final plat approval without being subject to
the moratorium. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a complete application for a
development approval has been submitted prior to the effective date of a
moratorium, G.S. § 160D-108(b) applies when permitting processing resumes.
   (D)   Required statements. Any development regulation establishing a
development moratorium must include, at the time of adoption, each of the
following:
      (1)   A statement of the problems or conditions necessitating the
moratorium and what courses of action, alternative to a moratorium, were
considered by the county and why those alternative courses of action were not
deemed adequate.
      (2)   A statement of the development approvals subject to the moratorium
and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems or conditions
leading to imposition of the moratorium.
      (3)   A date for termination of the moratorium and a statement setting
forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address the problems or
conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
      (4)   A statement of the actions, and the schedule for those actions,
proposed to be taken by the local government during the duration of the
moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the
moratorium.
   (E)   Limit on renewal or extension. No moratorium may be subsequently
renewed or extended for any additional period unless the county has taken all
reasonable and feasible steps proposed to be taken in its ordinance
establishing the moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to
imposition of the moratorium and unless new facts and conditions warrant an
extension. Any ordinance renewing or extending a development moratorium must
include, at the time of adoption, the findings set forth in divisions (D)(1)
through (D)(4) of this section, including what new facts or conditions warrant
the extension.
   (F)   Expedited judicial review. Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a
moratorium on development approvals required by law may apply to the General
Court of Justice for an order enjoining the enforcement of the moratorium.
Actions brought pursuant to this section shall be scheduled for expedited
hearing, and subsequent proceedings in those actions shall be accorded priority
by the trial and appellate courts. In such actions, the county has the burden
of showing compliance with the procedural requirements of this division (F).
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 157.250 VALIDITY.
    If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. The Pasquotank County Board of
Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each
section, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, sentences or clauses be declared invalid.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.251 SEPARABILITY.
    Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity
of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.252 EFFECTIVE DATE.
    This chapter shall be in full force and effective henceforth from December
1, 1992. This chapter was duly adopted by the Pasquotank County Board of
Commissioners on November 23, 1992, with an effective date of December 1, 1992.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or special use permits,
shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine in the amount of
$75 or a maximum 30 days imprisonment as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Any act constituting a violation of this chapter or a failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violations of any conditions and
safeguards established in connection with the grants of variances or special
use permits, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $50 for each day
the violation continues. If the offender fails to pay this penalty within 15
days after being cited for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the
county in a civil action in the nature of debt. A civil penalty may not be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment if the offender was sent a final notice of
violation in accordance with §
157.190 and did not take an appeal to the Board of Adjustment within the
prescribed time stated in §
157.214.
   (C)   This chapter may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action.
   (D)   Each day that any violation continues after notification by the
Enforcement Officer that such violation exists shall be considered a separate
offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies specified in this section.
   (E)   Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and
remedies may be used to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section               Code Section
Ch. 7A                     152.054
                           30.98,
                           30.99,
                           32.99,
                           50.99,
                           70.99,
                           71.99,
                           91.99,
Ch. 14-4                   92.07,
                           111.99,
                           114.99,
                           130.99,
                           151.13,
                           151.99,
                           152.999,
                           155.999,
                           157.999
14-4(a)                    10.99
Ch. 14, Art. 54            130.01
14-202.10(2)               157.046
14-223                     30.98
14-288.1                   30.36
14-288.20A                 30.98
14-409.39(2)               30.36
Ch. 19A, Art. 4            91.05
19A-45                     91.05
Ch. 20                  71.99
20-4.01(12a)               71.01
                           51.020,
47-30                      154.10,
                           155.131
Ch. 47A                    151.52
62A-8                      32.01
Ch. 63, Art. 4             156.01
63-34                      156.12
66-385 through 66-399      110.02,
                           110.03
66-396                     110.99
67-2                       91.01
74-46 through 74-68        50.02
Ch. 87                     113.02
104E-1 through 104E-29     50.02
105-164.13E(a)             157.030
105-277.3                  157.030
106-581.1                  157.030
106-581.1(6)               157.030
106-743.2                  157.030
113A-8 through 113A-10     155.076
113A-100                   153.05,
                           155.186
                           153.02,
                           153.03,
113A-100 et seq.           153.05-
                           153.08,
                           153.99
113A-103(5)(a) through (c) 153.04
113A-112                   153.10
113A-120                   153.04
113A-121                   153.10
Ch. 130A, Art. 9           51.095,
                           152.015
130A-290(a)(6)             152.015
130A-290(a)(35)            152.015
130A-290(a)(36)            152.015
131E-155 through 131E-161  112.06,
                           112.07
132-1                      33.01
136-67                     111.03
136-102.6                  155.186
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Pt. 6    152.001
Ch. 143, Art. 21A          50.02
Ch. 143, Art. 33C          31.01
Ch. 143, Art. 56           112.06,
                           112.07
143-143.15                 152.066
143-215.1                  50.02
143B-165                   112.01
Ch. 153A, Art. 2           155.003
Ch. 153A, Art. 6, Pt. 121  152.001
Ch. 153A, Art. 18          155.004
Ch. 153A, Art. 18, Pt. 3   152.001
Ch. 153A, Art. 18, Pt. 4   152.001
153A-49                    10.19,
                           10.20
153A-76                    31.01,
                           31.02
                           50.01,
153A-121                   151.47,
                           154.02,
                           154.21
Ch. 153A-121, Art. 6       154.22
153A-122                   113.02,
                           151.47
                           90.99,
                           113.99,
153A-123                   114.99,
                           130.99,
                           151.30,
                           154.99
153A-123(d)                50.99
153A-123(e)                50.99
153A-132.1                 50.01
153A-134                   113.01
153A-136                   50.01
153A-140                   92.04,
                           92.05
153A-140.2                 92.06
153A-245                   71.01,
                           71.03
153A-274 et seq.           70.99
153A-323                   150.18
153A-324                   53.01
153A-330                   53.01
153A-331                   53.01
153A-332                   155.045
153A-333                   155.022
153A-340                   53.01
                           51.095,
                           150.15,
153A-344.1                 150.16,
                           150.18,
                           150.21
153A-358                   150.19
153A-362                   150.19
Ch. 160A, Art. 10          151.13
Ch. 160A, Art. 19          150.18
Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Pt. 6   151.01
160A-146                   31.01
160A-193                   53.56
160A-385.1                 51.095
160A-441                   151.01
160A-443                   151.13
160A-443(5)                151.13
160A-443(6)                151.13
160A-444                   151.01
160A-446(f)                151.13
160A-446(g)                151.13
                           157.001,
                           157.045,
                           157.210,
Ch. 160D                   157.212,
                           157.231,
                           157.236,
                           157.237,
                           157.239
160D-106                   157.197
160D-108(b)                157.239
160D-109(d)                157.212,
                           157.213
160D-403(f)                157.197
160D-601                   157.235
160D-602                   157.197
160D-602(b)                157.236
160D-702                   157.030
160D-1111                  157.197
160D-1115                  157.197
Ch. 166A                   30.16
166A-19.15(2)              30.15
166A-19.31                 30.30
                           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        5-21-1990   151.25-
                     151.30
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        - -         70.01,
                     70.99
8        1-3-1977    150.01
                     153.01 -
-        6-20-1977   153.10,
                     153.99
                     113.01 -
-        12-19-1977  113.09,
                     113.99
-        2-15-1982   130.03,
                     130.99
93-1     1-19-1983   32.02
-        2-4-1985    112.01 -
                     112.14
                     151.45 -
-        12-16-1985  151.53,
                     151.99
                     111.01 -
-        4-6-1987    111.07,
                     111.99
                     155.001 -
                     155.007,
                     155.020 -
                     155.031,
                     155.045 -
                     155.047,
                     155.060,
                     155.061,
                     155.075 -
-        4-17-1989   155.078,
                     155.090 -
                     155.100,
                     155.115,
                     155.130 -
                     155.139,
                     155.150 -
                     155.172,
                     155.185,
                     155.186,
                     155.999
                     151.01 -
-        5-15-1989   151.14,
                     151.99
-        7-24-1989   130.02,
                     130.99
-        10-16-1989  32.01
                     154.01 -
-        2-18-1991   154.10,
                     154.99
-        11-4-1991   150.15 -
                     150.22
-        11-18-1991  91.99
                     50.01 -
-        12-16-1991  50.08,
                     50.99
                     155.005,
                     155.029,
                     155.047,
                     155.060,
                     155.076,
                     155.091,
1        12-16-1991  155.094,
                     155.096,
                     155.130,
                     155.137,
                     155.151,
                     155.167,
                     155.185
-        8-17-1992   154.20 -
                     154.24
                     155.005,
                     155.020,
                     155.046,
                     155.047,
                     155.061,
                     155.075,
                     155.076,
2        8-17-1992   155.078,
                     155.090-
                     155.094,
                     155.096,
                     155.097,
                     155.099,
                     155.151,
                     155.159,
                     155.186
3        3-8-1993    155.099
                     90.01 -
93-3     3-8-1993    90.07,
                     90.99
4        6-21-1993   155.022,
                     155.047
5        8-16-1993   155.186
                     51.001 -
                     51.005,
                     51.020 -
                     51.023,
                     51.035 -
                     51.045,
-        5-16-1994   51.060,
                     51.061,
                     51.075 -
                     51.083,
                     51.095,
                     51.096,
                     51.999
4        5-16-1994   157.105,
                     157.106
94-3     6-20-1994   91.99
                     50.01 -
95-1     1-9-1995    50.08,
                     50.99
                     155.139,
6        3-1-1995    155.162,
                     155.186
-        4-17-1995   31.01
                     155.092,
                     155.093,
                     155.095,
                     155.097,
7        7-17-1995   155.099,
                     155.100,
                     155.139,
                     155.159,
                     155.161,
                     155.186
                     155.076,
8        2-19-1996   155.093,
                     155.095,
                     155.099
97-1     4-7-1997    52.01
-        6-30-1997   32.01
                     50.01 -
-        7-21-1997   50.08,
                     50.99
                     50.01 -
-        9-22-1997   50.08,
                     50.99
98-1     4-6-1998    52.01
98-2     5-4-1998    91.99
9        6-1-1998    155.076
-        12-21-1998  31.02
10       12-21-1998  155.186
                     156.01 -
-        2-15-1999   156.13,
                     156.99
-        6-21-1999   130.01,
                     130.99
-        12-6-1999   31.01
                     155.060,
                     155.061,
                     155.075,
11       12-6-1999   155.076,
                     155.100,
                     155.169 -
                     155.171
                     90.01 -
00-01    3-6-2000    90.07,
                     90.99
                     110.01 -
-        4-17-2000   110.04,
                     110.99
00-03    5-15-2000   52.01
-        6-7-2000    33.01
-        11-6-2000   31.01
                     155.161,
12       3-19-2001   155.162,
                     155.169
                     155.095,
13       4-23-2001   155.097,
                     155.100
-        8-20-2001   31.01
14       11-19-2001  155.047
                     51.001 -
                     51.005,
                     51.020 -
                     51.023,
                     51.035 -
                     51.045,
-        7-15-2002   51.060,
                     51.061,
                     51.075 -
                     51.083,
                     51.095,
                     51.096,
                     51.999
15       8-5-2002    155.047,
                     155.138
-        1-20-2004   155.169
                     155.075,
16       1-20-2004   155.090,
                     155.167
                     155.060,
                     155.061,
                     155.075,
                     155.093,
                     155.095 -
                     155.097,
17       11-21-2005  155.151,
                     155.158,
                     155.161,
                     155.165 -
                     155.167,
                     155.169,
                     155.186
-        12-19-2005  155.168
18       12-19-2005  155.167
19       9-18-2006   155.060,
                     155.061
20       3-19-2007   155.090
21       7-9-2007    155.047,
                     155.186
22       9-4-2007    155.047
23       4-21-2008   155.047
-        11-17-2008  155.171
24       11-17-2008  155.170
-        2-16-2009   53.01 -
                     53.57
-        2-16-2009   155.170
25       2-16-2009   155.169
                     114.01 -
2010-1   2-15-2010   114.09,
                     114.99
                     155.098,
                     155.152 -
-        3-1-2010    155.155,
                     155.159,
                     155.160,
                     155.172
26       3-1-2010    155.171
                     155.061,
28       3-1-2010    155.075,
                     155.090,
                     155.099
-        4-5-2010    114.10
                     152.001 -
                     152.004,
                     152.015,
                     152.030 -
                     152.036,
-        3-25-2011   152.050 -
                     152.054,
                     152.065 -
                     152.069,
                     152.080 -
                     152.082,
                     152.999
29       10-17-2011  155.047
12-3     10-1-2012   32.02
15-01    - -         155.024
2016-1   9-6-2016    70.01,
                     70.99
                     71.01 -
-        9-18-2017   71.05,
                     71.99
                     91.01 -
                     91.06,
-        7-9-2018    91.45 -
                     91.51,
                     91.99
-        6-17-2019   92.01 -
                     92.08
-        9-14-2020   92.01
                     157.001 -
                     157.003,
                     157.015 -
                     157.019,
                     157.030,
                     157.045,
                     157.046,
                     157.060 -
                     157.076,
                     157.090 -
                     157.094,
                     157.105 -
                     157.107,
                     157.120,
-        6-21-2021   157.121,
                     157.135 -
                     157.137.
                     157.150 -
                     157.159,
                     157.170 -
                     157.177,
                     157.190 -
                     157.197,
                     157.210 -
                     157.215,
                     157.230 -
                     157.239,
                     157.250 -
                     157.252,
                     157.999
                     30.01 -
                     30.04,
                     30.15 -
-        10-17-2022  30.19,
                     30.30 -
                     30.40,
                     30.98,
                     30.99
-        10-17-2022  71.04
                     32.99,
                     50.99,
                     53.56,
                     71.99,
-        11-21-2022  90.99,
                     92.07,
                     111.99,
                     114.99,
                     130.99 
                     91.01 -
                     91.20,
                     91.30 -
                     91.39,
-        12-2-2024   91.45,
                     91.46,
                     91.50 -
                     91.58,
                     91.99
                     91.01 -
                     91.20,
                     91.30 -
                     91.39,
-        6-16-2025   91.45,
                     91.46,
                     91.50 -
                     91.58,
                     91.99
                    
 
 
