PINETOPS, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. -, passed 6-26-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF PINETOPS
Section
SECTION 1. INCORPORATION OF TOWN; NAME; POWERS, RIGHTS, AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   That the inhabitants of the town of Pinetops, Edgecombe County, North
Carolina shall be and continue as heretofore they have been, a body politic,
incorporated under and to be known by the name and style of the “Town of
Pinetops,” hereinafter at times referred to as the “Town”, with all such
powers, rights, duties, and immunities as are herein provided, and as are
provided by general laws, except wherein the same are contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of this act. The term “general law” is
employed herein as defined in G.S. § 60A-1.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, orthose appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town of
Pinetops shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to municipal
corporations by the general laws of North Carolina, and all powers which, under
the Constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this charter
specifically to enumerate.
SECTION 2. CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.
   That the corporate boundaries shall be those existing at the time of
ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town and
as they may be modified from time to time in accordance with the law. An
official map of the Town, showing the current municipal boundaries, shall be
maintained permanently in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be available
for public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate limits pursuant to law,
the appropriate changes to the official map shall be made and copies shall be
filed in the offices of the Secretary of State, the Edgecombe County Register
of Deeds, and the appropriate Board of Elections.
   All extensions of the corporate boundaries shall be governed by the General
Statutes of North Carolina.
SECTION 3. MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — VESTED WITH CORPORATE POWERS AND
AUTHORITY; QUALIFICATIONS; DUTIES OF MAYOR AT MEETINGS OF COMMISSIONERS.
   That all corporate powers and authority granted to said Town shall be vested
in and exercised by a Mayor and Board of Commissioners of five members,
hereinafter at times referred to as the “Board”; that no person shall be
eligible to the offices of Mayor or Board unless he or she be a legally
qualified voter and bona fide resident of the Town. The Mayor shall preside at
all meetings of the Board and vote in case of a tie only.
SECTION 4. BIENNIAL ELECTIONS; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (a)   At the regular municipal election in 1971, and biennially thereafter,
there shall be elected a mayor and five commissioners, and when qualified they
shall hold office for a full two year term and until their successors are
elected and qualified.
   (b)   The term forthe office of mayor shall beforfouryears and the members
of the Pinetops Board of Commissioners shall hereafter be elected for four-year
terms on staggered basis as follows: at the regular municipal election to be
held in 1979, the three candidates who receive the highest number of votes
shall be elected for four-year terms, while the two candidates who receive the
next highest number of votes shall be elected for two-year terms. Beginning at
the regular municipal election to be held in 1981, and every four years
thereafter, two members of the Board of Commissioners shall be elected to serve
for four-year terms. Beginning at the regular municipal election to be held in
1983, and every four years thereafter, three members of the Board of
Commissioners shall be elected to serve for four-year terms. Beginning with the
year 1979 and every four years thereafter, the mayor shall be elected to serve
a four-year term.
SECTION 5. VACANCIES.
   That in case of a vacancy in the board of commissioners caused by death,
removal or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the board of commissioners
in accordance with NCGS160A-63.
SECTION 6. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS TO ELECT MAYOR PRO TEMPORE AND APPOINT
EMPLOYEES.
   That at the first meeting of the Board of Commissioners after the regular
municipal election, the said Board shall proceed to elect from among its
members a mayor pro tempore to perform the duties of the Mayor during the
Mayor’s absence or disability, in accordance with general law who shall hold
said respective office for a term of one year.
   The Board of Commissioners is authorized and empowered to create such other
offices and positions of employment as may be deemed necessary, to define the
powers and limit the terms of the holders thereof, to prescribe their duties
and qualifications, and to fill said offices from time to time, and to abolish
the same when deemed no longer necessary.
SECTION 7. OATH OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS; REMOVAL OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
FOR CERTAIN CAUSES.
   That the said Mayor and Commissioners shall, before they enter upon the
duties of their respective offices, each take the oath prescribed for public
officials in the State of North Carolina; and in case any of said officers, or
any other officer or employee of said Town, shall be guilty of misconduct,
inability, or willful neglect of the performance of the duties of said office,
he may be removed from bis said office by the said board of commissioners.
SECTION 8. POWERS OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — GENERAL SUPERVISION AND CONTROL
OF TOWN PROPERTY; PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES, ETC.
   That the Board of Commissioners shall have the general custody or
supervision and control of a ll property of said town, of every description
whatever, is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and enact all
such ordinances, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with general law, as
may be necessary and proper for the government and good order of said Town and
for the maintenance of the public peace, quiet and good order and public health
within said Town; and it may, whenever deemed necessary or proper, repeal,
modify, or change the same, and said Board shall have power to provide for the
enforcement of all such ordinances, rules, and regulations.
SECTION 9. ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY, EASEMENTS, ETC.; EMINENT DOMAIN; OPERATION,
MAINTENANCE, ETC., OF PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   That the said Board of Commissioners shall have the power to acquire by
purchase, or otherwise, all such property as may be necessary for municipal
purposes, both within and without the corporate limits, and may lease, acquire
or purchase easements and rights of way, and for such purpose is hereby granted
the right of eminent domain and may enforce the same by condemnation
proceedings, and may use such property for municipal purposes including an
adequate electric light and power system, water supply system, and sewerage
system, and to that end said Board may establish, operate and maintain all
necessary light, power, water, and sewerage plants and systems, both within and
without the corporate limits of said Town, and in addition to supplying light,
power, water, and sewerage for municipal purposes and use, may sell the same to
its citizens, property owners, and others, under such rules, charges, and
regulations as may be prescribed by said Board.
SECTION 10. STREETS, SIDEWALKS, ETC. CEMETERY.
   That, in addition to any authority which is now or hereafter may be granted
by general law to the Town for making street improvements, including the power
of imminent domain, the said Board of Commissioners shall have the power to
provide for the maintenance and repair of all public streets, sidewalks, and
alleys of said Town, and to regulate and establish the width and grade of such
public streets, sidewalks, and alleys, and to change the same when deemed
advisable; to establish new streets, sidewalks, public alleys, and parks when
deemed a public necessity, and to discontinue and close the same when deemed no
longer a public necessity; to provide for the paving of the streets and
sidewalks of said Town, and to prohibit any obstruction or nuisance therein;
and to own and regulate by all necessary ordinances a public burying ground or
cemetery within or without the corporate limits of said Town.
SECTION 11. PROPERTY TAXES GENERALLY.
   That the Board of Commissioners shall have the power and is hereby
authorized to annually levy and collect, for municipal purposes, an ad valorem
tax on all real and personal property subject to taxation. Property taxes shall
be imposed and collected in the manner provided by general law.
SECTION 12. FINANCES.
   Alt moneys received by the Town, or in connection with the business of the
Town, shall be paid promptly into the Town’s depository. The Town’s official
depository shall be an institution designated by the Board in accordance with
applicable general laws including, without limitation, laws regarding
qualifications for the selected depository, the security for deposits, and
interest thereon. All interest on moneys belonging to the Town shall accrue to
the benefit of the Town. All moneys and accounts of the Town shall be
maintained, managed, held, disbursed, and invested in accordance with
applicable provision of the charter, general law, and regulations regarding
local government budgeting and finance.
SECTION 13. ANNUAL AUDIT.
   In accordance with applicable statutes, as soon as possible after the close
of each fiscal year, an independent audit shall be conducted of all accounts of
the Town. Such audit shall be performed by a qualified individual or firm to be
selected by the Council. The firm or individual selected to perform the audit
shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the affairs of the
Town or of any of its officers, and shall otherwise satisfy all applicable
legal and professional standards and requirements for this work.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Pinetops shall be
designated as the “Code of Pinetops, North Carolina” and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
subchapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and
shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      AT-LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the
owner or a member of his, her, or their immediate family or other authorized
person either by leash, cord, chain, or other tangible device.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The legislative body of the Town of Pinetops,
North Carolina.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Pinetops, North Carolina.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computer by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day
is Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters,
subchapters, or sections.
      COUNTY. Edgecombe County, North Carolina.
      DOG. Both male and female of the canine species.
      GENDER. Words imparting one gender shall include the other genders.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      GRAVE SITE. One grave plot.
      IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Includes spouse, child, mother, father, stepmother,
stepfather, sister, brother, grandmother, grandfather, mother-in-law, father-
in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, and
grandchild.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority
of those persons or officers.
      KENNEL. Any place where dogs are kept for breeding and subsequent
commercial sale, a place where dogs are boarded for a fee, and any place where
more than three dogs are kept.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural
includes the singular.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of that property.
      PARKWAY. Any portion of a street, between the curbline and the adjacent
property line.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. When applied to dogs, shall be intended to mean any dog
which habitually or repeatedly chases, attacks, snaps at, or barks at
pedestrians, bicyclists, or vehicles, turns over garbage cans, damages gardens,
or excessively or continuously barks.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto
within the town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      SUPERMAJORITY. When applied to actions of the Board of Commissioners,
means that four of the five Commissioners must agree to a motion for it to
pass. This term will apply in particular to issues of involuntary annexation of
property to the town and in cases whereby consideration is given to selling
real property owned by the town.
      SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an
artificial body of water for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of that building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TOWN. The Town of Pinetops, North Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
Statutory reference:
   Admission of code in evidence, see G.S. § 160A-79
   Adoption of code of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-77
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
   Definitions and rules for construction of statutes, see G.S. § 12-3
   Definitions and rules of statutory construction relating to municipalities,
see G.S. § 160A-1
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless such a construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   And or or. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of that act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such an error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section, or division, or any portion thereof, such repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section
               of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Pinetops, North Carolina, is
hereby amended as follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full
as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Town of Pinetops, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters, or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter, or chapter
number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, if any, are listed following the text of the
code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970;
Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise    exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 139-1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, if any person shall violate any
provision of this code of ordinances, except any provision regulating the
operation or parking of vehicles, he or she shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(G.S. § 14-4(a))
(Prior Code, § 10.99)
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
      
31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   PUBLIC SAFETY AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; FEES
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
30.01   Time and place of regular meetings
   
30.02   Mayor to preside
   
30.03   Rules of procedure
Statutory reference:
   Administration of towns having Mayor-Council form of government, see
    G.S. §§ 160A-155 through 160A-159
   Compensation of Mayor and Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A-64
   Composition of governing body, see G.S. § 160A-66
   Exercise of corporate power by Board of Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A-12
   Failure of Commissioners to raise sufficient revenue for operating expenses
of the town, see G.S. § 159-36
   Filling vacancies in elective offices, see G.S. § 160A-63
   General ordinance making powers of Board of Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A-
174
   General powers of governing body, see G.S. § 160A-67
   Organization and procedures of Board of Commissioners, see G.S. §§ 160A-68
et seq.
   Power of Board of Commissioners to organize town government, see G.S. §
160A-146
   Requirements and procedures relating to the budget and other fiscal matters,
see G.S. Ch. 159
§ 30.01 TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall hold a regular meeting at the Town Hall on
the first Tuesday of each month, beginning at 6:00 p.m.; provided that when a
first Tuesday falls upon a legal holiday such meeting shall be held on the next
following business day; and provided further, that if the Town Hall is
unavailable for any reason the Board may meet at any convenient place within
the town.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921; Ord. passed 8-5-1958)
Statutory reference:
   Biennial organizational meetings, see G.S. §§ 160A-68, 160A-70
   Duty of Board to fix time and place of regular meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71
   Minutes of meetings, see G.S. § 160A-72
   Quorum, see G.S. § 160A-74
   Special meetings, see G.S. § 160A
§ 30.02 MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Commissioners,
preserve order, decide all questions of order, and appoint all committees,
standing, and special.
(Prior Code, § 30.02) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921)
Statutory reference:
   Duty of Mayor to preside at Board meetings, see G.S.§ 160A
§ 30.03 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, adopt such rules of
procedure, not inconsistent with the town Charter, state law, or this code, for
the transaction of its business, the exercise of its powers and the performance
of its duties as the Board may deem appropriate for such purposes. Such rules
may include, among other subjects not mentioned in this section:
   (A)   The order of business at its meetings;
   (B)   Rules of parliamentary procedure;
   (C)   Official conduct of members of the Board;
   (D)   The conduct of public hearings and investigations;
   (E)   Appointment and jurisdiction of standing and special committees; and
   (F)   Such other subjects as may be deemed appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 30.03)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipal governing bodies to adopt their own rules of
procedure, see G.S. § 160A-71
   Conduct of public hearings, see G.S. § 160A-81
   Investigative and subpoena powers of municipal governing bodies, see G.S. §
160A-80
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Bond required of certain town officers, employees, and agents
   
31.02   Compensation; fees
   
31.03   Social Security coverage
   
31.04   Local Government Employees’ Retirement System
   
31.05   Suspension of officers and employees
   
31.06   Presentation of an action on claims and accounts against the town
   
31.07   Disbursement of town funds
   
31.08   Public records and property
   
31.09   Ex officio officers; officers may fill more than one office; authority
of deputies
   
31.10   Limited authority to administer oaths, false swearing
Specific Officers
   
31.25   Mayor
   
31.26   Mayor Pro Tempore
   
31.27   Town Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.28   Ex Officio Finance Officer
   
31.29   Town Attorney
   
31.30   Utility Supervisor
   
31.31   Budget Officer
   
31.32   Town Administrator
Cross-reference:
   Courteous conduct between town officers and employees and the public, see §
130.11
   Impersonating town officer or employee, see §
130.10
Statutory reference:
   Acting department heads, see G.S. § 160A-156
   Filling vacancies, see G.S. § 160A-63
   Oath of office of all town officers, see G.S. § 160A-61
   Officers holding over until successors qualified, see G.S. § 160A-62
   Qualifications of appointive town officers, see G.S. § 160A-60
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BOND REQUIRED OF CERTAIN TOWN OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, AND AGENTS.
   (A)   Every officer, employee, or agent of the town who handles or has
custody of more than $100 of the town’s funds at any time shall, before
assuming his or her duties as such, be required to enter into bond with good
sureties, in an amount sufficient to protect the town, payable to the town, and
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and a true
accounting for all funds of the town which may come into his or her hands,
custody, or control, which bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners and deposited with the town, except that such bond of any
employee may, in the discretion of the Board, be conditioned only upon a true
accounting for funds of the town.
   (B)   The bond of the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be in an amount not less
than $50,000; and all other persons required to be bonded under the provisions
of division (A) above shall be bonded under a system of blanket faithful
performance or honesty bonding in the amount of not less than $10,000.
   (C)   All bonds required by this section shall be approved as to form by the
Town Attorney, and the sureties thereon shall be bonding or casualty companies
licensed to do business in the state. The premium on all such bonds shall be
paid by the town.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
Statutory reference:
   Bond required of finance officers, see G.S. § 159-29
   Bond required of municipal tax collectors, see G.S. § 105-349
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION; FEES.
   (A)   Officers, employees, and agents of the town shall receive for their
services such compensation as may be provided for them in the annual budget or
other ordinances or resolutions of the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Fees paid to officers, employees, or agents of the town for services
rendered in the course of their official duties shall be turned over by them to
the Town Clerk-Treasurer as other money belonging to the town.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of Mayor and Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A
§ 31.03 SOCIAL SECURITY COVERAGE.
   The Board of Commissioners, having elected by resolution adopted May 5,
1955, to exercise its option to extend the benefits of Title II of the Federal
Social Security Act to all eligible town officers and employees, as provided in
G.S. § 135-23, with coverage to be effective upon adoption of such resolution,
hereby declares that the plan submitted to and approved by the state agency, as
such plan is in force on the effective date of this code, shall continue in
full force and effect and that the town shall conform to all applicable
provisions of G.S. § 135-23 and other applicable provisions of the General
Statutes relating to federal Social Security for eligible officers and
employees of municipalities in the state.
(Prior Code, § 31.03) (Ord. passed 5-3-1955)
§ 31.04 LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   The town is authorized to participate in the Local Governmental Employees’
Retirement System of the state.
(Prior Code, § 31.04) (Ord. passed 12-20-1976)
§ 31.05 SUSPENSION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Any officer or employee of the town elected by the Board of Commissioners
may be suspended by the Mayor, or by the committee of the Board of
Commissioners exercising supervision over him or her, for neglect of duty or
violation of any rules prescribed, and the Mayor or such committee may employ
others in his or her place, pending the action of the Board, who may approve
the same, or disapprove and reinstate such officer or employee.
(Prior Code, § 31.05)
§ 31.06 PRESENTATION OF AN ACTION ON CLAIMS AND ACCOUNTS AGAINST THE TOWN.
   (A)   Any person having a claim or account to collect from the town shall
present to the Town Clerk-Treasurer a statement, duly verified, showing each
item with the amount and date thereof; and the Clerk-Treasurer shall submit
each such statement, so prepared, when received by him or her to the town
officer or employee by whom the obligation was incurred, for his or her
endorsement to be attached thereto as to the correctness thereof; and for this
purpose all claims sounding in tort shall be submitted to the Town Attorney for
his or her comments and recommendations. The town officers and employees to
whom such statements are submitted shall return them to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer, with their endorsements attached thereto, promptly upon completing
their investigation thereof, and the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall then present
them to the Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting, at which time
the Board, as to each statement, shall approve it; approve it in part;
disapprove it; or, if necessary, defer action and provide for further
investigation of the matter. No claim or account, or item of any claim or
account, shall be paid until approved by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution or by motion duly put,
carried, and entered officers and employees in the minutes, delegate authority
to the Town Clerk-Treasurer to approve, on its behalf, claims and accounts due
under contract or otherwise due prior to the next regular meeting of the Board,
and for such utility services and routine purchases as may be specified in such
resolution or motion; provided that the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall first obtain
the approval of the town officer or employee to which any such claim relates,
and such other approval, if any, as may be required by the terms of such
resolution or motion.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the payment of compensation to
any town officer or employee whose compensation is prescribed by ordinance or
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 31.06) (Ord. passed 6-6-1961)
Statutory reference:
   Preaudit of town disbursements, see G.S. § 159-28
§ 31.07 DISBURSEMENT OF TOWN FUNDS.
   No money shall be disbursed from the Town Treasury except by approval of the
Board of Commissioners and then only if there is on hand sufficient funds
appropriated for the purpose of such disbursement and not otherwise obligated.
All checks on town depositories shall be signed by the Town Clerk-Treasurer and
countersigned by the Mayor; provided, that the Board of Commissioners may by
resolution provide alternate officers for such purposes to act when the Town
Clerk-Treasurer or Mayor is absent or disabled.
(Prior Code, § 31.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Disbursements from town funds, see G.S. § 159-25
§ 31.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall remove any record, document, book, or other paper
belonging to the town, or any other town property, from the office or place
where it properly belongs, without authority from the custodian thereof, who
may require a receipt therefor, except on written order from the Board of
Commissioners or the Mayor or pursuant to a valid subpoena duces tecum.
   (B)   All public records and accounts shall be available to the public for
inspection and use during all regular business hours in the offices where
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 31.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 31.09 EX OFFICIO OFFICERS; OFFICERS MAY FILL MORE THAN ONE OFFICE; AUTHORITY
OF DEPUTIES.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may provide that any appointive town
officer may serve ex officio in the capacity of any other appointive town
office, or that any two or more appointive town offices may be held
concurrently by one person.
   (B)   Authority vested in and duties imposed upon town officers by state
law, the Town Charter, this code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the
Board of Commissioners may, when they so authorize, be exercised or performed
by their deputies, assistants, and other subordinates to the extent not
prohibited by state law, this code, or other ordinance or resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 31.09)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Board of Commissioners to consolidate offices, see G.S. § 160A
§ 31.10 LIMITED AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER OATHS, FALSE SWEARING.
   (A)   The Mayor, the presiding officer of the Board of Commissioners or any
committee thereof, the presiding officer of any board, commission, or other
body of the town government, the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and each other officer,
deputy, or assistant officer of the town to whom any sworn statement, whether
oral or in writing, is required to be made or submitted by any person pursuant
to any provision of the Charter, this code, or other ordinance or resolution of
the Board of Commissioners shall have authority to administer the oath so
required; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as
purporting to authorize the administration of any oath which, by law, is
required to be administered by a judicial officer, notary public, or other
officer authorized by statute to administer oaths, nor shall this section be
construed as purporting to authorize the taking of any acknowledgment of any
signature or seal for the purpose of recording in the office of the clerk of
any court or elsewhere other than in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer or
some other office of this town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom an oath has been
administered pursuant to this section to knowingly make any false certificate,
affidavit, or statement, oral or written, concerning any matter whatsoever in
violation of such oath.
(Prior Code, § 31.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
SPECIFIC OFFICERS
§ 31.25 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the town for the
purpose of service of civil process and for all ceremonial purposes, and he or
she shall be the chief executive officer of the town government. He or she
shall have general supervision over all town departments, offices, and agencies
unless otherwise provided by state law, this code, or other ordinance or
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Mayor:
      (1)   To see that the provisions of this code and other ordinances and
resolutions of the Board of Commissioners are duly administered and enforced;
      (2)   To report to the Board of Commissioners from time to time as to the
state of the town government and the condition of town finances, and to make
such recommendations as he or she may deem desirable for the good of the town;
      (3)   To render reports to the Board of Commissioners and committees
thereof upon request;
      (4)   To sign all written contracts of the town when approved by the
Board of Commissioners;
      (5)   To keep the Mayor Pro Tempore currently informed as to all
transactions of the office of Mayor; and
      (6)   To exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may
be prescribed for his or her office by state law, the Charter, this code, and
other ordinances and resolutions of the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 31.20)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of Mayor, see G.S. § 160A-64
   Mayor and Board of Commissioners constituting governing body of town, see
G.S. § 160A-66
   Mayor calling special meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71
   Mayor presiding at meetings of Board of Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A-69
   Powers and duties of Mayor generally, see G.S. § 160A-67
§ 31.26 MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   During any period in which the office of Mayor is vacant or the Mayor is
absent or unable to perform the duties of his or her office, the Mayor Pro
Tempore shall have the powers and perform the duties of the office of Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.21)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment, duties, powers, and term of office of Mayor Pro Tempore, see
G.S. § 160A-70
§ 31.27 TOWN CLERK-TREASURER.
   The Clerk of the Board of Commissioners shall be Ex Officio Clerk,
Treasurer, and Tax Collector of the town with the title of “Town Clerk-
Treasurer,” and he or she shall have the powers and perform the duties
prescribed for those offices by state law, the Charter, this code, and other
ordinances and resolutions of the Board of Commissioners, including but not
limited to the following.
   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners and keep correct minutes of its proceedings; he or she shall file
and preserve all records and accounts of the town, properly classifying the
same, and shall take and preserve proper vouchers for all expenditures made by
him or her. He or she shall make disbursement of town funds only in compliance
with the provisions of §§
31.06 and
31.07.
   (B)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be the general purchasing and paying
agent of the town and shall make all purchases and payments, under the
direction and with the approval of the Mayor. He or she shall have the care,
custody, and control of all the material and supplies of the town of which no
other town officer is designated as custodian.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, or someone under his
or her direction, to list the taxes of the town, and make out all proper lists
thereof as required by law; and thereafter to collect and faithfully account
for all taxes due according to such lists, together with all license and
privilege taxes, and all other money due and coming to the town in any way.
   (D)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall make a report at each first monthly
meeting of the Board of Commissioners showing all receipts disbursements for
the preceding month, and the amount remaining in his or her hands as Treasurer.
   (E)   All town money coming within the possession, custody, or control of
the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be deposited by him or her in a depository
designated for such purpose by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to law,
except for such amount as may be authorized by the Board to be kept in a secure
place in his or her office as a petty cash fund.
(Prior Code, § 31.22) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921)
Statutory reference:
   Minutes of the Board of Commissioners, see G.S. § 160A-72
   Municipal tax collectors and the collection and foreclosure of taxes
generally, see G.S. §§ 105-349 et seq.
   Ordinance book, see G.S. § 160A-78
   Town clerks and deputy clerks generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-171 and 160A-172
§ 31.28 EX OFFICIO FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be Ex Officio Finance Officer of the town
and, as such, shall have the powers and perform the duties provided by law for
municipal finance officers, and for municipal accountants except those relating
to the budget officer.
(Prior Code, § 31.23)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal finance officers, see G.S. §§ 159-24 et seq.
§ 31.29 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Town Attorney shall attend each meeting of the Board of Commissioners,
at the request of the Board; he or she shall prosecute and defend suits for and
against the town and for and against town officers acting in their official
capacity; he or she shall approve all official bonds to form; he or she shall
approve all draft ordinances as to form, and, at the request of any
Commissioner, he or she shall approve any draft resolution as to form; he or
she shall draft or approve all deeds, contracts, and other instruments relating
to the business of the town; he or she shall advise the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners, and other town officers, as to the legality and legal
consequences of proposed courses of action; and, in general, the Town Attorney
shall be the legal counselor of the town.
(Prior Code, § 31.25)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment and duties of municipal attorney, see G.S. § 160A-173
§ 31.30 UTILITY SUPERVISOR.
   (A)   The Utility Supervisor, under the general direction of the Mayor,
shall have custody of and supervision over all buildings, grounds, equipment,
and other personal property owned by or leased to the town except real and
personal property of the Fire and Police Departments and the office of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer, and except such other real or personal property for which
another person is designated by the Board of Supervisors as the custodian and
supervisor. He or she shall be responsible to the Board of Commissioners,
through the Mayor, for the proper maintenance and use of all property within
his or her custody or under his or her supervision.
   (B)   The Utility Supervisor shall be the head of the following departments
of the town government: the Electric Department; Sanitation Department; Streets
and Maintenance Department; and the Water and Sewers Department.
   (C)   As head of any department, the Utility Supervisor shall be responsible
to the Board of Commissioners, through the Mayor, for its proper
administration, planning, and operations and for the training of and
performance of duty by its personnel, and he or she is hereby vested with all
authority necessary for such purposes to the extent not prohibited by law or
contrary to policy established by the Board of Supervisors.
   (D)   The Utility Supervisor shall have such other powers and perform such
other duties as may from time to time be specified by the Board of
Commissioners.
   (E)   The Utility Supervisor shall attend each regular meeting of the Board
of Supervisors, and each special meeting for which his or her attendance is
required in the roll call; and he or she shall render such comments,
recommendations, and reports to the Board of Commissioners as from time to time
he or she may deem appropriate, or upon request by the Board or by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.26)
§ 31.31 BUDGET OFFICER.
   At each organizational meeting of the Board of Commissioners, the Board
shall appoint or designate a Budget Officer, who may be the Town Administrator
if he or she agrees to undertake the duties of such office. The Budget Officer
shall have the powers and perform the duties provided by law for municipal
budget officers, as well as for municipal accountants with respect to their
budgetary powers and duties.
(Prior Code, § 31.24)
Statutory reference:
   Municipal budget officers, see G.S. § 159-9
§ 31.32 TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The job description detailing the duties of the position of Town
Administrator set forth in Exhibit A attached to the resolution codified herein
are adopted and are to be made part of the personnel policy of the town.
   (B)   Authority over all personnel, excluding the position of the Town
Administrator, is delegated to the Town Administrator. More specifically, the
Town Administrator shall have the authority to hire, promote, discipline, and
terminate all employees of the town without further approval, direction, or
input from the Mayor or Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   General authority over all town operations, including the departments
of administration, police, fire, public works, and any other departments
created by the town, is delegated to the Town Administrator.
   (D)   Where there is any conflict in this code of ordinances, the personnel
policy, or any other policy of the town, the delegation of authority set forth
in this section and Exhibit A attached to the resolution codified herein shall
control unless repealed or amended by the Board of Commissioners. More
specifically, where any of the aforementioned documents indicates that a
department or department head reports directly to the Mayor or Board of
Commissioners, this section shall control and the department or department head
shall report directly to the Town Administrator.
(Res. passed 5-4-2021)
CHAPTER 32: PUBLIC SAFETY AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Section
Civil Emergencies
   
32.01   Conditions constituting state of emergency
   
32.02   Proclamation by Mayor; restrictions authorized
   
32.03   Limitations and exemptions in proclamation
   
32.04   Extension, amendment, and repeal of proclamation
   
32.05   Authority to request state police and military forces; martial law
   
32.06   Termination of emergency
   
32.07   Required compliance with proclamation
Fire Department
   
32.20   Composition and organization
   
32.21   Chief of the Fire Department
   
32.22   Authority to command; obedience to orders
   
32.23   General authority of members
   
32.24   Rules and regulations
   
32.25   Constitution and bylaws for volunteer members
   
32.26   Town participation in State Volunteer Fire Department; service beyond
town limits
   
32.27   Fire Department member of State Firefighter’s Association
Police Department
   
32.40   Chief of Police
   
32.41   Rules and regulations
   
32.42   Intoxication or sleeping on duty
 
   
32.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fire protection, see
Ch. 92
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
§ 32.01 CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.
(Prior Code, § 34.01)
Statutory reference:
   Riots and civil disorders, see G.S. §§ 14-288.1 to 14-288.19
§ 32.02 PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR; RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health, and welfare of the people within the
town or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives and property of people within the town, to place
in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized in division (B)
below.
   (B)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
      (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one’s own premises of
explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind, and
prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer, or other disposition thereof;
      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or
intoxicating beverages of any kind and their possession or consumption off
one’s own premises;
      (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil, or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any
public property;
      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or
any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;
      (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street or roadway or
upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical
assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-
being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;
      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any
business activity and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly;
and/or
      (7)   Prohibit or regulate, by what is commonly called a curfew, persons
being upon any or all streets, sidewalks, public places, and vacant lots within
the town during such periods of the day or night, or both day and night, as the
Mayor may specify.
(Prior Code, § 34.02)
§ 32.03 LIMITATIONS AND EXEMPTIONS IN PROCLAMATION.
   The Mayor is authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation the
application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically
designated or described within the limits of the town and to specific hours of
the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law
enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors, nurses,
employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities,
public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting,
and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other
classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and
immediately necessary to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the
people within the town.
(Prior Code, § 34.03)
§ 32.04 EXTENSION, AMENDMENT, AND REPEAL OF PROCLAMATION.
   Any proclamation may be extended, altered, or repealed in any particular
during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the
issuance of a subsequent proclamation.
(Prior Code, § 34.04)
§ 32.05 AUTHORITY TO REQUEST STATE POLICE AND MILITARY FORCES; MARTIAL LAW.
   If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it shall appear that the emergency
is, or that the threatened emergency is likely to be, of such proportions that
the means available to the town to maintain law and order are insufficient for
such purpose, the Mayor shall, promptly and by the most expeditious means of
communication, inform the Governor of the situation and request that such
necessary police or military forces of the state be provided promptly; and if,
during an actual state of emergency, the Mayor shall find that the civil courts
having jurisdiction within the town are unable to perform their lawful duties
and that, by reason of widespread lawlessness, writs, and other process cannot
be served or executed in the town, the Mayor shall inform the Governor of his
or her findings and may recommend to him or her that a state of martial law be
proclaimed to exist within the town.
(Prior Code, § 34.05)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to request aid of police from other political
subdivisions, and their authority to respond, see G.S. § 160A-288
§ 32.06 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 34.06)
§ 32.07 REQUIRED COMPLIANCE WITH PROCLAMATION.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by
any proclamation authorized by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 34.07) Penalty, see §
32.99
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 COMPOSITION AND ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of such full time and volunteer
members, and such quarters, vehicles, apparatus, equipment, and other property
as may from time to time be authorized by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The organization of the Fire Department shall be as provided by
regulations promulgated pursuant to §
32.24.
(Prior Code, § 32.01)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipalities to organize, equip, and maintain a fire
department and prescribe the duties thereof, see G.S. § 160A-291
§ 32.21 CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the head of the Fire
Department and the commanding officer thereof, and shall be responsible to the
Mayor and Board of Commissioners for the administration of the Department and
for the training, discipline, morale, and effective deployment and utilization
of the members of the Department and for the maintenance and effective
deployment and utilization of the property, equipment, and apparatus of the
Department.
   (B)   The Chief shall have all such powers as may be necessary and lawful to
meet the responsibilities imposed upon him or her by this section, including
but not limited to the following.
      (1)   The Chief shall have absolute command, control, management,
assignment to duties, and supervision of every officer, member, and employee of
the Fire Department during a fire and at all practices and drills, and during
all hours when such personnel are on duty.
      (2)   The Chief shall have supervision over the engine houses, trucks,
and all apparatus and equipment belonging to the Fire Department. He or she
shall be responsible for the serviceable condition of all equipment belonging
to the Fire Department, and he or she shall be responsible that every piece of
fire apparatus is equipped at all times with the necessary wrenches and all
other equipment belonging to that piece of apparatus and necessary in the
successful fighting of fire.
      (3)   The Chief shall have supervision over all repairs to apparatus and
the charge of all supplies, and shall issue them upon his or her own discretion
or upon the authority of the Board of Commissioners to the units of the Fire
Department, taking from them the receipt of the commanding officer of the unit
to which the supplies are issued. He or she shall have sole control,
management, and command at fires and alarms of fire over all apparatus and
equipment belonging to the Fire Department. Whenever any purchases are to be
made, or the fire apparatus used by the Department requires attention or
repairs, he or she shall make a report and recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners unless the repairs needed are of such character that will require
immediate attention.
      (4)   The Chief shall have authority to direct the pulling down or
destroying of any fence, house, building, or other thing, if deemed necessary
to prevent the spreading of a fire.
      (5)   The Chief shall be responsible for the keeping of necessary records
for the Fire Department, which shall be subject to the inspection of the Mayor
and members of the Board of Commissioners at any time. Such record shall list
and note, inter alia, the state of repair of all property belonging to the Fire
Department. He or she shall record and report monthly to the Board of
Commissioners a statement of all fires occurring since the previous report, the
units and personnel responding to alarms, the loss and insurance as far as
ascertained, and the causes of any such fires, together with such suggestions
as he or she may deem advisable to bring the number of fires to a minimum. He
or she shall also keep at his or her office such books or other records as the
Common Council may prescribe.
      (6)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have such powers, perform
such duties, keep such records and make such reports as may be required by
state law for local or municipal fire chiefs and local or municipal fire
inspectors.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of chiefs of municipal fire departments generally, see G.S. § 160A-
292
   Duties of municipal fire chiefs relating to investigations, reports, and
records, see G.S. § 58-79-1
   Powers and duties of municipal fire chiefs relating to inspection of
premises and removal of fire hazards therefrom, see G.S. § 58-79-20
   Supervision over municipal fire inspectors by State Fire Marshall, see G.S.
§ 58-78A-15
§ 32.22 AUTHORITY TO COMMAND; OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS.
   Authority within the Fire Department shall flow from the Chief of the Fire
Department through the Assistant Chief and other officers and firefighters
downward in order of rank and seniority within rank; and subordinates shall
have the powers and perform the duties of their immediate superiors when such
superiors are absent or disabled. Each member of the Fire Department shall obey
all lawful orders of his or her superiors in the chain of command.
(Prior Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.23 GENERAL AUTHORITY OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Fire Department shall have authority to do all acts
reasonably necessary to extinguish fires and protect life and property from
fire; and it shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner of property
which is burning, willfully to interfere in any manner with any firefighter in
the performance of his or her duty.
(Prior Code, § 32.04) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.24 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Administrator, in consultation with the Chief of the Fire
Department, shall prepare rules and regulations for the government of the Fire
Department and the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations, which may be
amended from time to time, shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for
approval. It shall be unlawful for any member of the Fire Department to violate
any such rule or regulation which has been approved by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners and placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer;
and a copy of all such approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on
file at Fire Department headquarters.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.25 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS FOR VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.
   The constitution and bylaws applicable to volunteer members of the Fire
Department shall be consistent with state law, this code, and other ordinances
and the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and provision shall be
made for election of officers at the annual meeting in each year and for the
holding of at least one practice drill per month, with the names of those
participating to be reported monthly to the Chief of the Fire Department. Such
constitution and bylaws and all amendments thereto shall be approved by the
Board of Commissioners, by resolution or motion, and filed in the office of the
Town Clerk-Treasurer, before taking effect. A copy of such approved
constitution and bylaws shall also be on file in the office of the Chief of the
Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.26 TOWN PARTICIPATION IN STATE VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT; SERVICE BEYOND
TOWN LIMITS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 58-80-15, the Board of
Commissioners hereby resolves to accept and endorse the provisions of G.S. §§
58-80-1 et seq., thus making the town a participant in the State Volunteer Fire
Department.
   (B)   As required by G.S. § 58-80-25, the Board of Commissioners hereby
designates the Chief of the Fire Department to have the authority to grant or
deny permission to firefighters and apparatus to leave the town in all cases
where request is made for assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town;
and in the absence, disability, or unavailability of the Chief of the Fire
Department, the Assistant Chief of the Fire Department is hereby designated for
such purpose; and in the absence, disability, or unavailability of the
Assistant Chief, the Mayor is hereby designated for such purpose.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, or if he or
she is absent or disabled, the acting Chief of the Fire Department, to keep the
office of the State Commissioner of Insurance and the office of the secretary
of the State Firefighter’s Association currently informed as to the name,
address, and telephone number of each of the persons designated in division (B)
above to have authority to grant or deny permission to firefighters and
apparatus to leave the town.
   (D)   In the event of a conflagration beyond the capability of the Fire
Department to bring under control and prevent the spread thereof to other
property so as to endanger a considerable segment of the town, the ranking
officer of the Fire Department who is then in command shall forthwith cause to
be called upon for assistance such other fire departments of the State
Volunteer Fire Department as, in his or her judgment, may be required to
control and extinguish such conflagration.
(Prior Code, § 32.07)
Statutory reference:
   For additional provisions of state law relating to the furnishing of fire
protection outside town limits, immunity, and injury to firefighters while on
duty outside town, see G.S. § 160A-293
§ 32.27 FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBER OF STATE FIREFIGHTER’S ASSOCIATION.
   The Fire Department is a member of the State Firefighter’s Association and
shall comply with the constitution and bylaws thereof.
(Prior Code, § 32.08)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.40 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police, under the general supervision of the Town
Administrator, shall be head of the Police Department and commanding officer of
the police force. He or she shall be responsible to the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners for the administration of the Department and for the training,
discipline, morale, and effective deployment and utilization of the members of
the police force and for the maintenance and effective deployment and
utilization of the property and equipment of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town relating to police and law enforcement generally, see G.S.
§§ 160A-281 et seq.
§ 32.41 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Administrator, in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall
prepare rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and
the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations, which may be amended from
time to time, shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for approval. It
shall be unlawful for any member of the Police Department to violate any such
rule or regulation which has been approved by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer; and
a copy of all such approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file
at Police Department headquarters.
(Prior Code, § 33.02) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.42 INTOXICATION OR SLEEPING ON DUTY.
   (A)   Any police officer who shall be intoxicated while on duty, asleep at
his or her post, off his or her beat, unless officially, or in any way
neglecting his or her duties, shall be subject to such disciplinary action and
punishment, either or both, as may be provided in the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to §
32.41.
   (B)   No police officer shall consume any amount of alcoholic beverage while
on duty or as otherwise prohibited by the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to §
32.41.
(Prior Code, § 33.03) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921)
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The violation of any provision of §§
32.01 through
32.07, or of any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation
authorized by §§
32.01 through
32.07, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not
exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-
4.
(Prior Code, § 34.99)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE; FEES
Section
Fees and Fines
   
33.01   Administrative fees
   
33.02   Utility fees
   
33.03   Zoning violation fees
   
33.04   Cemetery plots
FEES AND FINES
§ 33.01 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   The following fees are effective as of July 1, 2023:
Delinquent fee                        $35
Fax                                   $1/page
Fingerprinting                        $25
Late fee                              $10
Notary fees                           $10
(G.S. § 10B-31)
Police reports                        $5
Return check fee                      $35
(G.S. § 25-3-506)
Sanitation fee                        $25
(garbage, recycle, bulk, yard debris)
Special event application             $25
Vehicle unlock/police                 $25
Xerox copies                          $0.25/page
Zoning permit                         $25
 
§ 33.02 UTILITY FEES.
   The following fees are effective as of July 1, 2023:
Damage to bottom meter (first damage no charge)              $250
Damage to top meter sensor (first damage no charge)          $50
Security light                                               $150
Security light with pole                                     $250
Utility deposits:
   Homeowner:
      Electric                                         $75
      Water                                            $50
   Rental property:
      Electric                                         $250
      Water                                            $100
   Return customer after 90 days (left owning utility bill):
      Electric                                         $325
      Water                                            $150
   Temporary service                                      $50
 
§ 33.03 ZONING VIOLATION FEES.
   The following fees for zoning violations are effective as of July 1, 2023:
 
First offense       $50 per day in non-compliance
Second offense      $100 per day in non-compliance
Third offense       $250 per day in non-compliance
Subsequent offenses $500 per day in non-compliance
 
§ 33.04 CEMETERY PLOTS.
   The following fees for cemetery plots are effective as of July 1, 2023:
 
Residential     $700
Non-residential $900
 
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER AND SEWERS
      
51.   ELECTRIC SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
   
50.01   Required connections to public sanitary sewer or septic tank
   
50.02   Water closet, privy connecting with or emptying into drains
   
50.03   Damage to utility system; unauthorized use
   
50.04   Appeal
   
50.05   Leak adjustment policy
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 REQUIRED CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER OR SEPTIC TANK.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
50.02, each house, building, or other structure within the town which is
intended for use or which is used as a place of human habitation, employment,
or congregation shall be provided by its owner with one or more sanitary flush
toilets, in such number as to be reasonably sufficient to accommodate the
number of persons usually residing, employed, or congregating therein; and such
toilets shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer if and when such sanitary
sewer is or becomes available. A sanitary sewer shall be regarded as available
to any property when it lies within a distance of 200 feet of the property line
and connection thereto would not require the crossing of property of a third
party; provided, that the grade of such sewer is below grade of the property to
which it is to be connected, so as to provide flow of sewage, by force of
gravity, from such property to such sewer; and provided further, that a public
water main is similarly available or a source of water exists upon the property
which is to be connected to such sewer and is sufficient to provide for the
flow of sewage from such property into the sewer.
   (B)   When a public sanitary sewer is not available to any property which,
by division (A) above is required to be provided with one or more sanitary
flush toilets, then such toilet located upon such property shall be connected
by its owner to a septic tank which meets all requirements of the State Board
of Health and the requirements of the applicable health regulations of the
county.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. passed 7-1-1947) Penalty, see §
50.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to require connections with water and sewer systems, see
G.S. § 160A-317
§ 50.02 WATER CLOSET, PRIVY CONNECTING WITH OR EMPTYING INTO DRAINS.
   No water closet, privy, septic tank, kitchen slops, or drainage from any
horse stable or pigpen shall connect with or empty directly or indirectly into
any of the open or covered drains of the town. No storm water shall run into
any sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 DAMAGE TO UTILITY SYSTEM; UNAUTHORIZED USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, remove, damage, or interfere
with any part of the utility system. Provided, it shall further be unlawful for
any person to turn off or discontinue or turn on water or sewer service to any
part of the utility system without the written consent of the town.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2021) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 APPEAL.
   Any appeal from a notice of violation or civil penalty assessment shall be
made in writing to the Town Administrator within ten days of receipt of the
notice of violation or civil penalty assessment issued pursuant to this
section. The Town Administrator shall use all reasonable efforts to notify the
appellant in writing of his or her decision within 30 days of receipt of the
notice of appeal.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2021)
§ 50.05 LEAK ADJUSTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   Private leaks. Customers are responsible for repair and water usage
due to leaks beyond the meter outlet:
      (1)   One private leak adjustment per 12-month period;
      (2)   The customer must provide a plumber statement and/or receipt that
leak has been repaired before adjustment can be applied;
      (3)   Adjustments will be calculated based on one year of customer usage.
Adjustment will only apply to sewer consumption, not water;
      (4)   Adjustments will be calculated based on one year of customer usage.
One water adjustment per 12-month period will be allowed for (water only
customers) who experience a water line break from meter to residence/business;
and
      (5)   Adjustments will only be allowed one time per year for pool fill-
up.
   (B)   City leaks. The city is responsible for repair and water usage due to
leaks on the yoke, tailpiece, or outlet washer:
      (1)   City leaks will be adjusted to remove 100% excess water and 100%
excess sewer usage above their average usage for all bills impacted; and
      (2)   No limit to the number of city leaks adjustment a customer can
receive.
   (C)   Exclusions. The following causes of leaks/high usage do not qualify
for a private adjustment:
      (1)   Appliances including hot water heaters, refrigerators, ice
machines, washing machines, dishwashers, and the like;
      (2)   Outside water hose;
      (3)   Spigots;
      (4)   Commodes;
      (5)   Faucets (sinks, showerheads, tubs);
      (6)   Powerwashing; or
      (7)   Irrigation.
(Ord. passed 4-4-2023)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any regulation,
standard, rule, or order adopted in furtherance of this chapter, shall be
subject to a civil penalty as follows:
      (1)   Water meter damage due to accident, first violation will be at no
charge to customer. Repeat violation within the previous five years, $200;
      (2)   Water meter obstruction, alteration, bypass, or tampering, first
violation, $500. Repeat violation within the previous five years, $1,000;
      (3)   Make any connection or reconnection with the water system without
first procuring from the town written permission, $1,000; and
      (4)   Any other violation not specifically listed herein, $500 per
violation.
   (B)   In the case of a violation of G.S. Ch. 14, § 151 (i.e., willful or
fraudulent interference with the utility system to obtain utility service) that
causes damages to the utility system or other loss to the town, the civil
penalty shall be subject to a penalty three times the amount of losses and/or
damages caused by the violation or $1,000, whichever is greater.
   (C)   The notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be issued in writing
and shall set forth with reasonable care the basis of the civil penalty and any
administrative costs and the costs to the town of rectifying the noncompliance
that are assessed.
   (D)   Any person violating any section of this chapter must pay to the town
all expenses incurred by the town in repairing any damage to the utility system
caused in whole or in part by such violation and any expense incurred by the
town in investigating such violation. These expenses include but are not
limited to equipment cost, material cost, labor cost, and site remediation.
Payment is due immediately upon the town incurring repair costs.
(Ord. passed 11-9-2021)
CHAPTER 51: ELECTRIC SYSTEM
Section
   
51.01   Electric rate schedule
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 ELECTRIC RATE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The following rates are effective as of the July 2023 billing:
Commercial:       
   Base charge$17.45/month
   0-1400 KWH $00.1988/kwh
   Over 1400 K$00.1289/kwh
Residential:
   Base charge$13.66/month
   0-750 KWH  $00.1360/kwh
   Over 750 KW$00.1360/kwh
Security lights:
   Amount/ligh$17.68/month
 
   (B)   The following rates are effective as of the July 2023 billing:
 
                                 Lights Water
Homeowner:                        $75    $50
Rental property:
   No reference                $250   $100
   Return customers after 90 da$325   $150 (left owing bill)
   With reference              $150   $50
 
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   VEHICLE LICENSES
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Short title
   
70.02   Compliance required
   
70.03   Applicability of chapter
   
70.04   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.05   Required obedience to police officers and firefighters
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Definition
   
70.21   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
70.22   Placement, change, or removal of official traffic-control devices
   
70.23   Types of devices authorized
   
70.24   Traffic-control devices in place
   
70.25   Requirement as to signs
   
70.26   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.27   Flashing signals
   
70.28   Specific duties imposed by certain devices
   
70.29   Speed limits
   
70.30   Reduced speed zones
   
70.31   Road name changes
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to designate stop and yield intersections, see G.S. §§ 20-158 and
20-158.1
   Authority to impose speed restrictions, establish one-way streets, see G.S.
§ 20-169
   Authority to install traffic-control devices, see G.S. § 20-169
   Authority to prohibit and regulate pedestrian and vehicular traffic, see
G.S. § 160A-300
   Authority to regulate turning movements, see G.S. § 20-153
   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see G.S. Ch. 20
   Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, see G.S. §§ 20-158 and 20-158.1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This title shall be known and may be cited as the “Traffic Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited or fail to do
any act required by this title.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be
subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions thereof which, by their very nature, can have
no application.
   (B)   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of, the United States government or any state,
county, or municipality, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise may be
permitted therein, or by state statute.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions of state law applicable to state traffic regulations,
see G.S. § 20-168
§ 70.04 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, except as
follows: A driver when operating such vehicle in an emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal, or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property; and/or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from consequences of his or her reckless disregard of the safety
of others.
   (C)   The term AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE, as used herein, shall mean any
police vehicle or vehicle of the Fire Department or any public or private
ambulance when on official business.
(Prior Code, § 70.04)
§ 70.05 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction given by a police officer, or fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction given by a uniformed firefighter at or near the
scene of any fire.
   (B)   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to
expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic
as conditions may require, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 70.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of uniformed firefighters to direct traffic, see G.S. § 20-114.1
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal, marking, or other device
not inconsistent with state law or this subchapter which is placed or erected
by authority of the Board of Commissioners for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding vehicular or pedestrian traffic or for the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 70.15)
§ 70.21 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle and any pedestrian shall obey the instructions of
any applicable official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of state law, this subchapter, and other ordinances of the town,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions
granted by state law to drivers of Fire Department and police vehicles, and
public and private ambulances when on official business.
(Prior Code, § 70.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 PLACEMENT, CHANGE, OR REMOVAL OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Traffic-control devices of the town shall be placed, erected,
installed, changed, or removed only upon order of the Board of Commissioners
pursuant to action taken by the Board and entered upon its minutes, and any
such action shall be by ordinance when so required by law.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by the Board of Commissioners in any
instance, such orders of the Board shall be executed under the direction of the
Utility Supervisor.
(Prior Code, § 70.17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 TYPES OF DEVICES AUTHORIZED.
   Traffic-control devices of the town within the purview of this subchapter
shall include, but shall not be limited to, those indicating stop and yield
intersections; speed restrictions; limited or prohibited turning movements;
one-way streets; prohibited and restricted parking areas; truck routes and
other restrictions as to vehicle types permitted to be driven upon the streets;
school zones; safety zones; zones of quiet; play streets; bus stops; taxicab
stands; loading zones; and business and residence districts.
(Prior Code, § 70.18)
§ 70.24 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES IN PLACE.
   All traffic-control devices heretofore installed by authority of the Board
of Commissioners and which are in place on the effective date of this code
shall continue to be official until such time as they may be removed by
authority of the Board of Commissioners; and until they are so removed it shall
be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any instruction or directive
indicated by any such official traffic-control device.
(Prior Code, § 70.19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 REQUIREMENT AS TO SIGNS.
   No provision of this subchapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being
placed to give notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 70.20)
§ 70.26 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by official traffic-control signals
exhibiting the words “go,” “caution,” or “stop,” or exhibiting different
colored lights successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be
used, and such words and lights shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Green alone, or “go.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn, but
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone, or “caution,” when shown following the green or “go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in
safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “stop.”
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated
by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Green straight-through arrow (alone).
      (1)   Vehicles facing such signal may proceed straight through, but shall
not turn right or left. Such vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians legally within the intersection at the time such
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway
within the appropriate marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise
by a pedestrian signal.
   (E)   Green turn arrow (alone).
      (1)   Vehicles facing such signal may proceed through the intersection
making only the turn so indicated by the arrow over the respective lane. Such
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway unless
they can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (F)   Green turn arrow (with steady red).
      (1)   Vehicles facing such signal shall comply with the steady red,
except that such vehicles may cautiously enter the intersection to make the
movement indicated by the green turn arrow. Vehicles shall yield the right-of-
way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully
using the intersection.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 70.21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.27 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever official flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(Prior Code, § 70.22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.28 SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED BY CERTAIN DEVICES.
   (A)   Stop signs. Every driver of a vehicle on approaching a street
intersection where an official stop sign has been erected shall come to a full
stop, clear of the lines marking the outside of the pedestrian aisle or
intersection, and shall remain at a full stop until such time as such driver
can enter the intersection without interfering with the progress of vehicles or
pedestrians approaching from the driver’s right or left.
   (B)   Yield signs. Every driver of a vehicle on approaching a street
intersection where an official yield or yield right-of-way sign has been
erected shall approach such intersection with caution and shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching on the intersected street.
   (C)   Devices governing turning movements. Whenever official signs are
placed, erected, or installed indicating that no right or left or U turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such
sign; and when official markers, buttons, or other traffic-control devices are
placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing, or turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such traffic-control devices.
   (D)   One-way street signs. Whenever official one-way street signs, with
arrows indicating the direction in which traffic shall move, are placed upon
any street it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon such
street in any direction other than that indicated by such arrows, except as may
reasonably be necessary to enter or leave such street or to occupy or leave a
parking space thereon and except as may be necessary in case of emergency.
   (E)   Zones of quiet signs. Whenever official signs are placed, erected, or
installed indicating a zone of quiet, no person driving a motor vehicle within
any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle,
except in an emergency, nor shall he or she permit any radio or other sound-
emitting device in the vehicle to be heard at a distance beyond the edge of the
roadway; and no person in the vehicle shall make any unnecessary noise.
   (F)   Play street signs. Whenever official signs are placed, erected, or
installed indicating any street, or part thereof, as a play street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon any such street, or portion thereof, except drivers
of vehicles having business, or whose residences are within such closed area;
and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon any
such street or portion thereof.
   (G)   School zone signs. Whenever official signs are placed, erected, or
installed indicating any street, or parts thereof, as school zones, all drivers
of motor vehicles using such streets or parts thereof shall exercise the
greatest care in driving thereon for the protection of children.
   (H)   Crosswalks. Vehicles approaching a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-
way to any pedestrian therein and shall take all precautionary action necessary
to avoid collision with any pedestrian; and at any crosswalk which is posted
with a sign of the term “stop for pedestrian in crosswalk,” any vehicle
approaching such crosswalk shall be brought to a stop when a pedestrian is in
the crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 70.23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.29 SPEED LIMITS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter or designated by sign, it
shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of 35 mph inside the corporate
limits.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.30 REDUCED SPEED ZONES.
   When proper signs have been erected giving notice of speed limits which are
other than the generally applicable 35 mph limit, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of such speeds.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 ROAD NAME CHANGES.
   (A)   Unless initiated by the Board of Commissioners, road name change
requests must include a petition for such action bearing the signatures of not
less than 75% of the property owners who own frontage on the road. The
petitioner shall state the reasons for the proposed name change. Only one
owner’s signature per individual parcel shall be permitted. Petitions which
include signatures of persons other than property owners will be deemed
invalid. The Clerk-Treasurer shall review the petition and certify to the Board
of Commissioners the percentage of property owners requesting the change.
   (B)   All road name changes shall be considered by the Board of
Commissioners at a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be
published at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (C)   All costs involved in changing a road name including, but not limited
to, blades, posts, installation, map changes, and advertising for any required
public hearing, shall be borne by those petitioning for the name change unless
such action is initiated by the Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   A charge per sign per intersection along with the currently required
administrative fee will be submitted with the petition. Road name changes
approved by the Board of Commissioners become effective 90 days from the date
approved by the Board.
   (E)   There is no fee for requesting a name to be applied to an unnamed
public or private road; however, the petitioning procedure shall remain the
same. The Town Administrator is authorized to determine the need for additional
road name changes and to recommend such changes to the Board of Commissioners
at any time.
   (F)   If the street name change is approved, the town will notify E911
telephone service provider(s), the local utility companies, all town
departments, all requisite county government departments, the State Department
of Transportation Division of Highways, U.S. Postal Service, residents, and
property owners of the street name change and the effective date set by the
Board of Commissioners in the resolution changing the street name. The
individual property owners must notify all other parties. Parties to notify may
include the Department of Motor Vehicles, Social Security Administration,
banks, and credit card companies, as well as others whom may regularly send
mail to the previous address.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2020)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever shall violate any provision of this traffic code for which no
other penalty is provided shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be
required to pay a fine as set forth in the adopted fee schedule of the town.
Each day that any provisions of this traffic code are violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (B)   Violation of §
70.30 is an infraction and will be enforced through issuance of a civil penalty
in the amount of $100. All civil citations may be appealed within seven days of
the date of issuance of the citation. Appeal shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police in writing and must contain the basis for why the offender believes that
the citation should be rescinded. The Chief of Police shall provide a written
decision to the offender within ten days of receipt of the appeal.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 14-4(b)
CHAPTER 71: VEHICLE LICENSES
Section
   
71.01   Annual tax levied on vehicles
   
71.02   License year
   
71.03   Municipal vehicle taxes
§ 71.01 ANNUAL TAX LEVIED ON VEHICLES.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual license lax in the sum of $2 upon
each of the following motor vehicles:
      (1)   Those which are owned by or under the control of any resident of
the town and used wholly or partially within the corporate limits of the town;
and
      (2)   Those which are regularly maintained and used in connection with
any business operated in the town and which are garaged or kept regularly or
infrequently within the corporate limits of the town when not in use.
   (B)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to motor vehicles
operated for display or exhibition purposes by manufacturers or dealers and
which bear dealers’ license plates issued by the state.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) (Ord. passed 11-21-1960)
§ 71.02 LICENSE YEAR.
   The annual license tax imposed by this chapter shall be for each calendar
year beginning with January 1 and terminating at 12:00 a.m. on the next
succeeding December 31; and the license tax imposed by this chapter shall not
be prorated for any period less than a whole year.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) (Ord. passed 11-21-1960)
§ 71.03 MUNICIPAL VEHICLE TAXES.
   (A)   G.S. § 20-97 authorizes North Carolina municipalities to levy from $2
up to $30 for the motor vehicle fee.
   (B)   Two dollars is charged to vehicle owners and remains in the General
Fund and can be used for any lawful purpose by the municipality.
   (C)   Payment is collected through the county tax billings.
   (D)   Display of license plates or auto decals is not required by the town.
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
72.01   Making U turns
   
72.02   Skidding on streets
   
72.03   Spinning wheels on streets
   
72.04   Driving through funeral processions
   
72.05   Entering intersections
   
72.06   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
72.07   Backing
   
72.08   Driving on sidewalks restricted
   
72.09   Entering or riding vehicles without permission
   
72.10   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
72.11   Manner of riding in vehicles
   
72.12   Use of roller skates, toy vehicles, and the like
   
72.13   Bicycle regulations
   
72.14   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 MAKING U TURNS.
   Upon any portion of a street not posted to prohibit U turns, U turns shall
be made only at a street intersection and then only by turning to the left.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 SKIDDING ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to willfully skid
such motor vehicle at any intersection or along any street within the town.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) (Ord. passed 9-2-1969) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 SPINNING WHEELS ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor vehicle to willfully spin the
wheels of such motor vehicle when starting off or traveling on any street
within the town.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. passed 9-2-1969) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols, and ambulances when the same are
responding to calls.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 ENTERING INTERSECTIONS.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or sidewalk
areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway he or she
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection or
over a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle
unless such movement can be made in safety, and he or she shall have given
ample warning to those who may be behind, by hand, horn, or other signal.
(Prior Code, § 72.07) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall propel a motor or animal-drawn vehicle on any sidewalk in
the town except when crossing a sidewalk at a crossing place constructed for
such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 72.08) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 ENTERING OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   No person shall enter, jump on, or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.
(Prior Code, § 72.09) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself or herself to
any public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(Prior Code, § 72.10) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 MANNER OF RIDING IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any
motor vehicle to permit more than three persons including the driver to ride in
the front or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude beyond
the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding except to give such
signals as are by law required, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 72.11) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, TOY VEHICLES, AND THE LIKE.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any sidewalk or upon any roadway
unless it be while crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except
upon streets set aside as play streets.
(Prior Code, § 72.12) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.13 BICYCLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle on any sidewalk in the town.
   (B)   Every bicycle operated on the highways or streets in the town during
the period from sunset to sunrise shall be equipped with a lighted lamp on the
front thereof, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of
at least 300 feet in front of such bicycle, and shall also be equipped with a
reflex mirror or lamp on the rear, exhibiting a red light visible under like
conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such bicycle.
   (C)   Any bicycle operated by the owner, or other person, lawfully in the
custody thereof, in violation of this section, shall be taken into custody and
impounded for a period of seven days.
(Prior Code, § 72.13) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.14 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle
while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 72.14) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be
required to pay a fine of $75. Each day that any provisions of this chapter are
violated shall constitute a separate offense. All civil citations may be
appealed within seven days of the date of issuance of the citation. Appeal
shall be submitted to the Chief of Police in writing and must contain the basis
for why the offender believes that the citation should be rescinded. The Chief
of Police shall provide a written decision to the offender within ten days of
receipt of the appeal.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
CHAPTER 73: STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
Section
   
73.01   Stopping of vehicle in streets restricted
   
73.02   Standing vehicles not to obstruct passage
   
73.03   Double parking prohibited
   
73.04   Parking prohibited or restricted in certain places as posted
   
73.05   Lights on parked vehicles
   
73.06   Manner of parking
   
73.07   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
73.08   Parking prohibited in specified places
   
73.09   Moving vehicle into prohibited parking area
   
73.10   Restricted parking zones
   
73.11   Loading zones
   
73.12   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Chapter 90
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate, restrict, and prohibit parking on streets, alleys,
and bridges, see G.S. § 160A-301
   Night parking on highways, see G.S. § 20-161.1
   Parking in front of fire hydrant, fire station, or private driveway, see
G.S. § 20-162
   Parking near fire trucks, see G.S. § 20-157
   Prima facie rule of evidence for enforcement of highway regulations, see
G.S. § 20-162.1
   Stopping on highways generally, see G.S. § 20-161
   Vehicles left unattended, see G.S. § 20-163
§ 73.01 STOPPING OF VEHICLE IN STREETS RESTRICTED.
   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as
prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach
of an authorized emergency vehicle as defined in §
70.04, by the approach of a funeral or other procession or vehicle which is
given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a school bus or a public conveyance,
by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a
pedestrian, or by some emergency; and in any case covered by these exceptions,
vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety
zone, crossing, or street intersection, if such can be avoided.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 STANDING VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSAGE.
   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with
the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 DOUBLE PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall double park or stop a vehicle next to and alongside any
vehicle parked at the curb.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 PARKING PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED IN CERTAIN PLACES AS POSTED.
   (A)   When official signs are placed, erected, or installed, giving notice
thereof, or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no
person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so sign-posted
or painted yellow.
   (B)   When official signs are placed, erected, or installed, giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets so sign-posted
at any time during which parking is prohibited by such signs or for a greater
length of time than is permitted by such signs.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   The displaying of lights upon a vehicle when lawfully parked at night upon a
street of the town in accordance with this chapter shall not be required when
there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet
upon such street.
(Prior Code, § 73.05)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Board of Commissioners to enact this section, see G.S. § 20-134
§ 73.06 MANNER OF PARKING.
   (A)   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter, and where the street is
not sign-posted or marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall
park parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle backed up to curb, except when actually
loading or unloading, and then only at places where such parking is not
prohibited. If the vehicle is horse-drawn, the horse, or horses, shall stand
parallel to the curb and face the direction of the traffic.
   (C)   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in any business
district, except that on one-way streets vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.
   (D)   On any street which is marked off with official lines indicating the
parking spaces, vehicles shall be parked between such lines.
(Prior Code, § 73.06) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Parking horses and mules on streets, see §
91.04
§ 73.07 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal
purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers, or other persons when such
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such vehicle; or
   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit has been
disconnected, or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from
one vehicle to another.
(Prior Code, § 73.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, attended or unattended,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the
following places:
   (A)   On the sidewalk;
   (B)   Within an intersection;
   (C)   On a crosswalk;
   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or other official
traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
   (E)   No vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching a grade
crossing within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided that where existing
permanent structures are located along the street and closer than 50 feet,
parking may be permitted in front of such structures, unless otherwise
prohibited, if the parking does not interfere with the view in either direction
of an approaching locomotive or train;
   (F)   Along side or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such
stopping or standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (G)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure;
   (H)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium, or any public building;
   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
   (J)   Within 25 feet from the intersection of curb lines or if none, then
within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of
highways or streets; or
   (K)   Within a traffic lane or upon the traveled portion of a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 73.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.09 MOVING VEHICLE INTO PROHIBITED PARKING AREA.
   No person shall move a vehicle whether his or her own or belonging to
another, into any prohibited area, or sufficiently away from the curb to make
such distance unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 73.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.10 RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   The area lying upon E. Lashley St. east of its intersection with
Second St. and west of its intersection with Fourth Street shall be designated
a restricted parking area for use by the residents residing along said area
upon E. Lashley St. and their bona fide household guests only. It shall be
unlawful for any other person to stop in, park in, or move a vehicle into such
area except in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-
control device.
   (B)   It is hereby ordered that traffic signs shall be erected along said
street indicating that parking is prohibited along said street except as
permitted by this section.
(Prior Code, § 73.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.11 LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Commercial vehicles may park in designated loading zones for the
purpose of loading or unloading merchandise for a period of time not exceeding
15 minutes.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in a loading zone for the purpose of
taking orders or buying or selling merchandise of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 73.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of §§
73.03,
73.04,
73.06, or
73.10, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other peace officers of
the town to attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof, if
the owner or operator is absent, or to deliver to the owner or operator, if he
or she is present, a notice to the effect that the vehicle has been illegally
parked in violation of a provision of this chapter.
   (B)   An owner or operator of a vehicle shall, within 30 days from the time
the notice referred to in division (A) above was attached to the vehicle or
delivered to the owner or operator, pay to the town a civil penalty of $25. No
owner or operator of the vehicle shall fail to appear and pay the penalty
within the prescribed period.
   (C)   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that such vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that proof of
ownership of any vehicle found parked in violation of this chapter shall be
prima facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle. All civil citations may
be appealed within seven days of the date of issuance of the citation. Appeal
shall be submitted to the Chief of Police in writing and must contain the basis
for why the offender believes that the citation should be rescinded. The Chief
of Police shall provide a written decision to the offender within ten days of
receipt of the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 73.12) (Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIRE PROTECTION
      
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Administration and enforcement
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Abandonment prohibited; removal authorized
   
90.04   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
90.05   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized
   
90.06   Removal of vehicles; pre-towing notice requirements
   
90.07   Exceptions to prior notice requirement
   
90.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
90.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale of final disposition of
vehicle
   
90.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
90.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
90.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
90.13   Nonliability for disposition of vehicles
   
90.14   Exceptions
   
90.15   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
   
90.16   Alternative remedies
§ 90.01 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police of the town shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for administering the removal
and disposition of vehicles determined to be “abandoned” on the public streets
and highways within the town, and on property owned by the town. Any police
officer shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter with
regard to such abandoned vehicles.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for administering the removal
and disposal of “abandoned,” “nuisance,” and “junked” motor vehicles located on
private property.
   (D)   The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck
operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned
vehicles, nuisance vehicles, and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this
chapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the Police Department and
Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their
duties.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. One that:
      (1)   Is left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance
prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours;
      (3)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant, or lessee thereof for longer than two hours; or
      (4)   Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days
or is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public.
   AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL. The Chief of Police or the Town Administrator,
respectively, designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. An abandoned motor vehicle that also:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move;
      (3)   Is more than five years old and worth less than $500; or
      (4)   Does not display a current license plate.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes all machines designed or intended to travel over
land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and
unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats, or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation which
exceeds eight inches in height;
      (3)   In a condition allowing the collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil, or other flammable
or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   An area of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside,
such as, but not limited to, trunks or hoods;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   A collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other
rotten or putrescent matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any other motor vehicle specifically declared a health and safety
hazard and a public nuisance by the Town Board of Commissioners.
   TOWING FEE. Includes the fee charged for towing and storage of a vehicle.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.03 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the
term is defined herein.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorized officials of the town may determine
that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the motor
vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance
vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorized officials of the town may determine
that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined
above, and order the vehicle removed.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as
defined herein, on the premises of private property. A single, permitted junked
motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment
requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, person entitled to the possession
of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with
the location requirements or the concealment requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) below, an authorized
official may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle found in violation of
this chapter to a storage garage or area. No such vehicle shall be removed from
private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the premises unless the authorized official finds in writing that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle(s) outweigh the burdens imposed on
the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicles, and the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the private property upon which the vehicle is located.
Such finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner(s) against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing
community, neighborhood, or area appearance. The following, among other
relevant factors, may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of the
area residents.
   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles is as
follows.
      (1)   One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, may be located in the
rear yard, as defined in the town zoning ordinance; provided the junked motor
vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and/or
abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The Chief of Police has the
authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed
as required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must
not be allowed to deteriorate.
      (2)   More than one junked motor vehicle: any other junked motor vehicle
(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete
enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from a public
street or abutting property. A GARAGE OR BUILDING STRUCTURE means either a
lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to
the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in
accordance with all zoning and building code regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
90.07, an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is to be removed
shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located, can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show
the name(s) and address(es) to whom and to which mailed, and the date mailed.
If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be
removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the
windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating
that the vehicle will be removed by the town under authority of this chapter.
The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed on a specified date, no
sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if
the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned,
a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic
benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be
made to the Clerk-Treasurer in writing, heard by the Mayor, and further
proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and
decided.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.07 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorized official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special
need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise
maintain and protect the police and public welfare. Such findings shall, in all
cases, be entered by the authorized official in the appropriate daily records.
   (B)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice
include the following.
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public
streets and highways, the Town Board of Commissioners hereby determines that
the immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in loading zones;
         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than the streets or
highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorized official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety, and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such location or manner as to
pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private
property.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.08 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or
area by a tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform such
services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorized
official for the town shall immediately notify the last known registered owner
of the vehicle with such notice to include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, indicating the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known address,
unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her
agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in this state, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is removed,
and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the
authorized official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the
vehicle identification number to determine the last known registered owner of
the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions
(A)(1) through (A)(5) above.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.09 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OF FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county
magistrate designated by the Chief District Court judge to receive such hearing
requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the
request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.10 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fees, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle.
   (B)   Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled
to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further
violations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.11 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 44A, Art. 1.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.12 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant, or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures.
   (B)   In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private property
without a written request of the owner, occupant, or lessee, except in those
cases where the vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle
which has been ordered removed by an authorized official.
   (C)   The town may require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle from private properly to indemnify
the town against any loss, expense, or liability incurred because of the
removal, storage, or sale thereof.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.13 NONLIABILITY FOR DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of any abandoned,
lost, or stolen motor vehicle for disposing of the vehicle as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.14 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle which is:
   (A)   Located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard, as defined in
G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, being G.S. §§ 136-
141 et seq.;
   (B)   In an enclosed building;
   (C)   On the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful
place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the town.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
§ 90.15 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provision of this chapter unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.16 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this chapter, nor any of its provisions, shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any
violation of the terms of this chapter shall subject the violator to the
penalties and remedies, as set forth in G.S. § 1-8, “Remedies not merged”.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2024)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Possession or harboring of wild animals
   
91.02   Keeping livestock; livestock running at large
   
91.03   Keeping horses prohibited
   
91.04   Parking horses and mules on streets
   
91.05   Slaughtering for market prohibited
   
91.06   Disposition of carcasses
   
91.07   Town constitutes bird sanctuary
   
91.08   Annual dog license tax
County Animal Control Provisions
   
91.20   County animal control ordinance
   
91.21   Subchapter not in conflict with statutes
   
91.22   Conflicts with county ordinance
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to regulate, restrict domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-
186
   Authority to levy annual license tax on privilege of keeping any domestic
animal within the town, see G.S. § 160A-212
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 POSSESSION OR HARBORING OF WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or harbor within the
town any wild animal dangerous to persons or property or offensive to the
senses
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any circus or menagerie duly licensed
by the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) Penalty, see §
10.99 
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Town Council to enact this section, see G.S. § 160A-187
§ 91.02 KEEPING LIVESTOCK; LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any cow, bull,
pig, hog, swine, goat, sheep, chicken, turkey, guinea, or any other kind of
livestock within the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow his or her horse, mule,
cattle, or stock of any kind to run at large on the streets or public places of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921; Ord. passed 11-7-1962) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 91.03 KEEPING HORSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to keep or
stable any horse, stud, mare, colt, or mule within the city limits of the town.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. passed 11-6-1973) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04 PARKING HORSES AND MULES ON STREETS.
   No person shall allow his or her horse or mule to stand on any street
without being hitched, or in the care of a responsible person.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Manner of parking horse-drawn vehicles, see §
73.06
§ 91.05 SLAUGHTERING FOR MARKET PROHIBITED.
   No person shall slaughter within the town any beef, sheep, hog, or other
animal intended for market.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Unwholesome meat prohibited for sale, see §
130.12
§ 91.06 DISPOSITION OF CARCASSES.
   The owner or person in charge of any animal dying within the town shall,
within six hours after notice of death of such animal, dispose of the carcass
thereof in a lawful and sanitary manner, and each hour of failure to comply
with this section after the expiration of such six-hour period shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 91.06) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Prohibited disposal of garbage, trash, and refuse, see §
93.01
Statutory reference:
   Required disposition of dead domesticated animals, see G.S. § 106-403
§ 91.07 TOWN CONSTITUTES BIRD SANCTUARY.
   The entire area of this town is hereby created and established as a bird
sanctuary, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the town to hunt,
kill, trap, or otherwise take any protected bird or to rob the nest of any
protected bird except pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of G.S.
§§ 113-270.1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 91.07) (Ord. passed 4-7-1953) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   State law basis of this section, see G.S. § 160A-188
§ 91.08 ANNUAL DOG LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed upon each person who owns or keeps a dog
within the town an annual license tax, for the privilege of keeping such dog
within the town, as follows:
      (1)   For each male or spayed female dog six months of age, $2; and
      (2)   For each unspayed female dog six months or more of age, $2.
   (B)   The tax imposed by this section shall be due and payable on October 1
each fiscal year; provided, that when a dog attains the age of six months after
October 1, or when a person after October 1 acquires a dog six months or more
of age to be kept within the town, the tax shall be payable within five days
after such dog attains the age of six months or within five days after the
acquisition of such dog six months or more of age.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each person owning or keeping a dog within the
town which is subject to taxation hereunder to list such dog for taxation in
the same manner as provided by law for the listing of personal property for
taxation.
(Prior Code, § 91.08) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to levy annual license tax on the privilege of keeping any
dog within the town, see G.S. § 160A-212
COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL PROVISIONS
§ 91.20 COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Adoption. The county animal control ordinance, as amended from lime to
time, is hereby adopted in full force and effect in the town limits and in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town.
   (B)   Enforcement. The county, through the County Health Department or such
other agency as the County Commissioners may from time to time direct, is
hereby authorized to enforce its animal control ordinance within the town and
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord. passed 8-1-2023)
§ 91.21 SUBCHAPTER NOT IN CONFLICT WITH STATUTES.
   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed or applied in conflict
with provisions of the state statutes pertaining to the control and supervision
of animals. This subchapter shall apply to unincorporated areas of the county
and to municipalities with populations of less than 5,000 people with a written
request from that said municipality be covered by the ordinance in accord with
the availability of staff.
(Ord. passed 8-1-2023)
§ 91.22 CONFLICTS WITH COUNTY ORDINANCE.
   No provision of this subchapter shall be construed or applied in conflict
with any provisions of the county animal control ordinances.
(Ord. passed 8-1-2023)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PROTECTION
Section
   
92.01   Required obedience to fire and police officers at scene of fire
   
92.02   Bonfires and outdoor yard waste fires
   
92.03   Smoking prohibited under certain conditions
   
92.04   Use of torches for removing paint and sweating pipe joints
   
92.05   Hot ashes and other dangerous materials
   
92.06   Accumulation of waste materials
   
92.07   Handling readily combustible materials
   
92.08   Storage of readily combustible materials
   
92.09   Powder storage
   
92.10   Flammable decorative materials
   
92.11   Storage or display in roofed-over malls
   
92.12   Open flames, lights, or kindling of fire restricted
   
92.13   Maintenance of chimneys, vents, heat producing appliances, and exhaust
systems
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to regulate or prohibit the storage, use, of explosives or
flammable substances, see G.S. § 160A-183
   Investigation of fires, inspection of premises, and removal of fire hazards,
see G.S. §§ 58-80-1 et seq.
§ 92.01 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO FIRE AND POLICE OFFICERS AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   (A)   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall obey all lawful
orders of firefighters and police officers in any matter relating to
extinguishing the fire, removal and protection of persons and property
endangered by fire, smoke or water, freedom of Fire Department personnel and
apparatus to perform their duties or to function properly, or the maintenance
of order at or near the scene of the fire, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to disobey any such order of a firefighter or police officer.
   (B)   Police officers at the scene of any fire shall have authority to
arrest any person willfully disobeying any such lawful order and to hold the
violator in custody until the fire has been extinguished, at which time he or
she shall be dealt with according to law.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02 BONFIRES AND OUTDOOR YARD WASTE FIRES.
   (A)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire
or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit from
the Chief of the Fire Department or other proper authorization. During
construction or demolition of buildings or structures no waste materials or
rubbish shall be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate
vicinity without having obtained such a permit or other proper authorization.
The term OTHER PROPER AUTHORIZATION, as used in this section, shall mean
compliance with the provisions of this section and notification to the Fire
Department prior to kindling any bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire when, upon
receipt of such notice, the person in charge at Fire Department headquarters
waives the permit requirement.
   (B)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or outdoor rubbish fire
or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land
unless the location is not less than 50 feet from any structure and adequate
provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any
structure, or the fire is contained in a waste burner of a type approved by the
Chief of the Fire Department and which is located safely not less than 15 feet
from any structure.
   (C)   Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires shall be constantly attended by a
competent person until such fire is extinguished. This person shall have a
garden hose connected to the water supply, or other fire extinguishing
equipment readily available for use.
   (D)   The Chief of the Fire Department may prohibit any or all bonfires and
outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fire hazardous.
   (E)   The following types of open burning are permissible as specified
within the fire limits of the town. The authority to conduct open burning under
the provisions of this section shall not exempt or excuse any person from the
consequences, damages, or injuries which may result from such conduct, nor does
it exempt or excuse any person from complying with all applicable laws,
ordinances, regulations, and orders of the State Environmental Management
Commission (Department of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources):
Campfires and fires used solely for outdoor cooking and other recreational
purposes or for ceremonial occasions, or for human warmth and comfort.
(Prior Code, § 92.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 SMOKING PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   (A)   SMOKING shall mean and include the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar,
cigarette, tobacco, or other substance used for smoking in any form.
   (B)   Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of
warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places of assembly, and in
open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled, the Chief of the
Fire Department is empowered and authorized to order the owner or occupant in
writing to post “No Smoking” signs in each building, structure, room, or place
in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Chief of the Fire Department shall
designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure, or
place in which smoking may be permitted.
   (C)   “No Smoking” signs of approved sized lettering and location required
in accordance with division (B) above shall read “By Order of the Fire Chief.”
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally required “No
Smoking” sign or to smoke in any place where such signs are posted.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 USE OF TORCHES FOR REMOVING PAINT AND SWEATING PIPE JOINTS.
   (A)   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device or removing
paint from any building or structure shall provide one fire extinguisher of a
type approved by the Chief of the Fire Department, or water hose connected to a
water supply in the area where such burning is done. In all cases, a fire
watcher shall remain on the premises for one hour after the torch or flame-
producing device has been used.
   (B)   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for sweating
pipe joints in any building or structure shall have available in the immediate
vicinity where the sweating is done one such fire extinguisher or water hose
connected to a water supply. Combustible material in the close proximity of
flame shall be protected against ignition by shielding, wetting, or other
approved means. In all cases, a fire watcher shall remain in the vicinity of
the sweating operation for one-half hour after the torch or flame-producing
device has been used.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 HOT ASHES AND OTHER DANGEROUS MATERIALS.
   No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smoldering coals, or greasy
or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition, into any combustible
receptacle, or place the same within ten feet of any combustible materials,
except in metal or other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless
resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building, shall
be placed on noncombustible stands, and in every case shall be kept at least
two feet away from any combustible wall or partition or exterior window
opening.
(Prior Code, § 92.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 ACCUMULATION OF WASTE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Roofs, courts, yards, vacant lots and open spaces shall be kept free
and clear of deposits or accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw,
weeds, litter, or combustible waste or rubbish of any kind.
   (B)   All weeds, grass, vines, or other growth, when same endangers
property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the owner
or occupant of the property.
(Prior Code, § 92.06)
§ 92.07 HANDLING READILY COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person making, using, storing, or having in charge or under his or
her control any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw,
or combustible waste materials shall fail or neglect at the close of each day
to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an
orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults, or
in metal or metal lined and covered receptacles or bins.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall require suitable baling presses
to be installed in stores, apartment buildings, factories, and similar places
where accumulations of paper and waste materials are not removed at least every
second day.
(Prior Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.08 STORAGE OF READILY COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall store in any building or upon any premises in excess
of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes,
barrels, or similar containers, or rubber tires, or baled cotton, rubber, or
cork, or other similarly combustible material without a permit from the Chief
of the Fire Department.
   (B)   Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of
the ceiling, shall be separated from heaters or heating devices by distance or
shielding so that ignition cannot occur, and not so located as to endanger exit
from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20 feet in
height, shall be so located, with respect to adjacent buildings, as not to
constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
(Prior Code, § 92.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.09 POWDER STORAGE.
   No person shall keep in any house or store in the town limits powder in any
quantity nor shall any powder magazine be allowed within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 92.09) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of explosives by town, see G.S. § 160A-183
   Sale, storage of explosives generally, see G.S. § 14-284.1
§ 92.10 FLAMMABLE DECORATIVE MATERIALS.
   Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves,
trees, artificial flowers, or shrubbery and foam plastic materials shall not be
used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of mercantile and
institutional occupancies unless first rendered flameproof. Electric light
bulbs in mercantile and institutional occupancies shall not be decorated with
paper or other combustible materials unless such materials shall first have
been rendered flameproof.
(Prior Code, § 92.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.11 STORAGE OR DISPLAY IN ROOFED-OVER MALLS.
   No combustible goods, merchandise, or decorations shall be displayed or
stored in a roofed-over mall unless approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
(Prior Code, § 92.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.12 OPEN FLAMES, LIGHTS, OR KINDLING OF FIRE RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn,
boat, or any other place where highly flammable, combustible, or explosive
material is kept, unless such light or flame shall be well secured in a glass
globe, wire mesh cage, or similar approved device.
   (B)   No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable material of the type stored or handled shall be used in the storage
area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair, or other highly flammable
or combustible material; nor in the work area of any shop or factory used for
the manufacture, repair, or renovating of mattresses or bedding; nor in the
work areas of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture.
   (C)   No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without
permission of the owner thereof or his or her agent.
(Prior Code, § 92.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.13 MAINTENANCE OF CHIMNEYS, VENTS, HEAT PRODUCING APPLIANCES, AND EXHAUST
SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Chimneys, flues, or similar devices for conveying products of
combustion or hot gases to the exterior of the building shall be maintained in
a manner as not to create a hazardous condition.
      (1)   Existing masonry chimneys which, upon inspection, are found to be
without flue liner and with open mortar joints which will permit smoke or gases
to be discharged into the building, or which are cracked as to be dangerous
shall be made safe by means of a fire clay liner, fire brick, a corrosion
resistant metal pipe, and otherwise repaired if necessary, or the chimney shall
be removed. Metal pipe liners shall be one inch less in diameter than the least
dimension of the flue and entire space between the metal liner and the walls of
the chimney filled with cement mortar.
      (2)   Existing chimneys and vents of metal which are corroded or
improperly supported shall be replaced, unless suitable repairs are made.
      (3)   Existing chimney and vent connectors of metal which are corroded or
improperly supported shall be replaced.
   (B)   All heat producing appliances, including boilers, furnaces,
incinerators, ovens, and restaurant type cooking appliances shall be installed
and maintained in an approved manner.
   (C)   Exhaust systems provided for restaurant cooking equipment shall be
maintained in a manner such as not to create a hazardous condition.
      (1)   Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts, and other devices shall
be inspected periodically and cleaned as needed to remove grease and deposits
of residues.
      (2)   Fire extinguishing systems shall be inspected periodically and
checked for proper operation. These inspections shall include a check that the
supply of extinguishing agent in the system is adequate, and all actuation
components are operating satisfactorily. Fusible links, if employed, shall be
replaced or properly cleaned. Instructions for manually operating the system
shall be posted conspicuously in the kitchen and employees checked for their
knowledge of procedures.
      (3)   Any fire dampers shall be tested periodically to ensure proper
functioning of all parts.
   (D)   Commercial, industrial, and flue-fed incinerators shall be provided
with approved spark arresters or other effective means for arresting sparks and
fly ash.
(Prior Code, § 92.13) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Health and Sanitation
   
93.01   Prohibited disposal of garbage, trash, and refuse
   
93.02   Slops or filth in streets or on premises
   
93.03   Maintenance of premises
   
93.04   Notice to abate violation
Noise
   
93.15   Loud or unnecessary noises
   
93.16   Enumeration of acts resulting in noise
HEALTH AND SANITATION
§ 93.01 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, TRASH, AND REFUSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or otherwise dispose of any
garbage, trash, or refuse of any kind upon any street, sidewalk, public place,
or vacant lot, or in any gutter or drain, or in any cistern, well, pond, or
watercourse which is a source of water supply for any person or for the town.
(Prior Code, § 93.01) (Ord. passed 9-21-1959) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 SLOPS OR FILTH IN STREETS OR ON PREMISES.
   No person shall throw or cause to be thrown into a back lot, or from his or
her premises, into the street or drains of the town, any slops or other filth,
nor shall he or she allow slops or filth to accumulate on his or her premises.
(Prior Code, § 93.02) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, and person in charge of
any premises within the town to maintain such premises free of any accumulation
of garbage, trash, or other refuse which constitutes a fire or health hazard or
which is dangerous to persons, or which otherwise constitutes a nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, and person in charge of
any premises within the town to maintain such premises free of noxious weeds,
undergrowth, and other vegetation which affords a breeding or harboring place
for vermin, insects, rodents, or reptiles; and grass which is eight inches or
more in height, not grown for agricultural purposes, shall be deemed
“undergrowth” within the meaning of this section.
(Prior Code, § 93.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to summarily remedy everything dangerous or prejudicial to
public health within the town or within one mile thereof at expense of persons
in default, see G.S. § 160A-193
§ 93.04 NOTICE TO ABATE VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and public health officers having jurisdiction
within the town, upon finding that any premises is being maintained contrary to
any of the provisions of §
93.03, are hereby vested with authority to give notice, which may be served in
any manner authorized by law, to the owner, occupant, or person in charge of
such premises, or to any two or more of them, believed to be responsible for
such violation. This notice shall specify the condition which constitutes the
violation and shall direct the addressee to abate such violation within a
period of time which shall be stated therein and which shall be not less than
three days nor more than ten days after service of the notice has been
accomplished, in a manner not prohibited by law. Such notice shall also warn
the addressee that failure to comply with the directive contained therein shall
subject him or her to prosecution for a violation of §
93.03 and, in addition, shall render him or her liable to the town for any
costs and expenses which may be incurred by the town in the abatement of such
violation under the provisions of division (B) below, and that such costs and
expenses shall constitute a lien upon the property involved.
   (B)   If, upon the expiration of the time specified in any such notice for
the abatement of an existing condition, such condition has not been abated, the
officer giving such notice shall inform the Mayor of the facts of the matter,
and the Mayor shall then provide for the abatement of such condition by the
most expeditious means, and the costs and expenses thereby incurred shall be
collected by the Town Clerk-Treasurer from the delinquent addressee of such
notice in any manner provided by law, and he or she shall take the action
necessary to establish a lien of record upon the property involved.
(Prior Code, § 93.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
NOISE
§ 93.15 LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in creating, permit,
continue, or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of such character, intensity, and duration
as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.16 ENUMERATION OF ACTS RESULTING IN NOISE.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger
signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in
motion only as a danger signal after, or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such
signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, and the sounding of such
device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
   (B)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than public
safety or other emergency vehicle;
   (C)   The use or operation of any piano or musical instrument, manual or
automatic, phonograph, tape or CD player, radio, loud speaker, or any other
instrument or sound amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons in the
vicinity thereof, or in such a manner as renders the same a public nuisance.
However, upon application to the Mayor, permits may be granted to produce
programs in music, speeches, or general entertainment in supervised and
controlled situations;
   (D)   The keeping of any animal or bird, which by causing frequent or loud,
continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
   (E)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, or other noise;
   (F)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
   (G)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom;
   (H)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the
noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
   (I)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, court, church, synagogue, or other place of
worship while the same is in session, or within 150 feet of any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution; provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating the location of a
school, hospital, court, church, synagogue, or place of worship;
   (J)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates,
and containers;
   (K)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises
which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
   (L)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, or sale or display of merchandise;
   (M)   The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes except where
specific license is received from the Board of Commissioners;
   (N)   The conducting, operating, or maintaining of any garage or filling
station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to
be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and
   (O)   The firing or discharging of squibs, crackers, gunpowder, or other
combustible substance in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making
noise or disturbance except by permit from the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 94.02)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Prohibited acts as to streets, sidewalks, ditches, and drains
   
94.02   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks
   
94.03   Permit required for sale or advertising on streets or sidewalks
Excavations
   
94.15   Permit required; restoration of surface
   
94.16   Bond or cash deposit
   
94.17   Covering of excavation; warning lights
Parades, Demonstrations, and Pickets
   
94.30   Definitions
   
94.31   Permit requirements
   
94.32   Revocation of permit
   
94.33   Prohibited acts
   
94.34   Exemptions
Special Events
   
94.45   Purpose
   
94.46   Definitions
   
94.47   Permit process
   
94.48   Criteria for use of all public property
   
94.49   Exemptions
   
94.50   Special events requiring Board of Commissioners’ approval
   
94.51   Violations
Cross-reference:
   Depositing litter on streets or sidewalks, see §
131.21
   Driving on sidewalks restricted, see §
72.08
   Fruit peelings, chewing gum, and the like not to be dropped on streets or
sidewalks, see §
130.05
   Slops or filth in streets, see §
93.02
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to establish, control streets and sidewalks, see G.S. §
160A-296
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 PROHIBITED ACTS AS TO STREETS, SIDEWALKS, DITCHES, AND DRAINS.
   No person shall dig, deepen, or fill up any street, sidewalk, ditch, or
drain of the town, or any ditch or drain leading from one lot to another
therein, without first obtaining an excavation permit; nor shall any person
deposit or drain into any ditch or drain of the town, any garbage, filth,
offal, or other thing of offensive nature.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.02 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The assemblage or collection of persons, either on foot or in
vehicles, on any of the streets or sidewalks of the town, so as to obstruct or
impede the passage of persons thereon is hereby prohibited unless authorized
pursuant to a currently valid town permit.
   (B)   No person shall obstruct any of the streets or sidewalks of the town
by placing or exposing thereon any boxes, merchandise, or other things;
provided, this shall not be construed to prevent merchants from making
reasonable use of sidewalks in receiving and shipping goods, or to their using
three feet of sidewalk next to their stores for displaying their goods.
(Prior Code, § 95.02)
   (C)   Except as provided in §§ 403.5.2 and 403.5.3 of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) Standards, the clear width of walking surfaces shall be
36 inches minimum.
(Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Walking surfaces, see ADA Standards Ch. 4, Part 403
§ 94.03 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SALE OR ADVERTISING ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall stop or place any vehicle, or erect any stand or booth, on
any of the streets or sidewalks of the town for the purpose of advertising or
vending any goods, merchandise, produce, or similar articles, except with a
written permit from the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 95.03)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 94.15 PERMIT REQUIRED; RESTORATION OF SURFACE.
   No person shall cut into or dig up any street, sidewalk, or public place in
the town for the purpose of laying or repairing any underground drain or piping
or for any other purpose, without first obtaining the written permission of the
Mayor; and any person who shall cut into or dig up any street or sidewalk by
such permission shall be required to put the place of excavation in as good
condition as before within such period of time as may be stated in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 95.15) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to regulate, license, and prohibit digging in the streets
and sidewalks, see G.S. § 160A-296(6)
§ 94.16 BOND OR CASH DEPOSIT.
   Every applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall, as a
prerequisite to the issuance thereof, file with the Town Clerk-Treasurer a
bond, payable to the town and in such amount as the Utility Supervisor shall
consider adequate, conditioned upon the restoration of the place to be
excavated to as good condition in all respects as it was before; provided that
in lieu of such bond a cash deposit may be made with the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 95.16)
§ 94.17 COVERING OF EXCAVATION; WARNING LIGHTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person making any excavation for any purpose
whatsoever in any of the streets, sidewalks, or public places to fail to
securely cover such excavations with planks or to place ropes around the same
three feet from the ground, or to fail to place a sufficient number of red
lights around such excavation before dark and to keep such light burning all
night every night such excavation shall be open.
(Prior Code, § 95.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARADES, DEMONSTRATIONS, AND PICKETS
§ 94.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. The portion of any street lying between its intersections with other
streets.
   GROUP DEMONSTRATION. Any assembly together or concert of action between or
among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making
known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention to
such assembly.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, or procession of any
kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public
grounds or places.
   PICKET LINE. Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position, or promotion of any cause of such persons, or of or
on behalf of any organization or class of persons, during the course of any
labor-management dispute.
(Prior Code, § 95.30) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970)
§ 94.31 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct, or
participate in any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any
street, sidewalk, or other public place within the town, unless a permit
therefor has been issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to issue
permits as required in the preceding section, and in the issuance thereof he or
she shall:
      (1)   Require a written application for such permit to be filed not less
than 48 hours in advance of such parade, picket line, or group demonstration.
Such application shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief, shall be signed by
the applicant, and shall show the proposed time, place, purpose, and size of
such parade, picket line, or group demonstration and whether or not any minors
under the age of 18 years shall participate;
      (2)   Refuse to issue such permit when the activity or purpose stated in
the application would violate any law or ordinance of the town or state law, or
when the activity or purpose would constitute a clear and present danger to the
public health or safety or would hinder or prevent the orderly movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the streets, alleys, or sidewalks;
      (3)   (a)   Specify in the permit whether or not minors under the age of
18 years will be permitted to participate.
         (b)   The Chief shall pass upon whether or not such minors may
participate and shall base his or her determination upon whether or not the
purpose or time or place of the particular activity will be detrimental to or
endanger the health, safety, or welfare of such minors or will interfere with
their education;
      (4)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the
permit shall designate the person in charge of the activity. Such person shall
be required to accompany the parade, picket line, or group demonstration and
shall carry such permit with him or her at that time. Such permit shall not be
valid in the possession of any other person;
      (5)   Set the starting time, duration, speed of travel, and space between
persons or vehicles in the parade, picket line, or group demonstration,
prescribe the portions or areas of streets, sidewalks, or other public places
to be used, or impose such other reasonable requirements as the Chief may
prescribe for the control and free movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or for the health, safety, and property rights of the participants and the
general public; and
      (6)   Among other considerations, consider and find as a requisite to
issuance the following.
         (a)   The activity will not require excessive diversion of police from
other necessary duties.
         (b)   The activity will not interfere with the right of property
owners in the area to enjoy peaceful and lawful occupancy and use of their
property.
         (c)   The activity can be conducted without unreasonable interference
with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area, and will not prevent
normal police and fire protection to the public, and will not be likely to
cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct or to
create a public disturbance.
(Prior Code, § 95.31) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.32 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade, picket
line, or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
   (A)   The violation by any participant of §
94.33(A); or
   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 95.32) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970)
§ 94.33 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of any parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited:
      (1)   The carrying on or about the person of any firearm or any weapon or
article, including but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks, or flashlights,
which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; and
      (2)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal, whether
leashed or unleashed.
   (B)   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
parade, picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of
a permit duly issued by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following
additional regulations.
      (1)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic.
      (2)   Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any one
time.
      (3)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective for
which the picketing is done; provided, the words used are not derogatory or
defamatory in nature.
      (4)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and not march
closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets shall not
be allowed to walk more than five feet from the curb line and shall be in
continuous motion.
      (5)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the same
sidewalk for picketing and such use would result in the presence of more than
ten pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group of
pickets for the use of such sidewalk on an equitable basis.
(Prior Code, § 95.33) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.34 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students going to or from school classes or participating in
educational or recreational activity where such activity is under the
supervision and direction of proper school authorities; or
   (C)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(Prior Code, § 95.34) (Ord. passed 4-7-1970)
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 94.45 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide special allowances for
special events held within the community on public property and to recognize
the substantial community benefits resulting from such special events.
   (B)   Due to special logistical and operational considerations related to
these special events, it is necessary to provide specific, separate, and
distinct guidelines and standards for them. It is the express intent of these
provisions to:
      (1)   Minimize any potential adverse impact of such special events by
eliminating, to the greatest possible extent, any major problems, threats, or
dangers to the public health, safety, or welfare as may exist as a result of
such special events;
      (2)   Minimize any real or perceived competition between these special
events and our permanent, seasonal, year-round businesses and town events;
      (3)   Ensure adequate public safety measures are in place at special
events;
      (4)   Provide for standardized fees and procedures required to administer
the permit process; and
      (5)   Provide cultural enrichment, promote economic vitality, enhance
community identity/pride, and provide opportunities for family activities and
funding for our community’s businesses.
(Ord. passed 9-6-2022)
§ 94.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. An event point of contact; the individual that applies for a
special event permit and is responsible and accountable for the overall special
event.
   EVENT SITE. The area designated on the site plan filed with the special
event permit for a special event’s activities.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY EVENT SITE. Property owned and/or controlled by the town,
including, but not limited to, buildings, vacant property, parks, streets,
sidewalks, and parking lots.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A temporary public or private gathering on public property
that includes activities (other than activities as allowed by the underlying
approved land use) and outdoor performances which have the potential for public
health or safety impacts (i.e., traffic, crowd control, noise, and the like).
All SPECIAL EVENTS require a special event permit.
   TOWN ADMINISTRATOR. The Town Administrator and/or such other person as
designated by the Board of Commissioners is responsible for coordinating
special events and shall be the administrator of the outdoor performance and
special events ordinance.
   TOWN RESOURCES. Town assets; including the human power of town employees to
provide those assets for the special event.
   WORKING DAYS. Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(Ord. passed 9-6-2022)
§ 94.47 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   Permit required. Any person or group who holds a special event shall
be required to obtain a special event permit.
   (B)   Permit procedure. An application for a special event permit shall be
made in writing at least 30 days before the time the event shall be scheduled
to be held. If the proposed special event is to occur on a state/federal
holiday, an application shall be submitted 45 working days prior to the
proposed special event. An application will not be reviewed until the non-
refundable application fee is paid and the application submitted contains the
following attachments.
      (1)   Scaled site plan (map provided by Town Administrator). The
applicant shall use the provided scaled map to show the proposed event site
layout. For example, parking areas, planned activity areas, proposed
structures, bathrooms, concessions, tents, and any other related activities
that will occur or be placed on site.
      (2)   Parking plan. The applicant shall provide a parking plan detailing
how parking will be managed for event, the proposed location of parking for
event goers and vendors, if parking will be off-site, or on-site and how event
goers and vendors will transit between event area and parking area.
         (a)   On-site private parking. Existing parking spaces designated for
on-site land uses may be used to accommodate activities occurring at the
special event.
         (b)   Off-site private parking. If off-site private parking is
identified on the parking plan for the special event a letter from the property
owner shall be required stating that the existing land use will not utilize the
parking spaces during the hours of the special event.
      (3)   Crowd and traffic control plan. The applicant shall provide a plan
detailing how crowds and traffic will be managed; the additional use of police
officers or a traffic control agency directing traffic and pedestrians
(applicant’s expense), routes for emergency vehicle to navigate without delay,
and the like.
      (4)   Liability insurance. Proof of liability insurance for the applicant
naming the town as the additional insured entity for an amount determined by
the Town Administrator, or no less than $1,000,000.
      (5)   Liquor liability insurance. Proof of liquor liability insurance,
state alcoholic beverage control application, and town issued special event
alcohol consumption permit shall be required if serving alcoholic beverages.
Liquor may not be sold or consumed on town property.
      (6)   Alcohol permit. Town issued special event alcohol permit shall be
required if alcohol will not be sold but can be consumed during the event.
Liquor may not be sold or consumed on town property.
   (C)   Meeting. Following receipt of a complete special event permit
application and fee, the Town Administrator shall schedule a meeting with town
department heads. The purpose of the meeting is to:
      (1)   Ensure compliance with this subchapter and other town ordinances;
and
      (2)   Verify fees associated with town resources needed for the event.
   (D)   Authority. The Town Administrator shall have authority to determine if
any proposed event meets the criteria of this subchapter, if the proposed event
requires a special event permit, and if traffic control or police services are
necessary to ensure safety.
(Ord. passed 4-20-2022; Ord. passed 9-6-2022)
§ 94.48 CRITERIA FOR USE OF ALL PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   A refundable deposit, as defined in the town’s fee schedule, shall be
required for all events to ensure the event area is returned to its original
condition. The town may require higher deposit amounts based on the estimated
attendance.
   (B)   The town reserves the right to alter or cancel an event at any time
due to weather or an emergency. In the event of cancellation, the town’s
special event fees, not already expended in preparation for the event, will be
refunded.
   (C)   Permitted special events shall end no later than the time designated
by the Town Administrator in the special event permit.
   (D)   The applicant shall follow all federal, state, and local regulations,
i.e., Alcohol Beverage Control Commission (ABC), Health Department, and the
like.
   (E)   The applicant shall display any special event signs required by the
town.
   (F)   If electric service is required for the event, it is the
responsibility of the applicant to inspect electrical outlets to ensure outlets
are working ten days prior to the event date. All problems found during the
electrical outlet inspection must be reported to the Town Administrator
immediately. If a problem arises with the electric service during the event,
the applicant shall contact the Town Administrator. The applicant shall be
responsible for all cost related to town’s electrician services during event.
   (G)   Vendors shall have designated parking that is not adjacent to any part
of the event.
   (H)   Noise levels shall be in accordance with applicable ordinances.
   (I)   The applicant shall ensure all trash is removed from the special event
area and not dumped on site, including ash or coals from grills.
(Ord. passed 9-6-2022)
§ 94.49 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This section identifies activities that are exempt from needing a
special event permit and/or describes any waivers that may be granted:
      (1)   Town sponsored events;
      (2)   Locations with established institutional uses (i.e., schools,
churches, and nonprofit organizations;
      (3)   Private events on private property that are outside the commercial
areas. These events are still subject to all applicable regulations in this
code. The intent of this exemption is not to allow for events to occur on a
regular basis in a residential area, but to recognize that many residences will
occasionally have birthday parties, wedding receptions, or similar events on
their property;
      (4)   Commercial establishments with outdoor areas:
         (a)   Designed for patrons to sit and/or congregate; and
         (b)   Identified on an approved zoning site plan.
      (5)   At the Town Administrator’s discretion, a special event may be
granted a waiver of some special event fees when it meets the following
criteria.
         (a)   The event has been conducted without significant issues on an
annual basis for at least ten years.
         (b)   The event takes place between Memorial Day and Labor Day.
         (c)   The event sponsors donate a portion of the event proceeds to a
community based nonprofit institution or governmental affiliate that is located
within the town.
   (B)   Applicants shall request a fee waiver in writing and express their
justification for the request at the time of filing the application.
(Ord. passed 9-6-2022)
§ 94.50 SPECIAL EVENTS REQUIRING BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS’ APPROVAL.
   Special event applications shall require the approval of the Board of
Commissioners if the special event or the applicant have previously received
violation notices of this subchapter or had health or safety issues identified
as inadequately addressed during a previous special event. The determination as
to whether the health and safety issues were a result of the applicant and/or
the special event shall be made by the Town Administrator.
(Ord. passed 9-6-2022)
§ 94.51 VIOLATIONS.
   Any special event that fails to meet the requirements of this subchapter
and/or any contract between the town and applicant:
   (A)   Shall be responsible for paying additional costs associated with town
resources utilized to accommodate any aspect of the event (i.e., setup,
activities of the special event, breakdown, and the like);
   (B)   May have civil penalties applied in accordance with the town’s
annually adopted rate and fee schedule;
   (C)   May have its special event permit revoked by the Town Administrator;
or
   (D)   May not be allowed future special event permits, unless approved by
Town Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9-6-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   SPECIALIZED SALES AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 110: SPECIALIZED SALES AND SERVICES
Section
Pool Halls
   
110.01   Pool halls not to be open to minors
   
110.02   Closing hours
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to regulate billiard halls, see G.S. § 160A-181
POOL HALLS
§ 110.01 POOL HALLS NOT TO BE OPEN TO MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for the proprietor of any billiard or pool hall to
allow or permit minors under the age of 18 years to frequent, loiter, go, or
remain in such hall under any circumstances, unless such minor is upon some
lawful errand and has been sent under the direction, consent, and knowledge of
the parent, guardian, or other person having the lawful custody of such minor.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. passed 10-17-1966) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Manager or owner of billiard room permitting minor to enter, see G.S. § 14-
317
§ 110.02 CLOSING HOURS.
   Pool rooms in the town shall remain closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 7:00 a.m.; provided that pool rooms in the town shall remain closed from 2:
00 a.m. Sunday morning until 7:00 a.m. the following Monday.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-16-
1982) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   WEAPONS
      
133.   ALCOHOL AND DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
   
130.01   Ringing bells for mischievous purpose
   
130.02   Disorderly conduct
   
130.03   Disturbing the peace
   
130.04   False alarms
   
130.05   Fruit peelings, chewing gum, and the like dropped on streets and
sidewalks
   
130.06   Halloween activity
   
130.07   Defecating or urinating in public places
   
130.08   Spitting on public places
   
130.09   Soliciting for magazines and books
   
130.10   Impersonating town officer or employee
   
130.11   Courteous conduct between town officers and employees and the public
   
130.12   Unwholesome meat prohibited for sale
   
130.13   Curfew
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 RINGING BELLS FOR MISCHIEVOUS PURPOSE.
   No person shall ring or cause to be rung any church, school, fire, or other
bell, in sport or for any mischievous purpose.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Disorderly conduct within the town is hereby made unlawful. Any person
who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct:
      (1)   Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by threats
of violence or threats of bodily harm;
      (2)   Any person who shall cause or provoke any fight or brawl so as to
endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another or public property;
      (3)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
and cause, provoke, or engage in any fight or brawl;
      (4)   Any person who shall assemble in bodies or in crowds and engage in
unlawful activities;
      (5)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
and engage or attempt to engage in gaming;
      (6)   Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money
from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice, or device,
or attempt to do so;
      (7)   Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any
fraudulent scheme, device, or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place
or from any person, or attempts to do so;
      (8)   Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the
public, any obscene words or epithets;
      (9)   Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale
or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is
practiced, allowed, or tolerated;
      (10)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
and do bodily harm to another;
      (11)   Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on
any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or
other person having authority; and
      (12)   Any person who damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or
the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically
offensive condition.
   (B)   Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this
section, shall be punished as provided in §
130.99.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Disorderly conduct generally, see G.S. § 14-288.4
   Disorderly conduct in or near public buildings, see G.S. § 14-132
§ 130.03 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall be permitted to disturb the good order, peace, and quiet of
the town by fighting, making loud noises, using profane, boisterous, or
indecent language, or in any other manner.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Offenses against the public peace, see G.S. §§ 14-269 et seq.
§ 130.04 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
explosion or impending danger of explosion.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for police protection or assistance.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for medical assistance by any physician or registered nurse.
(Prior Code, § 130.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   False alarm of fire, see G.S. § 14-286
   False report to police radio broadcasting station, see G.S. § 14-225
   False request for ambulance, see G.S. § 14-286
§ 130.05 FRUIT PEELINGS, CHEWING GUM, AND THE LIKE DROPPED ON STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast any fruit peeling or pit,
chewing gum, or other substance dangerous to any person or annoying to any
person of ordinary sensibilities on any street or sidewalk in the town.
(Prior Code, § 130.05) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 HALLOWEEN ACTIVITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in any public
place in the town for the purpose of making “trick or treat” visitations, or to
go on or in any private premises for such purpose, except as provided in
division (B) below.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to children 12 years of age and
under between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. on each Halloween night.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or her
minor child or ward to violate the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Distribution of certain food on Halloween and at all other times, see G.S. §
14-401.11
§ 130.07 DEFECATING OR URINATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on any street or
sidewalk, or on or within any public place other than in a “rest room” provided
for such purpose.
(Prior Code, § 130.07) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08 SPITTING ON PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate upon the floors, walls,
or steps of any public building, or upon the sidewalks of the town.
(Prior Code, § 130.08) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 SOLICITING FOR MAGAZINES AND BOOKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to go from place to place within
the town for the purpose of selling books or magazines or for the purpose of
soliciting the sale of books or subscriptions to magazines or other periodicals
without first having obtained a permit so to do from the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Each applicant for a permit under this section shall furnish to the
Town Clerk-Treasurer, in writing, his or her full name, age, and residence and
business address; the name and address of each person or publisher for whom he
or she proposes to solicit sales or subscriptions; a copy of each sales
contract or subscription order to be used by him or her in the course of his or
her transactions under this section; and his or her police record, if any.
   (C)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, upon the filing of any application for
permit under this section, shall refer it to the Chief of Police, who shall
investigate the applicant’s police record, whether or not any reference thereto
is made in the application, and he or she may make inquiries of any better
business bureau concerning the person or publisher for whom the applicant
proposes to solicit sales or subscriptions, and shall then return the
application to the Town Clerk-Treasurer together with his or her findings and
recommendations.
   (D)   Each non-resident of the town shall, upon making application for a
permit under this section, pay $5 to the Town Clerk-Treasurer to defray the
cost of investigation.
   (E)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue a permit under this section
if the Chief of Police has determined that the applicant or any person or
publisher for whom the applicant proposes to solicit sales or subscriptions has
been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or
has failed in any case to adhere to the provisions of any contract or order for
any sale or subscription; nor shall he or she issue any permit if any sales or
subscription contract contains any provision or any omission in violation of
federal or state law, in the opinion of the Town Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 130.09) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10 IMPERSONATING TOWN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or
employee of the town, or without proper authority wear or display any uniform,
insignia, or credential which identifies any town officer or employee; nor
shall any person without proper authority assume to act as an officer or
employee of the town, whether to gain access to premises, obtain information,
perpetrate a fraud, or for any other purpose; provided, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent a private citizen making a lawful
citizen’s arrest for felony or breach of the peace committed in his or her
presence.
(Prior Code, § 130.10) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Impersonation of peace officer, see G.S. § 14-277
§ 130.11 COURTEOUS CONDUCT BETWEEN TOWN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES AND THE PUBLIC.
   Town officers and employees shall be courteous in their official
transactions with the public, and they shall conduct themselves in the
performance of their official duties so as to not knowingly deprive any person,
at the time and under the circumstances then and there existing, of any lawful
right or benefit to which such person may be entitled. Any person who feels
aggrieved by the conduct of any town officer or employee in violation of this
section is hereby invited to bring such matter to the attention of such
officer’s or employee’s department head or to the Mayor, without prejudice to
any other recourse to which such aggrieved person may be entitled.
(Prior Code, § 130.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.12 UNWHOLESOME MEAT PROHIBITED FOR SALE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within the
town any unwholesome meat, fish or fowl.
(Prior Code, § 130.12) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Slaughtering for market prohibited, see §
91.05
§ 130.13 CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   On any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday: 11:00
p.m. until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and
         (b)   On any Saturday or Sunday: 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN.
         (a)   Linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the town during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town during
curfew hours.
      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
   (C)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) above that the
minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         (i)   Married or had been married, or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with state law.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3) above that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police
Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
division (C) above is present.
(Prior Code, § 130.13)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who violates a provision of §
130.13 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.
(Prior Code, § 130.99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Defacing or injuring public property
   
131.02   Tampering with town property
   
131.03   Trespassing on or damaging real property
   
131.04   Violators to pay for damage
   
131.05   Depositing of material in residential and commercial dumpsters
Littering
   
131.20   Definition
   
131.21   Prohibited deposits
   
131.22   Sweepings from premises
   
131.23   Duty of business establishments
   
131.24   Litter thrown or spilled from vehicles
   
131.25   Depositing litter in parks and other public places
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 DEFACING OR INJURING PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Any person who shall deface, remove, or in any way injure any fence, gate,
sign, building, or post, or who shall in any way injure, cut down, or destroy
any shade tree, lamp post, or telephone, telegraph, or electric light post, on
any street or public property, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 131.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
131.99
Statutory reference:
   Willful and wanton injury to personal property, see G.S. § 14-160
§ 131.02 TAMPERING WITH TOWN PROPERTY.
   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly use, tamper with,
render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest, or otherwise
interfere with any books, records, furniture, equipment, gear, apparatus,
tools, or other items of personal property belonging to, leased to, or used by
the town or any agency thereof.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 TRESPASSING ON OR DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY.
   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly trespass upon or
damage, deface, molest, or otherwise interfere with any real property belonging
to, leased to, or used by the town or any agency thereof.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 VIOLATORS TO PAY FOR DAMAGE.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
131.02 or
131.03 shall, in addition to any penalty which may be imposed for such
violation, be required to pay for the damages inflicted by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 131.04)
§ 131.05 DEPOSITING OF MATERIAL IN RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      LIMITED USE DUMPSTER OR TRASH RECEPTACLE. Any dumpster or other trash
receptacle placed and intended for deposit of garbage, trash, and other
materials only by residents of immediately surrounding apartment or residential
units, or by employees of immediately surrounding business establishments, and
which is empty on a regular basis by arrangement with the sanitation force of
the town.
      UNAUTHORIZED PERSON. Any person who is neither a resident or guest of a
resident of an apartment or residential unit in the immediate proximity to a
limited use dumpster or trash receptacle, as defined above, nor an employee or
patron of a business establishment in the immediate proximity to such a
dumpster or receptacle.
   (B)   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deposit
garbage, trash, or any other material in any limited use dumpster or trash
receptacle located within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 10-1-2002) Penalty, see §
131.99
LITTERING
§ 131.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the word LITTER shall mean refuse and
all other waste materials which, if thrown or deposited on any premises, vacant
lot, street, or sidewalk, tends to create a danger to public health and safety,
or an unsightly appearance.
(Prior Code, § 131.15)
§ 131.21 PROHIBITED DEPOSITS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or
other public place within the town except in receptacles provided for such
purpose and for which adequate provision is made for removal of the contents
and the maintenance thereof in a clean and sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 131.16) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.22 SWEEPINGS FROM PREMISES.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, or other public
or private place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalks and driveways abutting their
property clean and free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 131.17) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.23 DUTY OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in or on any gutter, street, sidewalk, or other public or private place
within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within the town shall keep the sidewalks abutting their business
premises clean and free of litter.
(Prior Code, § 131.18) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.24 LITTER THROWN OR SPILLED FROM VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person, while a driver or passenger, in a vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any private property or upon any street or other public
place within the town.
   (B)   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
dirt, litter, or other matter being spilled therefrom or deposited upon any
street or other public or private place.
(Prior Code, § 131.19) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.25 DEPOSITING LITTER IN PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit in any park within the town except in
public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon
any street or other private or public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. No person
shall throw or deposit litter in any drinking fountain, pond, lake, swimming
pool, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the town.
(Prior Code, § 131.29) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
131.05 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not
to exceed $50, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, as provided in G.S. §
14-4.
(Ord. passed 10-1-2002)
CHAPTER 132: WEAPONS
Section
   
132.01   Discharging firearms or other devices
   
132.02   Posting of signs prohibiting carrying of concealed weapons
   
132.03   Firearms and weapons on town property
§ 132.01 DISCHARGING FIREARMS OR OTHER DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm at any time or
place within the town except when used in lawful defense of person or property;
pursuant to lawful directions of a law enforcement officer; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to discharge any pellet gun, air rifle, or other
mechanism or device designed or used to project a pellet, BB, or other missiles
by compressed air or mechanical action with less than deadly force except at
places designated for such purpose by the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 132.01) (Ord. passed 6-6-1921) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of Board of Commissioners to enact this section, see G.S. §§ 160A-
189 and 160A-190
§ 132.02 POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING CARRYING OF CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   Posting of signs required. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations
on or within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased
as lessee, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the town, as well as
the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a
concealed handgun is prohibited therein.
   (B)   Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the
exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building.
The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall exercise discretion in determining the number
and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant
premises and parks.
(Prior Code, § 132.02) (Ord. passed - -1995)
§ 132.03 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS ON TOWN PROPERTY.
   (A)   Prohibition.
      (1)   Weapons on town property. It shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully and intentionally carry, possess, or have within his or her immediate
access any dangerous weapon or firearm while in public-owned buildings, on the
grounds or parking areas of those buildings, or in public parks or recreation
areas.
      (2)   Carrying a concealed handgun by permit (CCHP). In accordance with
G.S. § 14-415.23, the prohibition set forth in division (A)(1) above shall
apply to CCHP in all buildings and on their appurtenant premises that are
owned, leased as lessee, or otherwise temporarily controlled by the town which
are appropriately posted as such in compliance with G.S. § 14-415.11(c).
      (3)   Posting against CCHP. In the discretion of the Town Administrator,
a posting to prohibit CCHP is hereby authorized to be made in all buildings and
their appurtenant premises that are owned, leased as lessee, or otherwise
temporarily controlled by the town in compliance with G.S. § 14-415.11(c).
      (4)   Prohibiting CCHP at recreational facilities. In accordance with
G.S. § 14-415.23, the prohibition set forth in division (A)(1) above shall
apply to CCHP at any recreational facility owned or operated by the town.
      (5)   As used herein, the term RECREATIONAL FACILITY includes those
facilities specifically identified by the Town Administrator and shall include
the following:
         (a)   An athletic field, including any appurtenant facilities such as
restrooms, during an organized athletic event if the field had been scheduled
for use with the municipality or county office responsible for operation of the
park or recreational area;
         (b)   A swimming pool, including any appurtenant facilities used for
dressing, storage of personal items, or other uses relating to the swimming
pool; and
         (c)   A facility used for athletic events, including, but not limited
to, a gymnasium.
      (6)   As used herein, the term RECREATIONAL FACILITY does not include any
greenway, designated biking or walking path, an area that is customarily used
as a walkway or bike path although not specifically designated for such use,
open areas or fields where athletic events may occur unless the area qualifies
us an athletic field, pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) above, and any other area
that is not specifically described in division (A)(5) above.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CARRYING A CONCEALED HANDGUN BY PERMIT (CCHP). The lawful carry of a
handgun in a concealed manner in complete accordance with the requirements of
G.S. Ch. 14 Art. 54B by a person holding a valid concealed handgun permit
issued pursuant to the same article of law, or such permit issued by another
state which is in reciprocity with North Carolina.
      DANGEROUS WEAPON. Any object, substance, or device, other than a firearm,
designed or intended to be used to incapacitate or inflict serious injury upon
persons or property, including any object defined as a deadly weapon by G.S. §
14-269 and also including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Pellet guns or any other mechanism or device designed or used to
project a missile by compressed air or mechanical action with less than deadly
force;
         (b)   Bows and arrows, including crossbows or any other device
designed to discharge a projectile through any combination of limbs, strings,
cables, pulleys, or cams;
         (c)   Knives of any kind or type having a blade in excess of three and
one-half inches in length;
         (d)   Clubs, blackjacks, batons, and nightsticks;
         (e)   Dynamite, bombs, grenades, mines, or any other explosive,
corrosive, inflammable, or radioactive substance of any kind;
         (f)   Slingshots and blowguns or any other device designed or used to
project a missile through mechanical or physical means;
         (g)   Electronic weapons of any type including tasers, stun guns, or
any other device designed or used to emit current, impulse, wave, beam, sound,
vibration, or any form of energy in such a way so as to incapacitate, injure,
or affect the behavior of another; and/or
         (h)   Chemical weapons of any type including mace, pepper spray, or
any other device designed or used to emit any substance in such a way so as to
incapacitate, injure, or control the behavior of another.
      FIREARM. A handgun, shotgun, or rifle which expels a projectile by action
of an explosion.
   (C)   Applicability. This section shall not apply to any circumstance or
instance of dangerous weapon or firearm possession that has been preempted from
local government regulation by G.S. §§ 14-409.40 or 14-415.23. Additionally,
this section shall not apply to the following circumstances or persons while
acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority:
      (1)   Officers of the United States federal government, the State of
North Carolina, or of any county, city, town, or company police agency charged
with the execution of the laws of the state, when acting in the discharge of
their official duties;
      (2)   Sworn law-enforcement officers, when off duty, provided that an
officer does not carry a weapon while consuming alcohol or an unlawful
controlled substance or while alcohol or an unlawful controlled substance
remains in the officer’s body;
      (3)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces of the United
States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under
orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;
      (4)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the National Guard when
called into actual service; and/or
      (5)   Persons specifically authorized or required by state or federal law
to carry firearms in the performance of their jobs.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from possession of a
knife with a blade in excess of three and one-half inches when used solely for
preparation of food, instruction, or maintenance; or razors and razor blades
when used solely for personal shaving.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from storing a firearm
within a motor vehicle while the vehicle is on the grounds or parking areas of
a public-owned building, public park, or recreation area.
   (F)   Any other person authorized, in writing, by the Town Administrator or
his or her designee to carry or possess dangerous weapons while in or upon
specified public property. The Town Administrator may promulgate guidelines for
the issuance of permits for the possession of dangerous weapons on public
property. The purpose of the guidelines shall be to ensure that permits are
issued only for lawful purposes and in circumstances which present no threat to
the safety and welfare of any person.
   (G)   This section shall not prohibit the lawful possession or carrying of
dangerous weapons on the public streets and sidewalks.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: ALCOHOL AND DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Open containers on streets or public property
   
133.02   Regulation of beer and wine sales
   
133.03   Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug related activity
§ 133.01 OPEN CONTAINERS ON STREETS OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink beer, wine, or other
alcoholic beverages on public property of the town, including town streets and
sidewalks, or to have in his or her possession any opened can, bottle, or other
container for the purpose of drinking beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages
therefrom while on public property, including town streets and sidewalks,
except as expressly permitted by G.S. Ch. 18B and as authorized by permit
issued by the Town Administrator pursuant to division (B) below.
   (B)   Upon written request by an applicant, the Town Administrator, or such
other individual as designated by the Board of Commissioners, may allow by
issuance of a permit the consumption of beer or wine on public property,
including town streets and sidewalks, for special events under the following
conditions.
      (1)   The permit may only be considered if prior approval of the request
has been obtained from the town’s Police Department.
      (2)   The applicant may be required to submit such information or
documentation as required by the Town Administrator evidencing that the event
organizers will have in place sufficient safety measures to ensure that the
consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event will not create a public safety
issue.
      (3)   The permit shall set forth a specific date(s) on which the event is
to be held and specific times during which consumption of alcoholic beverages
shall be permitted.
      (4)   The resolution shall state that consumption of alcoholic beverages
shall not be permitted in or on public streets, sidewalks, or parking lots,
unless such areas will be closed for the special event by the town.
      (5)   Liquor is expressly prohibited from such permitted events.
(Ord. passed 4-20-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.02 REGULATION OF BEER AND WINE SALES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. Ch. 18B, it shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to sell wine from 12:00 p.m. on each Sunday
until 7:00 a.m. on the following Monday, in any place within the corporate
limits of the town. This section shall not apply to establishments having a
“brown bagging permit” issued under G.S. § 18B-1001(7).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to consume malt beverage on any premises having
only an off-premises permit; and it shall also be unlawful to consume wine
(fortified or unfortified) on any premises having only an off-premises permit
for the type of wine being consumed.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give to any minor under
the age of 21 years, or to allow, aid, or abet any such minor to purchase
anywhere the beverages as defined by state law in any town.
(Prior Code, § 133.02) (Ord. passed 5-21-1984; Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.03 LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG RELATED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR, OR SELLER. A person who has, within
the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this
state of any violation involving the use, possession, or sale of any of the
substances referred to in the State Controlled Substances Act, being G.S. Ch.
90, Art. 5, or has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar
laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state or of
federal law.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza,
park, driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility, or the doorways and
entranceways to any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor
vehicle in or on any of those places, or any property owned by the town.
   (B)   Restriction. It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander
about in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the
purpose to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the State Controlled
Substances Act, being G.S. Ch. 90, Art. 5. Such circumstances shall include:
      (1)   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop passers-
by, or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in conversation;
      (2)   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles;
      (3)   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons;
      (4)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller;
      (5)   Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful
drug related activity;
      (6)   Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from passers-by,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects;
      (7)   Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a
police officer;
      (8)   Such person is at a location frequented by persons who use,
possess, or sell drugs; or
      (9)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor, or seller, or is known to be or have been involved in drug related
activities.
   (C)   Violation. Violation of any provision of this section shall be a
misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 133.03) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS
Section
   
150.01   Building Inspector
   
150.02   State Building Code to be on file and available for public inspection
   
150.03   Construction of buildings within fire limits
   
150.04   Applications for building permits
   
150.05   Fees
   
150.06   Structures dangerous to public health or safety constitute nuisances
Statutory reference:
   Safety provisions for hotels, see G.S. §§ 58-81-1 et seq.
§ 150.01 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The County Building Inspector shall serve as Building Inspector for the
town.
(Prior Code, § 150.01)
§ 150.02 STATE BUILDING CODE TO BE ON FILE AND AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain in his or her office at all
times while currently in effect each volume of, and supplement and amendment
to, the State Building Code; and the Building Inspector shall procure from the
State Building Code Council a copy of each volume of the State Building Code,
and amendments and supplements thereto, as promulgated from time to time, and
he or she shall maintain them on file in his or her office at all times while
currently in effect.
   (B)   Such copies of the State Building Code shall be available to the
public for inspection and use in the offices of the Town Clerk-Treasurer and
the Building Inspector during all regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 150.02)
Statutory reference:
   Applicability of State Building Code throughout the state, see G.S. § 143-
138(e)
   Duty of State Building Code Council to distribute State Building Code, see
G.S. § 143-138(g)
   Violations of State Building Code and penalties and remedies, see G.S. §
143-138(h)
§ 150.03 CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.
   All buildings erected within the fire limits on or after the effective date
of this code shall be of fireproof material approved by the State Insurance
Commissioner or his or her representative, and shall conform to the minimum
requirements and standards of the State Building Code as to building
construction in the first fire district.
(Prior Code, § 150.03)
§ 150.04 APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
   Every application for a building permit required by state law shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications for the proposed building or structure,
the proposed location thereof, the materials to be used therein, the purposes
for which it is intended to be used, the cost of materials and labor, and such
other information as reasonably may be required by the Building Inspector to
enable him or her to determine whether the permit applied for may be issued
pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, § 150.04)
§ 150.05 FEES.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may from time to time, by resolution not in
conflict with state law, this code, or other ordinance, promulgate schedules of
fees which shall be charged for permits and certificates issued or to be
issued, and inspections made or to be made, by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   A copy of each such schedule, while in effect, shall be maintained on
file in the office of the Building Inspector for information and use by the
public during all regular business hours; and no permit or certificate shall be
issued, or inspection made, for which a fee is prescribed until such fee has
been paid.
(Prior Code, § 150.05)
§ 150.06 STRUCTURES DANGEROUS TO PUBLIC HEALTH OR SAFETY CONSTITUTE NUISANCES.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any building or structure to remain in such
condition as to be dangerous to the public health or safety in any way. Any
such building or structure is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 150.06) (Ord. passed 9-21-1959)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to summarily remedy anything dangerous or prejudicial to
public health, see G.S. § 160A-193
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
151.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Interpretation
   
151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.25   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.26   Floodplain development application; permit and certification
requirements
   
151.27   Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.28   Corrective procedures
   
151.29   Variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
151.43   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but
without established floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
151.44   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
   
151.45   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO)
Legal Status Provisions
   
151.60   Effect on rights and liabilities under existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
151.61   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The State Legislature has in G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6; and Ch. 160A
Arts. 8 and 19, delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the town does ordain this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports, and
storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds, and
the like qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA
approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any activity defined as DEVELOPMENT which will
necessitate a Floodplain Development Permit.
   DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM). The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the
special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY and FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated
(see also DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY report includes
flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs),
if published.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state, or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact a
proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to
have on the floodway boundaries, base flood elevations, and floodway surcharge
elevations. The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified state licensed
engineer using standard engineering methods and models.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus the
FREEBOARD establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. § 130A, Art. 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a certified local government (CLG) program; or
      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a certified local government
(CLG) program. Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the
U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the State Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance
study. LETTERS OF MAP CHANGE include:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map
and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure
is not located in a special flood hazard area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that
a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood
elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard
area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been
permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management
regulations.
      (4)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission
and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may
be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this chapter, the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown
on a DFIRM are referenced. The state uses NAVD 1988.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the “start of
construction” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone AE, A, A99, or AO.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances, and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.07.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued; provided the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant
to §
151.29.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
151.25 through
151.29 and
151.40 through
151.45 is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1%-annual-chance flood event.
Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
   ZONES AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1%-annual-chance
flood event determined by detailed methods. BFEs are shown within these zones.
Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply. (ZONE AE is used on new
and revised maps in place of ZONES A1-A30.)
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs), of the town.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the cooperating
technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its FIS dated
June 2, 2015 for the county and associated DFIRM panels, including any digital
data developed as part of the flood insurance study, which are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter. Future revisions to the FIS and
DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional
authority of the town are also adopted by reference and declared a part of this
chapter. Subsequent revisions to the FIRM should be adopted within 12 months.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.07.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.25 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Administrator or designee, hereinafter referred to as the
“Floodplain Administrator,” is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.26 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION; PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development or disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.07, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.07;
         (d)   The boundary of the flood way(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
151.07;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
151.07,
151.27, or
151.42;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone AE, A, or AO will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34
(7/12)) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise,
and maintenance of floodproofing measures;
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
151.41(D)(3) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE,
and A1-30.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state, and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §§
151.41(F) and
151.41(G) are met; and
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit;
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
151.07;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable;
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE, or A1-30;
and
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable) (i.e.,
parking, building access, and limited storage only).
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/12)) is required
after the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of
establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done
within the seven-day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
         (b)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/
12)) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34 (7/12)), with supporting data, an operational
plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual
start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed
design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in
relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and
certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior
to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   Engineered foundation certificate. If a manufactured home is placed
within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than
36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is
required in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(C)(2).
      (4)   Certified report. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed project
on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties
located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the
permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.41(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.41(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
151.41(H).
   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building
Official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the State Building Code
and this chapter is required.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been received,
including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. § 1334;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Public Safety,
Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood
Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA);
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.44 are met;
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of §
151.26(C);
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of §
151.26(C);
   (I)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
151.26(C);
   (J)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
151.26(C) and
151.41(B);
   (K)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter;
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.26, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.42(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions
of §
151.07, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (N)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to
apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the
LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file;
   (O)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended;
   (P)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (Q)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order
constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (R)   (1)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason
(s) for the revocation.
      (2)   Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
   (S)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (T)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
151.28;
   (U)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests;
   (V)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS Report, FIRM, and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.07, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued
by FEMA. Notify the state and FEMA of mapping needs; and
   (W)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.28 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating that:
      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk-Treasurer
within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an
appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local
governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.29 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Adjustment Board as established by the town, hereinafter referred
to as the Appeal Board, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
151.05 provided provisions of divisions (I)(2), (I)(3), and (I)(5) below have
been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development; provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
151.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the state upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances are as follows.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas; provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state, and
local laws.
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the State Department of
Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30 calendar days
prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of new construction, as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback; provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
151.29(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
152.26(C).
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C, § 1334.
   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
151.07 or
151.42, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.40, are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation; provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation
shall be in accordance with §
151.45(B). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the floodproofing standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in
§
152.26(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in
height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (D) below.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices; provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure; and/or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, with modifications/rehabilitations/
improvements to the existing structure or the common wall is structurally
modified more than installing a doorway, both the existing structure and the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
      (2)   Additions to pre-FIRM or post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with no modifications/rehabilitations/improvements to
the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction consistent with the
code and requirements for the original structure; and/or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a
three-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must
comply with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure,
the three-year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of
that building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. If
the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
requirement does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Temporary placement.
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions).
      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (G)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures. 
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, and the like)
are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria
shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
151.40(A);
         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.40(D); and
         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of §
151.41(D)(3).
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet
or that is a minimal investment of $3,000 or less and satisfies the criteria
outlined above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards
of §
151.41(B). Elevation or floodproofing certifications in accordance with §
151.26(C) are required for all other accessory structures exceeding the minimum
size or minimal investment.
   (I)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
      (2)   Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation, securely
attached to a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-
supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable
flood hazard area;
      (3)   Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not
meet the elevation requirements of division (B) above shall be permitted in
flood hazard areas; provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and
constructed to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of
flood-prone debris.
      (4)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets, and
vents shall be:
         (a)   At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
   (J)   Other development. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a
hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The
following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval.
      (1)   Fences in regulated floodways and NBAs that have the potential to
block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences,
shall meet the limitations of §
151.44.
      (2)   Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the
placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
151.44.
      (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges,
culverts, low-water crossings, and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to
travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into
regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
151.44.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.42 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
151.07, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.40, shall apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20
feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream,
whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria.
      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
151.40 and
151.41.
      (2)   When flood way or non-encroachment data is available from a
federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial
improvements within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply with
the requirements of §§
151.40 and
151.41.
      (3)   (a)   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other
development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured
home sites.
         (b)   Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with §
151.07 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (non-residential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05. All other applicable provisions of §
151.41 shall also apply.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.43 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-
encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM
or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development
within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
151.40 and
151.41; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.44 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07. The flood ways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in §§
151.40 and
151.41, shall apply to all development within such areas.
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or
         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six
months of completion of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If division (A) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
provided the following provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.41(C); and
         (b)   The encroachment standards of division (A) above.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.45 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07 are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate.
   (B)   In addition to §§
151.40 and
151.41, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of four feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least four feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
      (2)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in division (A) above so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that
level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is
required in accordance with §§
151.26(C) and 151.41(B).
      (3)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 151.60 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions
of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted March 4, 1980, as amended, and
it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding
instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
of the town enacted on March 4, 1980, as amended, which are not reenacted
herein, are repealed.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.61 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit, within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2015)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Adopted by reference
Manufactured Housing
   
152.15   Findings
   
152.16   Purpose and intent
   
152.17   Manufactured home overlay areas
   
152.18   Zoning compliance documents
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The zoning ordinance of the town is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this code the same as if set forth in full herein.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-1-1996; Ord. passed 9-
7-1999; Ord. passed 6-1-2021; Ord. passed 3-5-2024; Ord. passed 3-5-2024; Ord.
passed 3-5-2024; Ord. -, passed 6-26- 2025)
MANUFACTURED HOUSING
§ 152.15 FINDINGS.
   The Board of Commissioners finds that manufactured housing offers affordable
housing opportunities for low and moderate income residents who could not
otherwise afford to own their own home. The Board of Commissioners further
finds that there is a need for more affordable housing within the corporate
limits and extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 151.10) (Ord. passed 11-1-1996)
§ 152.16 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to allow the placement of manufactured
homes in residential districts; provided that the homes meet appearance and
dimensional criteria which will protect the character and property values of
those single-family residential areas. The intent of this subchapter is to
increase the housing opportunities for individuals with a low or moderate
income.
(Prior Code, § 151.11) (Ord. passed 11-1-1996)
§ 152.17 MANUFACTURED HOME OVERLAY AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose. In accordance with the comprehensive plan and based on local
housing needs, and as authorized by G.S. § 160D-910, three types of
manufactured home overlay areas may be established. Such overlay areas may not
consist of an individual lot or scattered lots, but shall consist of a defined
area within which additional requirements or standards are placed upon
manufactured homes. The intent of this approach is to allow manufactured homes
in parts of a zoning district where they would not otherwise be allowed,
subject to appropriate conditions. The Board of Commissioners will give close
consideration to whether manufactured homes would be compatible with
surrounding land uses.
   (B)   Designation. Manufactured Home Class A (MH Class A), and Manufactured
Home Class B (MH Class B) overlay areas are authorized as areas which overlay
or overlap existing zoning districts, the extent and boundaries of which are or
may be indicated on the zoning map by adoption of a separate ordinance by the
Board of Commissioners, usually upon later request.
      (1)   These provisions create the mechanism which may from time to time
be used by the Board of Commissioners in designating such areas.
      (2)   In addition to other permitted uses, Class A manufactured homes
shall be permitted in MH Class A overlay areas, and Class A and B homes shall
be permitted MH Class B overlay areas. These uses are in addition to other
permitted uses. All other applicable requirements, including but not limited to
setback and accessory structure requirements, also shall apply to manufactured
homes allowed in overlay areas.
(Prior Code, § 151.12) (Ord. passed 11-1-1996)
§ 152.18 ZONING COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTS.
   A zoning compliance permit must be secured from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer before a Class A, B, or C manufactured home may be placed on a lot. A
building permit must also be secured. The building permit shall state all
applicable conditions and requirements and state that any violations will be
subject to appropriate enforcement action. Once installation and construction
is complete and necessary inspections have been performed, and before occupancy
and use, a certificate of occupancy must be secured. The certificate shall
state that the property owner is responsible for assuring that all applicable
conditions and requirements continue to be satisfied, and that appropriate
enforcement actions will be taken if violations occur. These permits shall be
in addition to all other necessary permits.
(Prior Code, § 151.13) (Ord. passed 11-1-1996)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS; CONTRACTS
      
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS; CONTRACTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Interlocal agreement addressing jurisdiction, road
-             8-4-1999    names, signage, and address database between the town
                          and the county
-             4-21-2020   Contract with the county to collect town taxes
                         
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        9-3-2002    Annexation of territory to the town
-        9-4-2018    Annexation of territory to the town
-        9-4-2018    Annexation of territory to the town
-        9-4-2018    Annexation of territory to the town
-        9-4-2018    Annexation of territory to the town
-        1-4-2021    Annexation of territory to the town
-        2-2-2021    Annexation of territory to the town
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
N.C.G.S. Cites Code Section
N.C.G.S. Cites           Code Section
1-8                      90.16
Ch. 7A                   151.29
10B-31                   33.01
12-3                     10.05
Ch. 14 Art. 54B          132.03
Ch. 14, 151              50.99
                         32.99;
14-4                     131.99;
                         133.03
14-4(a)                  10.99
14-4(b)                  70.99
14-132                   130.02
14-160                   131.01
14-225                   130.04
14-269 et seq.           130.03
14-277                   130.10
14-284.1                 92.09
14-286                   130.04
14-288.1 to 14-288.19    32.01
14-288.4                 130.02
14-317                   110.01
14-401.11                130.06
14-409.40                132.03
14-415.11(c)             132.03
14-415.23                132.03
14-269                   132.03
Ch. 18B                  133.01;
                         133.02
18B-1001(7)              133.02
Ch. 20                   Ch. 70
20-97                    71.03
20-114.1                 70.05
20-134                   73.05
20-153                   Ch. 70
20-157                   Ch. 73
20-158                   Ch. 70
20-158.1                 Ch. 70
20-161                   Ch. 73
20-161.1                 Ch. 73
20-162                   Ch. 73
20-162.1                 Ch. 73
20-163                   Ch. 73
20-168                   70.03
20-169                   Ch. 70
20-219.11                90.09
25-3-506                 33.01
Ch. 44A, Art. 1          90.11
58-78A-15                32.21
58-79-1                  32.21
58-79-20                 32.21
58-80-1 et seq.          32.26;
                         Ch. 92
58-80-15                 32.26
58-80-25                 32.26
58-81-1 et seq.          Ch. 150
60A-1                    Charter
Ch. 90, Art. 5           133.03
105-349                  31.01
105-349 et seq.          31.27
106-403                  91.06
113-270.1 et seq.        91.07
130A-290(a)(6)           151.05
130A-290(a)(35)          151.05
130A-290(a)(36)          151.05
130A, Art. 9             151.05
135-23                   31.03
136-141 et seq.          90.14
136-143                  90.14
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6 151.01
143-138(e)               150.02
143-138(g)               150.02
143-138(h)               150.02
143-143.15               151.41
Ch. 159                  Ch. 30
159-9                    31.31
159-24 et seq.           31.28
159-25                   31.07
159-28                   31.06
159-29                   31.01
159-36                   Ch. 30
                         30.01;
160A                     31.02;
                         31.09
160A-1                   10.05
Ch. 160A Arts. 8 and 19  151.01
160A-11                  10.18
160A-12                  Ch. 30
160A-60                  Ch. 31
160A-61                  Ch. 31
160A-62                  Ch. 31
160A-63                  Ch. 30;
                         Ch. 31
160A-64                  Ch. 30;
                         31.25
160A-66                  Ch. 30;
                         31.25
160A-67                  Ch. 30;
                         31.25
160A-68                  30.01
160A-68 et seq.          Ch. 30
160A-69                  31.25
160A-70                  30.01;
                         31.26
                         30.01;
160A-71                  30.03;
                         31.25
160A-72                  30.01;
                         31.27
160A-74                  30.01
160A-77                  10.05
160A-78                  31.27
160A-79                  10.05
160A-80                  30.03
160A-81                  30.03
160A-146                 Ch. 30
160A-155 160A-159        Ch. 30
160A-156                 Ch. 31
160A-171                 31.27
160A-172                 31.27
160A-173                 31.29
160A-174                 Ch. 30
160A-175                 10.99
160A-181                 Ch. 110
160A-183                 Ch. 92;
                         92.09
160A-186                 Ch. 91
160A-187                 91.01
160A-188                 91.07
160A-189                 132.01
160A-190                 132.01
160A-193                 93.03;
                         150.06
160A-212                 Ch. 91;
                         91.08
160A-281 et seq.         32.40
160A-288                 32.05
160A-291                 32.20
160A-292                 32.21
160A-293                 32.26
160A-296                 Ch. 94
160A-300                 Ch. 70
160A-301                 Ch. 73
160A-317                 50.01
160D-910                 152.17
160A-296(6)              94.15
                         
 
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2024 Code
Prior Code 2024 Code
10.99      10.99
30.01      30.01
30.02      30.02
30.03      30.03
31.01      31.01
31.02      31.02
31.03      31.03
31.04      31.04
31.05      31.05
31.06      31.06
31.07      31.07
31.08      31.08
31.09      31.09
31.10      31.10
31.20      31.25
31.21      31.26
31.22      31.27
31.23      31.28
31.24      31.31
31.25      31.29
31.26      31.30
32.01      32.20
32.02      32.21
32.03      32.22
32.04      32.23
32.05      32.24
32.06      32.25
32.07      32.26
32.08      32.27
33.01      32.40
33.02      32.41
33.03      32.42
34.01      32.01
34.02      32.02
34.03      32.03
34.04      32.04
34.05      32.05
34.06      32.06
34.07      32.07
34.99      32.99
50.01      50.01
50.02      50.01
51.99      51.99
70.01      70.01
70.02      70.02
70.03      70.03
70.04      70.04
70.05      70.05
70.15      70.20
70.16      70.21
70.17      70.22
70.18      70.23
70.19      70.24
70.20      70.25
70.21      70.26
70.22      70.27
70.23      70.28
71.01      71.01
71.02      71.02
72.01      72.01
72.02      72.02
72.03      72.03
72.04      72.04
72.05      72.05
72.06      72.06
72.07      72.07
72.08      72.08
72.09      72.09
72.10      72.10
72.11      72.11
72.12      72.12
72.13      72.13
72.14      72.14
73.01      73.01
73.02      73.02
73.03      73.03
73.04      73.04
73.05      73.05
73.06      73.06
73.07      73.07
73.08      73.08
73.09      73.09
73.10      73.10
73.11      73.11
73.12      73.12
91.01      91.01
91.02      91.02
91.03      91.03
91.04      91.04
91.05      91.05
91.06      91.06
91.07      91.07
91.08      91.08
92.01      92.01
92.02      92.02
92.03      92.03
92.04      92.04
92.05      92.05
92.06      92.06
92.07      92.07
92.08      92.08
92.09      92.09
92.10      92.10
92.11      92.11
92.12      92.12
92.13      92.13
93.01      93.01
93.02      93.02
93.03      93.03
93.04      93.04
94.01      93.15
94.02      93.16
95.01      94.01
95.02      94.02
95.03      94.03
95.15      94.15
95.16      94.16
95.17      94.17
95.30      94.30
95.31      94.31
95.32      94.32
95.33      94.33
95.34      94.34
111.01     110.01
111.02     110.02
130.01     130.01
130.02     130.02
130.03     130.03
130.04     130.04
130.05     130.05
130.06     130.06
130.07     130.07
130.08     130.08
130.09     130.09
130.10     130.10
130.11     130.11
130.12     130.12
130.13     130.13
130.99     130.99
131.01     131.01
131.02     131.02
131.03     131.03
131.04     131.04
131.15     131.20
131.16     131.21
131.17     131.22
131.18     131.23
131.19     131.24
131.29     131.25
132.01     132.01
132.02     132.02
133.02     133.02
133.03     133.03
150.01     150.01
150.02     150.02
150.03     150.03
150.04     150.04
150.05     150.05
150.06     150.06
151.01     152.01
151.10     152.15
151.11     152.16
151.12     152.17
151.13     152.18
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Passed Date Code Section
-        5-4-2021    31.32
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         Charter
-        - -         110.02
-        - -         110.02
-        - -         133.02
-        - -         133.03
-        - -         152.01
-        - -1995     132.02
                     30.01;
                     30.02;
-        6-6-1921    31.27;
                     32.40;
                     32.42
-        6-6-1921    50.02
-        6-6-1921    72.01;
                     73.06
                     91.02;
                     91.04 
                     91.06;
                     91.08;
-        6-6-1921    92.09;
                     93.02;
                     94.01;
                     94.02;
                     94.15
                     130.01;
                     130.03;
                     130.05;
-        6-6-1921    130.07;
                     130.08;
                     130.12;
                     131.01;
                     132.01
-        7-1-1947    50.01
-        4-7-1953    91.07
-        5-3-1955    31.03
-        8-5-1958    30.01
-        9-21-1959   93.01
-        9-21-1959   150.06
-        11-21-1960  71.01;
                     71.02
-        6-6-1961    31.06
-        11-7-1962   91.02
-        10-17-1966  110.01
-        9-2-1969    72.02;
                     72.03
-        4-7-1970    94.30 
                     94.34
-        11-6-1973   91.03
-        12-20-1976  31.04
-        11-16-1982  110.02
-        5-21-1984   133.02
-        11-1-1996   152.01; 150.15 150.18
-        8-4-1999    TSO Table I
-        9-7-1999    152.01
-        9-3-2002    TSO Table II
-        10-1-2002   131.05;
                     131.99
                     151.01 
                     151.12;
                     151.25 
                     151.29;
-        5-5-2015    151.40 
                     151.45;
                     151.60;
                     151.61;
                     151.99
-        9-4-2018    TSO Table II
-        9-4-2018    TSO Table II
-        9-4-2018    TSO Table II
-        9-4-2018    TSO Table II
-        5-5-2020    70.31
-        5-5-2020    132.03
-        4-21-2020   TSO Table I
-        1-4-2021    TSO Table II
-        2-2-2021    TSO Table II
-        6-1-2021    152.01
                     50.03;
-        11-9-2021   50.04;
                     50.99
-        4-20-2022   94.47
-        4-20-2022   133.01
-        9-6-2022    94.45 
                     94.51
-        4-4-2023    50.05
-        8-1-2023    91.20 
                     91.22
-        3-5-2024    152.01
-        3-5-2024    152.01
-        3-5-2024    152.01
                     70.29;
-        8-6-2024    70.30;
                     70.99;
                     73.12
-        8-6-2024    90.01 
                     90.16
-        6-26-2025   152.01
                    
 
 
 
 
