PLYMOUTH, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through Ord. 2025-11a, passed 2-10-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF PLYMOUTH
Section
Article I. Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries
   
1.1   Incorporation
   
1.2   Powers
   
1.3   Corporate Limits
Article II. Governing Body
   
2.1   Town Governing Body; Composition
   
2.2   Town Council; Composition; Terms of Office
   
2.3   Mayor; Term of Office; Duties
   
2.4   Mayor Pro Tempore
   
2.5   Meetings
   
2.6   Voting Requirements; Quorum
   
2.7   Compensation; Qualifications for Office; Vacancies
Article III. Elections
   
3.1   Regular Municipal Elections
   
3.2   Ward Boundaries
   
3.3   Election of Governing Body
   
3.4   Special Elections and Referenda
Article IV. Town Manager
   
4.1   Form of Government
   
4.2   Town Manager, Appointment: Powers and Duties
Article V. Administrative Officers and Employees
   
5.1   Town Attorney
   
5.2   Town Clerk
   
5.3   Tax Collector
   
5.4   Other Administrative Officers and Employees
Article VI. Police
   
6.1   Police Jurisdiction
Article VII. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
   
7.1   Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES
 
Section 1.1. Incorporation.
   The Town of Plymouth, North Carolina in Washington County and the
inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name of the ‘Town of Plymouth,’ hereinafter at times
referred to as ‘the Town.’
Section 1.2. Powers.
   The Town shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights,
privileges and immunities conferred upon the Town of Plymouth specifically by
this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law. The term ‘general
law’ is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1.
Section 1.3. Corporate Limits.
   The corporate limits shall be those existing at the time of ratification of
this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town and as they may be
altered from time to time in accordance with law. An official map of the Town,
showing the current municipal boundaries and the boundaries of the wards
therein, shall be maintained permanently in the office of the Town Clerk and
shall be available for public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate
limits or wards pursuant to law, the appropriate changes to the official map
shall be made and copies shall be filed in the office of the Secretary of
State, the Washington County Register of Deeds and the appropriate board of
elections.
ARTICLE II. GOVERNING BODY
 
Section 2.1. Town Governing Body; Composition.
   The Mayor and the Town Council, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Council,’
shall be the governing body of the Town.
Section 2.2. Town Council; Composition; Terms of Office.
   The Council shall be composed of six members who shall each be elected for
terms of two years or until their successors are elected and qualified.
Section 2.3. Mayor; Term of Office; Duties.
   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of two years or until his or her
successor is elected and qualified. The Mayor shall be the official head of the
Town government and preside at meetings of the Council, shall have the right to
vote only when there is an equal division on any question or matter before the
Council, and shall exercise the powers and duties conferred by law or as
directed by the Council.
Section 2.4. Mayor Pro Tempore.
   The Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform
the duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability, in accordance
with general law. Alternatively and notwithstanding the provisions of general
law, the Council may elect to have the Mayor appoint one of the Councilmembers
to act as Mayor Pro Tempore. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve in such capacity
at the pleasure of the Council.
Section 2.5. Meetings.
   In accordance with general law, the Council shall establish a suitable time
and place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held
as provided by general law.
Section 2.6. Voting Requirements; Quorum.
   Official actions of the Council and all votes shall be taken in accordance
with the applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. The
quorum provisions of G.S. 160A-74 shall apply.
Section 2.7. Compensation; Qualifications for Office; Vacancies.
   The compensation and qualifications of the Mayor and Councilmembers shall be
in accordance with general law. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the
Council as provided by general law.
ARTICLE III. ELECTIONS
 
Section 3.1. Regular Municipal Elections.
   A regular municipal election shall be held in each odd-numbered year in
accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina.
Elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined
using the nonpartisan plurality method as provided in G.S. 163-292.
Section 3.2. Ward Boundaries.
   The Town shall be divided into three wards. The ward boundaries are those
existing at the time of ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the
official map of the Town and as they may be altered from time to time in
accordance with general law.
Section 3.3. Election of Governing Body.
   Six Councilmembers and a Mayor shall be elected in each regular municipal
election. The qualified voters of the Town voting at large shall elect a Mayor,
and shall elect two Councilmembers from each of the three wards, all to serve
for terms of two years, or until their successors are elected and qualified. In
each election, the candidate for Mayor who receives the largest number of votes
cast for Mayor shall be declared elected, and the two candidates for
Councilmember from each ward who receive the highest number of votes cast for
candidates who reside in the ward wherein they reside shall be declared
elected.
Section 3.4. Special Elections and Referenda.
   Special elections and referenda may be held only as provided by general law
or by applicable local acts of the General Assembly.
ARTICLE IV. TOWN MANAGER
 
Section 4.1. Form of Government.
   The Town shall operate under the councilmanager form of government, in
accordance with G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 7, Part 2.
Section 4.2. Town Manager; Appointment; Powers and Duties.
   The Council shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be the administrative
head of the Town government responsible for the administration of all
departments. The Town Manager shall be appointed with regard to merit only. The
Town Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and shall receive
such compensation as it shall fix by ordinance. The Town Manager shall have all
the powers and duties conferred by general law, except as expressly limited by
the provisions of this Charter, and the additional powers and duties conferred
by the Council, so far as authorized by general law.
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
 
Section 5.1. Town Attorney.
   The Council shall appoint a Town Attorney licensed to practice law in North
Carolina. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to represent the Town, to
advise Town officials and to perform other duties required by law or as the
Council may direct.
Section 5.2. Town Clerk.
   The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Council, to maintain official records, and documents, to
give notice of meetings, and to perform such other duties required by law or as
the Manager may direct.
Section 5.3. Tax Collector.
   The Town shall have a Tax Collector to collect all taxes owed to the Town
and perform those duties specified in G.S. 105-350 and such other duties as
prescribed by law or assigned by the Town Manager. Notwithstanding the contrary
provisions of G.S. 105-349, the Manager is authorized to appoint and remove the
Tax Collector and one or more Assistant Tax Collectors.
Section 5.4. Other Administrative Officers and Employees.
   The Council may authorize other positions to be filled by appointment by the
Town Manager, and may organize the Town government as deemed appropriate,
subject to the requirements of general law. All appointments and removals made
by the Town Manager shall be reported to the governing body at the next meeting
thereof following such appointments and removals.
ARTICLE VI. POLICE
 
Section 6.1. Police Jurisdiction.
   The Town police force shall have extraterritorial jurisdiction as provided
by G.S. 160A-286 and as provided by Section 2 of Chapter 93 of the Session Laws
of 1965.
ARTICLE VII. EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
Section 7.1. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
   The Town in exercising the extraterritorial zoning authority granted under
G.S. 160A-360 is prohibited from exercising such authority over any territory
located outside the boundaries of Washington County, as specified by Chapter
450 of the Session Laws of 1965.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   WARD BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.04   Application to future ordinances
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of construction
   
10.07   Conflicting provisions
   
10.08   Code provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances
   
10.09   Severability
   
10.10   Reference to other sections
   
10.11   Reference to offices
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Official time
   
10.14   Reasonable time
   
10.15   Ordinances repealed
   
10.16   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.17   Ordinances saved
   
10.18   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.19   Altering code
   
10.20   Corporate limits; official town map
   
10.21   Extraterritorial jurisdiction for enforcement of certain ordinances
   
10.22   Town seal
   
10.23   Insurance
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Plymouth, North Carolina” and may be so cited.
(Prior Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of the
General Statutes of North Carolina.
   (B)   Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part
of the law as contained in the code. Footnotes, cross-references and other
comments are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the
text of any section.
(Prior Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section.
      Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   If a G.S. cite is included in the history, this indicates that the
text of the section reads word-for- word the same as the statute.
      Example: (G.S. § 160A-69) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1985).
      If a G.S. cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 31.10 MAYOR.
      The Mayor shall preside at all Council meetings.
   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)
   Statutory reference:
      For powers and duties of the Mayor, see G.S. § 160A-67
(Prior Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of this chapter not incompatible with future legislation
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
   COUNTY. The County of Washington, in the State of North Carolina, except as
otherwise provided.
   GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY. The municipality of Plymouth, North Carolina, unless the
context in which used indicates another MUNICIPALITY.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an OATH, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn”
shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed”.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
this municipality.
   OWNER. When applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of such property.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property, as
herein defined.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the town; the
entire width of the right-of-way between abutting property lines.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Any person who occupies the whole or a part of the
building or land, whether alone or with others.
   TOWN. The Town of Plymouth, Washington County, North Carolina, except as
otherwise provided.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the town.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinances.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (C)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
   (D)   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   (E)   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language. However, technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that
meaning.
(Prior Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a whole.
(Prior Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 CODE PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those
of the ordinances included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
(Prior Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 SEVERABILITY.
   It is the intention of the Town Council that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall
not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the Town
Council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
(Prior Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Prior Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted that will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
(Prior Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.13 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law, shall
be the official time within the town of the transaction of all town business.
(Prior Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.14 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code, by
order of any court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the act, event or
default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be
included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included unless it is
a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. In any event, the period runs until
the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday.
When the period of time allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded from the computations.
A half holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday.
(Prior Code, § 10.14)
Statutory reference:
   State law computation of time, see G.S. § 1A-1, Rule 6(a)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Prior Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body or a certain town officer or employee to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving that
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall
remain in effect and are saved unless such prior ordinances and regulations are
specifically repealed.
(Prior Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.18 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by ordinances
passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein. Any chapter, section or
division repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent ordinances as printed or omitted
shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the
legislative body of the town adopts a new code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 10.18)
§ 10.19 ALTERING CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code; insert or delete pages, or any
portions thereof; or alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever,
except pursuant to ordinance or resolution or other official act of the Town
Council, which will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented thereby.
(Prior Code, § 10.19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.20 CORPORATE LIMITS; OFFICIAL TOWN MAP.
   The current municipal boundaries shall at all times be drawn on a map, set
out in a written description, or shown by a combination of these techniques.
This delineation shall be retained permanently in the office of the Clerk.
Alterations in these established boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate
entries upon or additions to the map or description made by or under the
direction of the officer charged with that duty by the Town Council. This map
shall be known and may be cited as the official town map.
(Prior Code, § 10.20)
§ 10.21 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION FOR ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The town hereby establishes boundaries for the extraterritorial
enforcement of such provisions of this code and other ordinances as may be
authorized for such extraterritorial enforcement by G.S. § 160A-360 by the Town
Council acting pursuant to G.S. § 160A-360.
   (B)   (1)   The boundaries of the area for extraterritorial enforcement are
described as follows:
Starting at Point “A”, Point “A” being the center of Welch Creek where it
intersects the center of the Roanoke River. Proceed in a southernly direction
along the center of Welch Creek to Point “B”, Point “B” being the center of
Welch Creek where it intersects the center of the Southern Railway right-of-
way. Thence S 49° 30’ E, 6,400’ to Point “C”, Point “C” being the center of
U.S. Highway 64. Thence S 01° 30’ E, 9,150’ to Point “D”, Point “D” being the
center of S.R. 1106. Thence N 50° 30’ E, 16,400’ to Point “E”, Point “E” being
the center of S.R. 1111. Thence N 17° 30’ W, 4,300’ to Point “F”, Point “F”
being the center of S.R. 1300. Thence N 41° W, 6,900’ to Point “G”, Point “G”
being the center of the Roanoke River. Thence in a southernly direction along
the center of the Roanoke River to Point “A”, the beginning point.
      (2)   This land includes that portion of the one-mile extraterritorial
area which will determine the future growth and development of the town. The
one-mile area also has contained within it major sewer lines that connect to
residential, commercial and industrial sites. With the intended expansion of
the town as population increases, this area becomes vital to the future growth
of the town.
   (C)   (1)   The boundaries described in division (B) of this section are
delineated on the face of a map entitled “Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the
Town of Plymouth”. The official copy of this section and such map shall be on
record in the office of the Clerk for public inspection during normal business
hours.
      (2)   The Clerk shall cause a certified copy of this section and map and
any subsequent amendments to be recorded in the office of the County Registrar
of Deeds. The Clerk shall cause signs, signposts or similar readily
identifiable markers to be installed at all points of intersection of the
extraterritorial boundary with all roads, streets, highways and railroads.
(Prior Code, § 10.21) (Ord. passed 4-21-1975)
§ 10.22 TOWN SEAL.
   (A)   The town seal shall be a corded circle, within which there shall be
another corded circle, and between these corded circles and conforming to the
arcs thereof shall be the words “Seal of the Town of Plymouth, North Carolina”,
and near the bottom of and within the inner corded circle, in a horizontal
position, shall be the date “1807”, above which and conforming to the arc of
the inner corded circle shall be the word “Incorporated”.
   (B)   The Clerk shall be custodian of the town seal.
(Prior Code, § 10.22)
§ 10.23 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The Town Council may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor or Town
Manager, on behalf of the town, to contract with one or more insurance
companies authorized to do business in this state to protect the town and town
officers and employees while acting in the line of duty against losses rising
from public liability, fire, theft, hail, windstorm and other causes, the
amount and terms of policies to be as prescribed by the Town Council and agreed
upon by the insurers.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of the
governmental immunity of the town under the provisions of G.S. § 160A-485.
(Prior Code, § 10.23)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of
this code or any other town ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, as provided by
G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Any provision of this code or any other town ordinance may be enforced
by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have
jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a
defense to the application of the town for equitable relief that there is an
adequate remedy at law.
   (C)   (1)   Any provision of this code or any other town ordinance that
makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be
enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and the general court of justice
shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a
provision occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the general
court of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of
abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or
cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all
respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the State
Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
      (2)   (a)   In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may
direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished
or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from
buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that improvements or
repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring
the property into compliance with this code or the ordinance.
         (b)   If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction
or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he or she
may be cited for contempt, and the town may execute the order of abatement.
         (c)   The town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of
executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and materialman’s
lien.
         (d)   The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement
by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with
the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the Clerk of
Superior Court in an amount approved by the Judge before whom the matter is
heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance with the
terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the Judge. Cancellation
of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in
conjunction therewith.
   (D)   The provisions of this code and any other town ordinance may be
enforced by any one, all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and
prescribed by this section.
   (E)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day’s continuing
violation of any provision of this code or any other town ordinance shall be a
separate and distinct offense.
(G.S. § 160A-175) (Prior Code, § 10.99)
CHAPTER 11: WARD BOUNDARIES
Section
   
11.01   Ward boundaries
§ 11.01 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The town adopts the three wards, being Ward I, Ward II and Ward III,
as shown in the map attached to Ordinance 2021-08, which is adopted by
reference, for the purposes of electing Town Council members; except for the
Mayor, who is elected at large.
   (B)   The boundaries of the three wards for the election of Town Council
members are altered to follow the lines depicted on the map attached to
Ordinance 2021-08.
   (C)   The new ward boundaries shall be used in the next election of the Town
of Plymouth Town Council, scheduled for March 8, 2022.
   (D)   A copy of Ordinance 2021-08 and the map showing the district
boundaries shall be provided to the County Board of Elections and retained in
the office of the Town Clerk.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1fd8a7c5b7a864d636930047dc49da40f2cbbb3c/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1595.png]
 
(Prior Code, § 11.01) (Ord. passed 7-11-1983; Ord. passed 6-11-2001; Ord. 2021-
08, passed 11-8-2021)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
      
32.   ELECTIONS
      
33.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   PERSONNEL POLICY
      
35.   FINANCE
      
36.   TOWN POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Illegal interest in contract made by Council
Meetings
   
30.15   Regular meetings
   
30.16   Special meetings
   
30.17   Adjourned meetings
   
30.18   Quorum
   
30.19   Mayor to preside
   
30.20   Rules of procedure
   
30.21   Agenda
   
30.22   Minutes
Ordinances
   
30.35   Requirements for enactment
   
30.36   Copies, records to be kept
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 ILLEGAL INTEREST IN CONTRACT MADE BY COUNCIL.
   No member of the Town Council or other officer of the town shall be
pecuniarily interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract made or entered
into by the town, nor in any matter where the rights or liabilities are or may
be involved.
(Prior Code, § 30.01)
MEETINGS
§ 30.15 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held on the second Monday in
each month, at 7:00 p.m.; provided, that when any such second Monday falls upon
a holiday the Council may fix a different date for such regular meeting. All
meetings of the Town Council shall be held in the Council chamber of the Town
Hall, unless for any meeting the Council chamber is damaged or otherwise
unsuitable for the holding of a meeting in which case the Town Council shall
designate another place within the town for the meeting.
(Prior Code, § 30.10)
§ 30.16 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore or any two members of the Town
Council may at any time call a special Council meeting by signing a written
notice stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be
considered. The notice shall be delivered to the Mayor and each Councilmember
or left at his or her usual dwelling place at least six hours before the
meeting. Only those items of business specified in the notice may be transacted
at a special meeting unless all members are present or have signed a written
waiver of notice. A person or persons calling a special meeting of Council
shall also comply with the notice requirements of G.S. Chapter 143, Article
33C.
      (1)   Special meetings may be held at any time when the Mayor and all
members of the Council are present and consent thereto, or when those not
present have signed a written waiver of notice.
      (2)   During any regular meeting or any duly-called special meeting, the
Council may call or schedule a special meeting, provided the motion or
resolution calling or scheduling any special meeting shall specify the time,
place and purpose or purposes of the meeting and shall be adopted during an
open session.
   (B)   Any regular or duly-called special meeting may be recessed to
reconvene at a time and place certain, or may be adjourned to reconvene at a
time and place certain, by the Council.
(G.S. § 160A-71) (Prior Code, § 30.11)
§ 30.17 ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   Any regular or special meeting of the Town Council and any adjourned meeting
thereof may adjourn to such time prior to the next regular meeting date as may
be fixed by the Councilmembers present.
(Prior Code, § 30.12)
§ 30.18 QUORUM.
   (A)   A majority of the actual membership of the Council plus the Mayor,
excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a quorum. A member who has withdrawn
from a meeting without being excused by majority vote of the remaining members
present shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether or not
a quorum is present.
(G.S. § 160A-74)
   (B)   If no quorum can be secured, the meeting shall stand adjourned until
the next regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 30.13)
§ 30.19 MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the Town Council, and, in his
or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside. In the absence of both,
the Council may elect from its members a temporary Chairperson to preside in
such absence.
(Prior Code, § 30.14)
Statutory reference:
   Presiding officer, see G.S. §§ 160A-69 and 160A-70
§ 30.20 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Town Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules of procedure not
inconsistent with state law, this code or other ordinance, for the transaction
of its business, the exercise of its powers, and the performance of its duties
as the Town Council may deem appropriate for such purposes. These rules may
include, but shall not be limited to, the order of business at its meetings;
rules of parliamentary procedure; official conduct of Councilmembers; the
conduct of hearings and investigations; appointment and jurisdiction of
standing and special committees; and such other subjects as may be deemed
appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 30.15)
§ 30.21 AGENDA.
   The Town Manager shall prepare an agenda for each regular meeting of the
Town Council and mail or deliver copies thereof to the Mayor, each
Councilmember and the Clerk in time to be received in due course not less than
four days prior to the meeting to which such agenda relates. The Mayor and each
Councilmember shall have the privilege of advising the Town Manager, prior to
the beginning of any such four-day period, as to subjects desired for inclusion
in the agenda, but in preparing an agenda the Town Manager shall not be limited
to subjects proposed by the Mayor and Councilmembers and he or she may include
therein such other subjects as he or she may consider appropriate. Subjects not
included in an agenda may be brought up at any regular meeting as the occasion
may require by motion duly put, recorded and carried.
(Prior Code, § 30.16)
§ 30.22 MINUTES.
   (A)   The Clerk shall be ex officio Clerk of the Town Council. The Clerk
shall keep a complete and accurate account of all the proceedings of the
Council and, upon request of any member of the Council, the ayes and noes upon
any question shall be taken and entered in the minutes; and the minutes of the
Town Council shall be open to the inspection of the public.
   (B)   Every resolution adopted or passed by the Town Council, and every
petition submitted to it which is not set out in full in the minutes shall be
filed in an exhibit book and, by proper reference, shall be made a part of the
minutes. The minutes of each meeting, upon being approved by the Town Council,
shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 30.17)
ORDINANCES
§ 30.35 REQUIREMENTS FOR ENACTMENT.
   (A)   Every ordinance amending or repealing any ordinance and every new
ordinance shall be proposed in writing, signed by the Councilmember presenting
it and approved as to form by the Town Attorney.
   (B)   Every ordinance introduced, if it proposes to amend or repeal any
existing portion of this code, shall show by proper reference the chapter,
subchapter and section proposed to be amended or repealed; or, if it proposes
to add to the existing code a new chapter, subchapter or section, it shall
indicate with reference to the arrangement of this code the proper number of
such chapter, subchapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof, as
may be contained in the text of the proposed ordinance, the subject matter
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
   (C)   Not more than one chapter, subchapter or section of this code shall be
amended, repealed or ordained by any one ordinance unless such chapters,
subchapters or sections are consecutive.
(Prior Code, § 30.30)
§ 30.36 COPIES, RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   The Clerk shall file in his or her office the original copy of each
ordinance adopted on or after January 1, 1972, and he or she shall file a true
copy of each thereof in an ordinance book separate and apart from the minute
book of the Town Council. The ordinance book shall be appropriately indexed and
maintained for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. True copies of all
ordinances that were adopted before January 1, 1972, and are still in effect
shall be filed and indexed in the ordinance book.
   (B)   A true copy of each ordinance which amends or adds to this code shall
be immediately inserted by the Clerk at its proper place in a volume of this
code which he or she shall maintain in his or her office, and all portions of
this code so amended or repealed shall be removed therefrom; and the Clerk
shall make appropriate historical notes in the margin thereof.
   (C)   The Clerk shall file in his or her office the original copy of each
resolution adopted, and he or she shall file a true copy of each resolution in
a resolution book separate and apart from the minute book of the Town Council.
True copies of resolutions so filed in the resolution book shall be annotated
in the margin if and when amended, and shall be removed when suspended,
repealed, lapsed or executed. The resolution book shall be appropriately
indexed.
(Prior Code, § 30.31)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Bond
   
31.02   Right of entry for inspections
   
31.03   Authority to administer oaths; false swearing
   
31.04   Authority of deputies and acting officers
   
31.05   Concurrent officeholding
Town Officers
   
31.20   Mayor
   
31.21   Mayor Pro Tempore
   
31.22   Town Manager
   
31.23   Town Clerk
   
31.24   Town Attorney; Assistant Town Attorney
   
31.25   Town Tax Collector
   
31.26   Finance Officer
   
31.27   Budget Officer
   
31.28   Chief of Police
   
31.29   Chief of Fire Department
   
31.30   Zoning Administrator
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 BOND.
   (A) Every officer, employee or agent of the town who in the course of his or
her official duties receives, handles or has custody of or control over more
than $100 of town funds, negotiable instruments or securities at any time
shall, before entering upon his or her duties as an officer, employee or agent
and within ten days of his or her election or appointment, give bond, payable
to the town, with corporate surety, in such amount not less than $500 as shall
be determined by the Town Council, and conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his or her duties, a true accounting to give of all town funds,
negotiable instruments and securities received or handled by him or her or
coming within his or her custody or under his or her control, and payment
thereof to the town; however, the bond of the Clerk shall be in an amount not
less than $15,000, the bond of the Town Tax Collector shall be not less than
$15,000 and the bond of the Finance Officer shall be not less than $15,000.
Further, during any period when two or more positions are held by the same
person, the bond for such person shall be in the amount of not less than the
highest amount required for any one of such positions.
   (B)   All officers, employees and agents of the town who, in line of duty,
are required or authorized to carry firearms, shall give bond, payable to the
town, with corporate surety, in such amount not less than $10,000 as may be
specified by the Town Council, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of
their respective duties and the payment of any judgment or decree which may be
rendered against them for the negligent or unlawful use or handling of such
firearm and to save the town harmless from all claims and demands whatsoever
for the negligent or unlawful use or handling of such firearm.
   (C)   The Town Council may adopt a system of blanket faithful performance
and honesty, bonding as an alternative to the individual bonds provided in
division (A) of this section; provided, that the minimum amounts as specified
in division (A) of this section for the Clerk, Town Tax Collector and Finance
Officer shall remain the same as therein specified.
   (D)   The Town Attorney shall approve all bonds required by this section
with respect to their form and legality; and the premiums thereon shall be paid
by the town. The Town Council shall approve all bonds required by this section
with respect to their sufficiency. All bonds required by this section shall be
in the custody of the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
Statutory reference:
   Fidelity bonds, see G.S. § 159-29
§ 31.02 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever any officer or employee of the town is required or authorized by
statute or the provisions of this code or other ordinances, in order to carry
out his or her duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the
purpose of making an inspection thereof or anything therein contained, such
officer or employee, upon proper identification, shall have the right to enter
any such premises or vehicle in accordance with law and at any reasonable time
in the execution of such duties.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
§ 31.03 AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER OATHS; FALSE SWEARING.
   (A)   The Mayor, the presiding officer of the Town Council or any committee
thereof, the presiding officer of any board, commission or other body of the
town government, the Clerk and each other officer, deputy or assistant officer
of the town to whom any sworn statement, whether oral or written, is required
to be made or submitted by any person pursuant to any provision of this code or
other ordinance or resolution of the Town Council shall have authority to
administer the oath so required; provided, that nothing in this section shall
be construed as purporting to authorize the administration of any oath which by
law is required to be administered by a judicial officer, notary public or
other officer authorized by statute to administer oaths, nor shall this section
be construed as purporting to authorize the taking of any acknowledgment of any
signature or seal for the purpose of recording in the office of the Register of
Deeds or elsewhere other than in the office of the Clerk or some other office
of this town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom an oath has been
administered pursuant to this section to knowingly make any false certificate,
affidavit or statement, oral or written, concerning any matter whatsoever in
violation of such oath.
(Prior Code, § 31.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 31.04 AUTHORITY OF DEPUTIES AND ACTING OFFICERS.
   (A)   Authority vested in and duties imposed upon town officers by state
law, this code or other town ordinances and resolutions may, when they so
authorize, be exercised or performed by their deputies, assistants and other
subordinates, to the extent not prohibited by state law, this code or other
town ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   When any town officer or employee is absent or disabled, or when any
office or position in the town government is vacant, the person designated by
competent authority to act in the place of such absent or disabled officer or
employee or to hold temporarily the vacant office or position shall have the
powers and perform the duties of such absent or disabled officer or employee or
appertaining to such vacant office or position.
(Prior Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.05 CONCURRENT OFFICEHOLDING.
   The Town Manager may designate any officer appointed by him or her to hold
concurrently any two or more offices which are subject to his or her appointing
authority.
(Prior Code, § 31.05)
TOWN OFFICERS
§ 31.20 MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be the official head of the town for all ceremonial
purposes, and for the purpose of taking command of the police force of the town
and calling upon the Governor for aid in times of emergency. He or she shall
have the powers and perform the duties prescribed by state law for Mayors of
municipalities having the Council-Manager form of government and as prescribed
in this code and other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 31.10)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor, see G.S. §§ 160A-67 and 160A-69
§ 31.21 MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   At each biennial organizational meeting, the Council shall elect from among
its members a Mayor Pro Tempore to serve at the pleasure of the Council. A
Councilmember serving as Mayor Pro Tempore shall be entitled to vote on all
matters and shall be considered a Councilmember for all purposes, including the
determination of whether a quorum is present. During the absence of the Mayor,
the Council may confer upon the Mayor Pro Tempore any of the powers and duties
of the Mayor. If the Mayor should become physically or mentally ill incapable
of performing the duties of the office, the Council may by unanimous vote
declare that he or she is incapacitated and confer any of his or her powers and
duties on the Mayor Pro Tempore. Upon the Mayor’s declaration that he or she is
no longer incapacitated, and with the concurrence of the majority of the
Council, the Mayor shall resume the exercise of powers and duties. In the event
both, the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tempore are absent from a meeting, the
Council may elect from its members a temporary chair to preside in such
absence.
(G.S. § 160A-70) (Prior Code, § 31.11)
§ 31.22 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   The Town Council shall appoint a Town Manager to serve at its
pleasure. The Town Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her
executive and administrative qualifications. He or she need not be a resident
of the town or state at the time of his or her appointment. The office of Town
Manager is hereby declared to be an office that may be held concurrently with
other appointive (but not elective) offices.
(G.S. § 160A-147)
   (B)   The Town Manager shall be the chief administrator of the town. He or
she shall be responsible to the Town Council for administering all municipal
affairs placed in his or her charge by it, and shall have the following powers
and duties:
      (1)   To appoint and suspend or remove all town officers and employees
not elected by the people, and whose appointment or removal is not otherwise
provided for by law, except the Town Attorney, in accordance with such general
personnel rules, regulations, policies or ordinances as the Town Council may
adopt;
      (2)   To direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the town, subject to the general direction and control
of the Town Council, except as otherwise provided by law;
      (3)   To attend all meetings of the Town Council and recommend any
measures that he or she deems expedient;
      (4)   To see that all laws of the state, the town’s Charter and the
ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Town Council are faithfully
executed within the town;
      (5)   To prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
Town Council;
      (6)   To annually submit to the Town Council and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
town as of the end of the fiscal year;
      (7)   To make any other reports that the Town Council may require
concerning the operations of town departments, offices and agencies subject to
his or her direction and control; and
      (8)   To perform any other duties that may be required or authorized by
the Town Council.
(G.S. § 160A-148) (Prior Code, § 31.12)
§ 31.23 TOWN CLERK.
   The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Council, to maintain official records and documents, to give
notice of meetings and to perform such other duties required by law or as the
Manager may direct.
(Prior Code, § 31.13)
Charter reference:
   Establishment of office of Town Clerk, see Charter §
5.2
Statutory reference:
   Establishment of office of Town Clerk, see G.S. § 160A-171
§ 31.24 TOWN ATTORNEY; ASSISTANT TOWN ATTORNEY.
   (A)   The Town Council shall appoint a City or Town Attorney to serve at its
pleasure and to be its legal advisor.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to:
      (1)   Prosecute and defend suits by or against the town and town officers
and employees acting in line of duty;
      (2)   Advise the Town Council, Town Manager and any other officer of the
town in regard to matters connected with the town’s business;
      (3)   Attend meetings of the Town Council when requested to do so by the
Council;
      (4)   Draw such deeds, contracts, bonds, notes and other legal papers as
may be required for the proper conduct of the town’s business;
      (5)   Draft all ordinances granting franchises;
      (6)   Approve all ordinances as to form before their introduction; and
      (7)   Perform such other professional services as may be agreed upon by
and between the Attorney and the Town Council.
   (C)   The Town Council may authorize the Town Attorney, subject to approval
of the Council to appoint an Assistant Town Attorney, to assist him or her as
may be necessary and to act in the place of the Town Attorney when the Town
Attorney is absent, disabled or unavailable by reason of his or her
professional duties.
(Prior Code, § 31.14) (Ord. passed 8-14-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Town Attorney, see G.S. § 160A-173
§ 31.25 TOWN TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Town Tax Collector shall collect all real and personal property taxes
and all other taxes due the town; and, where no other town officer is
designated by state law, this code or other ordinance to collect fees, charges
and accounts due the town, he or she shall collect them. The Town Tax Collector
shall pay over to the Clerk periodically, not less frequently than once each
week as directed by the Finance Officer, all money collected by him or her, and
he or she shall render to the Clerk a statement showing the source of each sum
so collected and the purposes thereof. He or she shall issue a receipt to each
person from whom he or she makes collection and shall keep accurate records of
all collections in accordance with directives of the Finance Officer. The Town
Tax Collector shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him or her
by state law, this code, the Town Council or the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 31.15)
Charter reference:
   Town Tax Collector, see Charter §
5.3
Statutory reference:
   Town Tax Collector, see G.S. §§ 105-349 et seq.
§ 31.26 FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Town Manager shall appoint the Finance Officer of the town and, as such,
said Finance Officer shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed
for the office of municipal finance officer with reference to G.S. §§ 159-24
and 159-25.
(Prior Code, § 31.16) (Ord. 2015-14, passed 9-14-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Finance Officer, see G.S. §§ 159-24 and 159-25
§ 31.27 BUDGET OFFICER.
   The Town Manger shall serve as the Budget Officer.
(Prior Code, § 31.17)
Statutory reference:
   Budget officer, see G.S. § 159-9
§ 31.28 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   For provisions concerning the Chief of Police, see §
33.051.
(Prior Code, § 31.18)
§ 31.29 CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   For provisions concerning the Chief of the Fire Department, see §
33.015.
(Prior Code, § 31.19)
§ 31.30 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   For provisions concerning the Zoning Administrator, see §§
154.200 through
154.202.
(Prior Code, § 31.20)
CHAPTER 32: ELECTIONS
Section
   
32.01   Election of Councilmembers, Mayor; term
§ 32.01 ELECTION OF COUNCILMEMBERS, MAYOR; TERM.
   (A)   At each regular biennial town election there shall be elected from
each of the three town wards two Councilpersons to serve as members of the Town
Council. The candidates for Councilperson shall reside in the wards for which
they are to be elected and shall be a qualified voter under the laws of the
state. The six Councilpersons elected shall constitute the Town Council and
shall hold office as provided by law.
   (B)   At each regular biennial town election, a Mayor shall be elected by
popular vote of the town at large.
   (C)   The term of office of any Mayor or Councilmember elected at a regular
biennial town election shall be for two years and until his or her successor is
elected and qualified.
   (D)   The determination of results of elections for the offices of Mayor and
Councilmembers shall be the nonpartisan plurality method, as set out in G.S. §
163-292.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. passed 8-14-2000)
CHAPTER 33: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Board of Adjustment
   
33.001   Establishment
Fire Department
   
33.015   Fire Chief; appointment; powers and duties
   
33.016   Assistant Chief
   
33.017   Chain of command
   
33.018   Rules and regulations
   
33.019   Fire Department premises
   
33.020   Volunteer members; constitution and by-laws; compensation
   
33.021   Participation in state volunteer fire department; fire service beyond
town
Planning Board
   
33.035   Establishment; duties
Police Department
   
33.050   Composition; organization
   
33.051   Chief of Police; duties
   
33.052   Chain of command
   
33.053   Oath of office
   
33.054   Extraterritorial jurisdiction
   
33.055   Duties of police officers
   
33.056   Rules and regulations
   
33.057   Arrest procedure
   
33.058   Auxiliary police
   
33.059   Uniforms
   
33.060   Authority to enforce trespassing regulations
Human Relations Commission
   
33.075   Finding of desirability of Human Relations Commission
   
33.076   Establishment of Human Relations Commission duties
   
33.077   Authority of Human Relations Commission
   
33.078   Membership; terms of office
   
33.079   Organization; officers; by-laws; meeting; quorum; votes
   
33.080   Reports
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 33.001 ESTABLISHMENT.
   For provisions concerning the Board of Adjustment, see §§
154.220 through
154.227.
(Prior Code, § 33.001)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.015 FIRE CHIEF; APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be nominated by the members of
the Fire Department, subject to confirmation by the Town Council.
   (B)   Subject to the general control and supervision of the Town Manager,
the Chief of the Fire Department shall have direct control and supervision of
the Fire Department and the personnel and equipment thereof, including the fire
alarm system.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to:
      (1)   Proceed immediately to the scene of each fire and supervise and
direct the extinguishing thereof;
      (2)   Preserve and safely keep all equipment of the Fire Department in
readiness for immediate use;
      (3)   Compel, when necessary, all officers of the town or other persons
to aid in the extinguishing of fires;
      (4)   Enforce all provisions of this code and other ordinances relative
to fire prevention and the extinguishing of fires;
      (5)   Perform the duties assigned by state law to the chiefs of municipal
fire departments and to municipal fire inspectors;
      (6)   Inspect periodically, not less frequently than once each month, all
equipment of the Fire Department and report all needed repairs and replacements
to the Town Council;
      (7)   Report all violations of any fire prevention ordinance;
      (8)   Annually report to the Town Council the names, residences and
occupations of all firefighters, the number and locality of fires which have
occurred during the year, the causes thereof if they can be ascertained, name
of the owner and value of the property destroyed, insurance coverage and such
other matters pertaining to the Fire Department, its organization and operation
as he or she deems appropriate; and
      (9)   Do such other and further things necessary for the proper and
efficient operation of the Fire Department and for the prevention and
extinguishment of fires.
(Prior Code, § 33.020)
§ 33.016 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
   In the absence or disability of the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Assistant Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief and
shall be clothed with the same authority as the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 33.021)
§ 33.017 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   Authority within the Fire Department shall flow from the Chief of the Fire
Department through the Assistant Chief and other officers and firefighters
downward in order of rank and seniority within rank; and subordinates shall
have the powers and perform the duties of their immediate superiors when such
superiors are absent or disabled. Each member of the Fire Department shall obey
all lawful orders of his or her superiors in the chain of command.
(Prior Code, § 33.022)
§ 33.018 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Manager, in consultation with the Chief of the Fire Department,
shall prepare rules and regulations for the government of the Fire Department
and the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations, which may be amended
from time to time, shall be submitted to the Town Council for approval. It
shall be unlawful for any member of the Fire Department to violate any rule or
regulation which has been approved by resolution of the Town Council and placed
on file in the office of the Clerk. A copy of all approved rules and
regulations shall also be placed on file at Fire Department headquarters.
(Prior Code, § 33.023)
§ 33.019 FIRE DEPARTMENT PREMISES.
   (A)   No person, except town officers or members in good standing of the
Fire Department, shall enter the premises of the Fire Department unless
authorized to do so by authority of the Town Manager or the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (B)   The premises of the Fire Department and all entranceways thereto shall
be kept free of vehicles, boats and other items of property not belonging to
the Fire Department; and all property of the Fire Department shall be stored or
parked at such places approved therefor by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.020 VOLUNTEER MEMBERS; CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   (1)   The constitution and by-laws applicable to volunteer members of
the Fire Department shall be consistent with state law, this code and other
ordinances and the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and provision
shall be made for election of officers at the annual meeting in each year and
for the holding of at least one practice drill per month, with the names of
those participating to be reported monthly to the Chief of the Fire Department.
      (2)   Such constitution and by-laws and all amendments thereto shall be
approved by the Town Council by resolution or motion and filed in the office of
the Clerk before taking effect. A copy of such approved constitution and by-
laws shall also be on file in the office of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (B)   (1)   Volunteer firefighters shall be paid for their attendance at all
fires within the corporate limits at such rate, not less than $1 per hour for
the first hour and $0.50 per hour for each additional hour, as shall from time
to time be provided by the Town Council, whether or not hose connections are
made or chemicals used for extinguishing the fire.
      (2)   All firefighters attending fires shall return to the fire house and
answer roll call after the fire is extinguished.
(Prior Code, § 33.025)
§ 33.021 PARTICIPATION IN STATE VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE SERVICE BEYOND
TOWN.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 58-80-15, the Town Council hereby
resolves to accept and endorse the provisions of G.S. §§ 58-80-5 through 58-80-
60, thus making the town a participant in the State Volunteer Fire Department.
   (B)   As required by G.S. § 58-80-25, the Town Council hereby designates the
Chief of the Fire Department to have the authority to grant or deny permission
for firefighters and apparatus to leave the town in all cases where request is
made for assistance beyond the corporate limits of the town; and in the
absence, disability or unavailability of the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Assistant Chief of the Fire Department is hereby designated for such purpose;
and in the absence, disability or unavailability of the Assistant Chief, the
Town Manager is hereby designated for such purpose.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, or if he or
she is absent or disabled, the Acting Chief of the Fire Department, to keep the
office of the State Commissioner of Insurance and the office of the Secretary
of the State Firefighter’s Association currently informed as to the name,
address and telephone number of each of the persons designated in division (B)
of this section to have authority to grant or deny permission for firefighters
and apparatus to leave the town.
   (D)   In the event of a conflagration beyond the capability of the Town Fire
Department to bring under control and prevent the spread thereof to other
property so as to endanger a considerable segment of the town, the ranking
officer of the Fire Department who is then in command shall forthwith cause to
be called upon for assistance such other fire departments of the State
Volunteer Fire Department as in his or her judgment may be required to control
and extinguish the conflagration.
(Prior Code, § 33.026)
PLANNING BOARD
§ 33.035 ESTABLISHMENT; DUTIES.
   For provisions concerning the Planning Board, see §§
154.242 through
154.244.
(Prior Code, § 33.035)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.050 COMPOSITION; ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of such regular, auxiliary and
special members and such quarters, vehicles, equipment and other property as
may from time to time be authorized by the Town Council.
   (B)   The organization of the Police Department shall be as provided by
regulations adopted pursuant to §
33.056.
(Prior Code, § 33.040)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of police officers, see G.S. § 160A-281
§ 33.051 CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES.
   The Chief of Police shall be the commanding officer of the Police
Department. He or she shall be responsible for the administration, training,
discipline and morale of the members of the Police Department and for their
efficient and effective employment in the enforcement within the town of state
law, this code and other ordinances; for the preservation of the public peace
and safety; for the prevention and suppression of crime; and for the
apprehension of violators of the law. The Chief of Police shall be responsible
for the maintenance and use of all property and apparatus of the Police
Department; he or she shall cause all required investigations to be made and
all required reports to be rendered; and he or she shall have such powers and
perform such duties as may he or she prescribed by state law for his or her
office and by this code and other ordinances and resolutions of the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 33.041)
§ 33.052 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, under the general supervision of the Town
Manager, shall have direct control of the members and property of the Police
Department and shall be in command of the members. Members of the Police
Department shall assume command in order of rank, as prescribed in departmental
rules and regulations.
   (B)   Each member of the Police Department shall be obedient to the orders
of his or her superiors in the chain of command.
   (C)   The chain of command shall descend from the Chief of Police in order
of rank and seniority within rank; and in the absence or disability of any
member of the Police Department the next ranking member of the Police
Department then and there present and able shall assume the powers and duties
of such absent or disabled member.
(Prior Code, § 33.042)
§ 33.053 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Each person appointed or employed as Chief of Police, police officer or
auxiliary police officer shall take and subscribe before some person authorized
by law to administer oaths the oath of office required by Article VI, Section 7
of the State Constitution. The oath shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
(G.S. § 160A-284) (Prior Code, § 33.043)
§ 33.054 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   In addition to their authority within the corporate limits, town police
officers shall have all the powers invested in law enforcement officers by
statute or common law within one mile of the corporate limits of the town, and
on all property owned by or leased to the town, wherever located. Any officer
pursuing an offender outside the corporate limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the town shall be entitled to all of the privileges, immunities
and benefits to which he or she would be entitled if acting within the town,
including coverage under worker’s compensation laws.
(G.S. § 160A-286) (Prior Code, § 33.044)
§ 33.055 DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   It shall be the duty of the police officers to:
   (A)   Preserve public peace, prevent crimes, detect and arrest offenders,
suppress riots and unlawful gatherings, and prevent the obstruction of free
passage upon or within public streets, sidewalks, parks and public places;
   (B)   Protect the rights of persons and property;
   (C)   Guard the public health;
   (D)   Preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages;
   (E)   Regulate the movements of vehicles and pedestrians in the streets,
bridges, parks, public squares and highways;
   (F)   Provide proper police attendance at fires;
   (G)   Carefully observe and inspect all places of public amusement, all
places of business having license to carry on such business and suppress and
restrain all unlawful and disorderly conduct or practices therein;
   (H)   Enforce penalties for the violation of laws and ordinances in the
town;
   (I)   Arrest or, when so authorized, serve summons or notice of violation
upon all persons guilty of violating any law or ordinance;
   (J)   Prevent any damage to town property, buildings, streets and sidewalks;
   (K)   Report to the Chief of Police any repairs needed to any public
property;
   (L)   Serve all processes issued to them;
   (M)   Summon as many persons as may be necessary to assist them in the
duties herein outlined; and
   (N)   Perform any and all other duties that may be assigned to them by the
Town Council, the Town Manager or the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 33.045)
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of police officers, see G.S. § 160A-285
§ 33.056 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Town Manager, in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall
prepare rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and
the personnel thereof. Such rules and regulations, which may be amended from
time to time, shall be submitted to the Town Council for approval.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any member of the Police Department to
violate any such rule or regulation which has been approved by resolution of
the Town Council and placed on file in the office of the Clerk. A copy of all
such approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at Police
Department headquarters.
(Prior Code, § 33.046)
§ 33.057 ARREST PROCEDURE.
   Upon the arrest of a person, with or without a warrant, but not necessarily
in the order hereinafter listed, a police officer:
   (A)   Must inform the person arrested of the charge against him or her or
the cause for his or her arrest;
   (B)   Must, with respect to any person arrested without a warrant and, for
purpose of setting bail, with respect to any person arrested upon a warrant or
order for arrest, take the person arrested before a judicial official without
unnecessary delay;
   (C)   May, prior to taking the person before a judicial official, take the
person arrested to some other place if the person so requests;
   (D)   May, prior to taking the person before a judicial official, take the
person arrested to some other place if such action is reasonably necessary for
the purpose of having that person identified;
   (E)   Must without unnecessary delay advise the person arrested of his or
her right to communicate with counsel and friends and must allow him or her
reasonable time and reasonable opportunity to do so; and
   (F)   Must make available to the state on a timely basis all materials and
information acquired in the course of all felony investigations. This
responsibility is a continuing affirmative duty.
(G.S. § 15A-501) (Prior Code, § 33.047)
§ 33.058 AUXILIARY POLICE.
   The Town Manager shall have power, when he or she deems it advisable, to
employ as many auxiliary police officers as are necessary to preserve peace;
and he or she shall report each action taken by him or her pursuant to this
section to the Town Council at its next regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 33.048)
Statutory reference:
   Auxiliary police, see G.S. § 160A-282
§ 33.059 UNIFORMS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and other police officers shall when on duty wear
such uniforms as shall be prescribed by the Town Council and shall keep them in
a neat condition; and upon discharge, resignation or dismissal, shall surrender
such uniforms which have been purchased by the town for their use. However, any
member of the police force designated or employed for emergency, limited or
special duty, or anyone working generally as a detective or doing detective
work, need not be clad in a uniform unless specially directed by the Chief of
Police to wear a uniform.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that the members of
the police force present a neat and respectable appearance.
(Prior Code, § 33.049)
§ 33.060 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE TRESPASSING REGULATIONS.
   The Police Department is authorized to act as agents for property owners and
tenants to enforce regulations against trespassing on private property located
within the corporate limits of the town, upon specific request by such property
owners or tenants.
(Prior Code, § 33.050) (Ord. 96-3, passed 4-8-1996)
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 33.075 FINDING OF DESIRABILITY OF HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
   The town hereby finds and declares that it is desirable that a Human
Relations Commission be established and maintained in the town.
(Prior Code, § 33.70) (Ord. 91-8, passed 10-28-1991)
§ 33.076 ESTABLISHMENT OF HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION DUTIES.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Commission to be known as the Plymouth
Human Relations Commission.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Commission in general:
      (1)   To encourage understanding and good will between all citizens
regardless of race, sex, religion, creed, nationality or economic status, and
thus promote the general welfare of our town;
      (2)   To report to and to recommend to the Town Council measures designed
to promote the welfare of the community;
      (3)   To identify concerns within the community which could jeopardize
the welfare of our town;
      (4)   To act as an impartial public forum to the end that there will be
better communications between all segments of our town; and
      (5)   To promote peace, understanding, respect, good will and harmony
among all citizens.
(Prior Code, § 33.71) (Ord. 91-8, passed 10-28-1991)
§ 33.077 AUTHORITY OF HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Plymouth Human Relations Commission may promote public interest in
its recommendations in such a manner as to lessen any tensions and promote good
will among all citizens.
   (B)   The Commission may sponsor meetings or forums intended to lead all
citizens to a clearer understanding of the true meaning of responsible
citizenship in our town, of the obligations inherent in being a good citizen,
and of the need for mutual understanding and respect by all citizens for each
other.
   (C)   The Commission shall have the authority to create and devise plans for
recommendations to the Town Council.
   (D)   The Commission shall receive funding, if any is required, from the
town.
(Prior Code, § 33.72) (Ord. 91-8, passed 10-28-1991)
§ 33.078 MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of 11 members. The members will be
appointed by the Town Council. While representation of all of the various
segments of the community is not required, diversity of membership is
desirable. For the first Commission the appointed members will serve two-year
terms beginning on the date of the adoption of this subchapter. Thereafter,
members will be appointed for three-year terms. In the event any members shall
fail to attend three consecutive meetings (without just cause), the same shall
constitute an involuntary resignation by said member.
   (B)   The Commission shall promptly notify the Town Council of all
resignations (whether voluntary or involuntary) and other vacancies on the
Commission, and such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Town
Council. No person shall serve more than two three-year consecutive terms.
Notwithstanding any of the language set out above, all members shall serve at
the pleasure of the Town Council. Members of the Commission shall receive no
compensation for their services.
(Prior Code, § 33.73) (Ord. 91-8, passed 10-28-1991)
§ 33.079 ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; BY-LAWS; MEETING; QUORUM; VOTES.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet for the purpose of organization as soon as
reasonably possible after its creation. The Commission shall elect its own
officers, which shall include a Chairperson, a Vice- Chairperson and a
secretary, and shall propose by-laws for the transaction of its business
subject to approval of such by-laws by the Town Council. A copy of by-laws
shall be filed with the Clerk of the Town Council for inspection by interest
parties and shall constitute public records.
   (B)   The Commission shall hold meetings as provided by the by-laws, or when
called by the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or any three members of the
Commission at any time upon 12 hours’ written or telephone notice to all of its
members. All meetings shall be open to the general public except those
authorized by law to be in executive session (e.g., those considering action
necessary to deal with riot or civil disorder or with conditions that indicate
a riot or civil disorder is eminent). It shall keep minutes of its meetings, in
which shall be recorded all action taken in its public meetings that it
considers. Such minutes shall be public records. The Commission can invite and
receive suggestions from the public concerning any and all matters within the
scope of its duties.
   (C)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Commission.
No proxies shall be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 33.74) (Ord. 91-8, passed 10-28-1991)
§ 33.080 REPORTS.
   The Commission shall cause a comprehensive annual report to be prepared
describing the objectives, programs, activities and accomplishments of the
Commission. This report shall be prepared as of June 30 of each year for the
previous year and shall be submitted to the Town Council by September 1 of each
year. The form and content of the report shall be determined by the Commission,
subject to the right of the Town Council at any time to require a report
containing any information on any subject in any format it may reasonably
designate. Special reports and recommendations can be made to (or requested by)
the Town Council as the need arises in the judgement of the Commission or at
the specific request of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 33.75) (Ord. 91-8, passed 10-28-1991)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL POLICY
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Compensation of Mayor, Councilmembers and the like and fees
Affirmative Action
   
34.15   Purpose
   
34.16   Policy
   
34.17   Application
   
34.18   Administration of program
   
34.19   Recruitment
   
34.20   Utilization of minorities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR, COUNCILMEMBERS AND THE LIKE AND FEES.
   (A)   The Mayor, Councilmembers, Town Manager and all other town officers
and employees shall receive such compensation for their services as may from
time to time be provided in the annual budget or other ordinances; provided,
that the compensation of the Town Manager shall be as agreed upon by and
between the Town Council and the Town Manager.
   (B)   All fees paid to town officers and employees for services rendered in
the line of duty shall belong to the town and shall be turned over by the
recipients thereof to the Clerk not less frequently than once each week, as
directed by the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 34.01)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of Mayor and Council, see G.S. § 160A-64
   Compensation of town employees, see G.S. § 160A-162
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
§ 34.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to establish the town’s policy
regarding equal employment opportunity.
(Prior Code, § 34.10) (Ord. passed 7-10-1978)
§ 34.16 POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the continuing policy of the town that there shall be no
discrimination in the treatment of minority group job applicants or employees
in the application of any town policy, practice, rule or regulation. All
applicants and employees, regardless of race, creed, color, sex, marital
status, age, national origin or political affiliation, shall be treated on the
same basis with respect to employment, performance rating, promotion, training
courses and all other town or town-sponsored activities.
   (B)   AFFIRMATIVE ACTION may be defined as specific and individual programs
designed to increase the utilization of minorities at all levels and all
segments of the work force. The town will take such affirmative action as
needed to effectuate this goal.
(Prior Code, § 34.11) (Ord. passed 7-10-1978)
§ 34.17 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall apply to all segments of the town government.
(Prior Code, § 34.12) (Ord. passed 7-10-1978)
§ 34.18 ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAM.
   (A)   Coordinator for the town in matters pertaining to equal employment
opportunity shall be the Town Manager or his or her designate. His or her
duties will be to coordinate the efforts of all segments of the town
government. He or she shall regularly report to the Town Council concerning
progress of the program, with recommendations where appropriate.
   (B)   Administration of the program shall be the responsibility of the Town
Manager or his or her designate, as the town Equal Employment Opportunity
Coordinator. He or she has the support of the Town Council. He or she and his
or her staff are responsible for:
      (1)   Implementing policy, affirmative action programs and internal and
external communication techniques;
      (2)   Assisting department heads in arriving at solutions to problems;
      (3)   Periodically auditing hiring and promotion patterns to ensure that
goals and objectives are met and reported to the Town Council;
      (4)   Assisting in the identification of problem areas;
      (5)   Quarterly auditing to ensure that:
         (a)   Posters are properly displayed;
         (b)   All facilities are, in fact, desegregated; and
         (c)   Minority employees have the opportunity to participate in all
town-sponsored activities.
      (6)   Conducting regular discussions with department heads, supervisors
and employees to ensure that town policy is being followed and measure
effectiveness of town programs, indicate the need for remedial action and
determine the degree to which goals and objectives have been attained;
      (7)   Keeping town management informed of the latest developments in the
entire equal opportunity area; and
      (8)   Serving as liaison between the town and enforcement agencies,
minority organizations and community action groups.
(Prior Code, § 34.13) (Ord. passed 7-10-1978)
§ 34.19 RECRUITMENT.
   (A)   The town shall seek qualified minority group applicants for all job
categories and shall make particular efforts to increase minority group
representation in occupations at the higher levels of skill and responsibility.
Decisions on employment shall be based solely upon an individual’s
qualifications for the position being filled.
   (B)   To increase the flow of minority applicants, the following shall be
pursued.
      (1)   Contacts shall be made with organizations representing minority
applicants.
      (2)   Schools attended by substantial numbers of minority group members
shall be contacted for job referral.
      (3) Minority employees shall be actively encouraged to refer applicants.
   (C)   A copy of the town’s employment policy shall be available to each
employee. Communication media, including bulletin boards and orientation of new
employees shall emphasize this subject. All management personnel and any others
involved in administering this policy, including those engaged in recruiting,
employment, training and other personnel activities shall be aware of the
policy and of their responsibility with respect to it.
   (D)   All external recruitment sources shall be informed verbally and
confirmed in writing of the town’s policy, stipulating that such sources
actively recruit and refer minorities for all positions listed. The town will
include appropriate equal opportunity clauses in all external documents such as
purchase orders, leases and contracts. The town will endeavor to publicize its
program in various news media and will include the phrase “equal opportunity
employer” in all advertisements for employment.
   (E)   Supervisors shall be directed to contact the Equal Employment
Opportunity Coordinator for advice and counsel to ensure that all employees are
given proper consideration for promotions, upgradings, transfers and other
personnel actions.
(Prior Code, § 34.14) (Ord. passed 7-10-1978)
§ 34.20 UTILIZATION OF MINORITIES.
   (A)   If minorities are found underutilized in any job category, a good
faith effort will be made to increase the percentage of minorities in that job
category. This effort of utilization of minorities will be based on
availability of minorities, skills required, a forecast of replacement
turnover, and a forecast of increase in the work force during the period
involved. Necessary remedial job training programs will be recommended for
employees who require additional qualification.
   (B)   Active encouragement shall be given to minority group employees to
improve their skills and job potential. Promotion, upgrading and transfer
activities will be monitored to ensure that full consideration is given to
qualified minority group employees. The town will continue to make layoffs,
terminations, downgradings and recalls from layoff without regard to race,
color, religion, age, sex, marital status, national origin or political
affiliation. The town will continue to ensure that there is no disparity in the
compensation received by minority group employees and other employees for
performing equivalent duties, and that opportunities for performing overtime
work or otherwise earning increased compensation are afforded to all employees
without discrimination.
(Prior Code, § 34.15) (Ord. passed 7-10-1978)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Fiscal year
   
35.02   Inventory of town real property
Taxation
   
35.15   Late payment; penalties
   
35.16   Partial payment of tax
   
35.17   Apportionment and release of tax lien
   
35.18   Property sold for taxes
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year for the town government shall begin on July 1 of each
calendar year and shall terminate with the expiration of the next succeeding
June 30.
(Prior Code, § 35.01)
§ 35.02 INVENTORY OF TOWN REAL PROPERTY.
   The Clerk shall maintain on file in his or her office an inventory of all
real property owned by or leased to the town. This inventory shall be
maintained in current status, and during January of each year shall be revised,
as may be appropriate, to show changes in value due to depreciation or to
repairs, renovations and the like. For each building or lot such inventory
shall also show a brief description; a reference to the deed, devise, lease or
other instrument whereby the town acquired title to or the use thereof; the
department, office or agency charged with custody; the purpose or use; the
insurance of all types thereon, together with notes as to premiums payable and
anniversary dates; and for property owned by the town and leased to other
persons, copies of such leases and appropriate notes as to the revenues derived
therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 35.03)
TAXATION
§ 35.15 LATE PAYMENT; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Taxes which are the subject of this section, if paid:
      (1)   On or after January 1 and before February 1 next after due and
payable, there shall be added to the tax a penalty of 2%; and
      (2)   On and after February 1 following the due date there shall be added
to the tax, in addition to the 2% provided in division (A)(1) of this section,
interest at the rate of 0.75% per month or fraction thereof until the tax plus
penalties and interest have been paid.
   (B)   All legal costs, fees and other expenses incurred in connection with
necessary legal work or proceedings to collect delinquent taxes shall be
assessed against the delinquent party.
(Prior Code, § 35.10)
§ 35.16 PARTIAL PAYMENT OF TAX.
   Any taxpayer may make a partial payment on the total tax levied by the Town
Council against his or her property and thereafter be relieved of penalties or
interest to the extent of such payment, but no release of an individual parcel
of real property from tax lien of the town shall be granted upon a partial
payment made by the party in whose name the property was listed for taxes.
(Prior Code, § 35.11)
§ 35.17 APPORTIONMENT AND RELEASE OF TAX LIEN.
   In order to avoid undue hardship, the Town Tax Collector may release a
particular tract or parcel of real estate from the tax lien of the town when a
change in the ownership of such property occurred since the listing date for
the year proposed to be paid upon payment by the owner of such property of the
tax against the property and upon the payment of all unpaid personal property
tax against the party in whose name such property was listed. The party paying
the personal property tax of another shall be subrogated to the rights of the
town with respect to such tax, and the Town Tax Collector shall assign to such
party all rights of the town with respect to such item of personal tax.
(Prior Code, § 35.12)
§ 35.18 PROPERTY SOLD FOR TAXES.
   The rules stated in §
35.17 and this section shall apply in cases where property has been sold for
taxes and the town is the holder of the certificate of sale; provided, that no
suit has been instituted to foreclose such certificate; and provided, further,
that the first applicant for a release in accordance with the provisions of
this section shall pay the cost of advertising, selling and issuing of the
certificate of sale.
(Prior Code, § 35.13)
CHAPTER 36: TOWN POLICIES
Section
   
36.01   Smoking in municipal buildings
   
36.02   Signs prohibiting concealed handguns on municipal property
§ 36.01 SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a lighted pipe,
cigar, cigarette or other combustible tobacco products.
   (B)   Smoking regulated in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for any
person to smoke in any building or facility, or portion of a building or
facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or
controlled by the town, except in specially designated smoking areas. The Town
Manager shall have the authority to designate smoking areas within each
municipal building or facility. Twenty percent of an area within any building
or facility may be designated as a smoking area.
(Prior Code, § 36.01) (Ord. 93-2, passed 10-11-1993) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 36.02 SIGNS PROHIBITING CONCEALED HANDGUNS ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Posting of signs required. The Town Manager is authorized to post
appropriate signage on each park, building or portion of a building now or
hereafter owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by
the town, as well as the appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating
that concealed handguns are prohibited therein.
   (B)   Location of signs. The signs shall be visibly posted on the exterior
of each entrance by which the general public can access the building,
appurtenant premises or park. The Town Manager shall exercise discretion in
determining the necessity and appropriate location for other signs posted on
the interior of the building, appurtenant premises or park.
(Prior Code, § 36.02) (Ord. 96-2, passed 1-8-1996)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWER REGULATIONS
      
51.   WATER AND WASTEWATER
      
52.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
CHAPTER 50: SEWER REGULATIONS
Section
Sewer Regulations
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Usage of municipal sanitary sewers
   
50.03   Structures required
   
50.04   Permits
   
50.05   Outside connections
   
50.06   Grease traps
   
50.07   Powers and authority for inspection
   
50.08   Measurement of flow
   
50.09   Duties of user upon unlawful discharges
   
50.10   Injunction and abatement
   
50.11   Termination of services; revocation of permits; issuance of cease and
desist orders
   
50.12   Notice and bearing
Late Payment
   
50.25   Water and sewer late payment policy
Accepting Groundwater Remediation Discharge Waters into Wastewater Facilities
   
50.40   Purpose of policy
   
50.41   Information required prior to issuance of special use discharge permit
   
50.42   General conditions
   
50.43   Fees and charges
Procedure for Verification of Pretreatment
System Efficiency Prior to Discharge to POTW
   
50.55   Intent
   
50.56   Purpose
   
50.57   Procedure
   
50.58   Cost
 
   
50.99   Penalty
SEWER REGULATIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMMONIA NITROGEN. The quantity of ammonia in wastewater expressed as
milligrams of nitrogen per liter by weight.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Town Manager of the Town of Plymouth.
   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight.
   COLOR. The true color due to the substances in solution expressed in
milligrams per liter.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. That liquid waste from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens
and home laundries.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a
Adischarge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes, other than domestic sewage resulting
from processes or operations employed in industrial establishments.
   INFILTRATION. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system
(including sewer service connections) from the ground through such means as
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. INFILTRATION does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
   INFLOW. Water other than wastewater that enters a sewerage system (including
sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains,
yard drains, area drains, foundation drains, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary
sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash
waters or drainage. INFLOW does not include, and is distinguished from,
infiltration.
   INTERFERENCE. Inhibition or disruption of a POTW’s sewer system, treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of
its NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342, or any
criteria guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDP), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§
2601 et seq., or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). The standard unit of measurement commonly used
in the sewerage or wastewater industry and is equivalent to parts per million
(ppm).
   NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
§ 307(b) and (c) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317(b) and (c), respectively,
which applies to industrial users.
   NEW SOURCE. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed regulations prescribing a § 307(c) Categorical
Pretreatment Standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard
is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register.
Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a NEW
SOURCE means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date
of promulgation of the standard.
   NPDES PERMIT or PERMIT. A permit issued to a POTW pursuant to § 402 of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association or corporation.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. A
stabilized pH will be considered as a pH which does not change beyond the
specified limits when the waste is subjected to aeration. A pH value indicates
the degree of acidity or alkalinity.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alternation of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes
or by other means except as prohibited by § 403.6(d), being 33 U.S.C. § 1343.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than 21 inches in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works as defined by §
212 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1292, which is owned by a state or
municipality (as defined by § 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any
sewer that convey wastewater to such a treatment works, but does not include
pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. The term also means the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of the
Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges
from such a treatment works.
   RECEIVING STREAM. That body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the
discharge waters from the waste treatment plant or formed by the waters
discharged from the waste treatment plant.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and industrial
waste, except that of the type expressly prohibited by this subchapter, without
the admixture of surface water and stormwater.
   SHALL. Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in the
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOWN. The Town of Plymouth, North Carolina.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance (including replacement) of such works.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985)
§ 50.02 USAGE OF MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   Waste materials. No person shall discharge or deposit any of the
following waste materials into any town sewer:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having:
         (a)   A temperature higher than 150°F;
         (b)   Such temperature and in such quantities that the temperature at
the treatment works influent exceeds 104°F; or
         (c)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment works.
      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per
liter, by weight, or fat, oil or grease, exclusive of soap; provided that up to
500 milligrams per liter may be discharged by permit authorization;
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquids, solid or gas;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shaving, metal, glass, bones,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or other solid or viscous
substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewer or other
interference with the proper operation of the treatment works;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage treatment
plant or system;
      (7)   Any water or wastes having a biochemical oxygen demand in excess of
300 milligrams per liter by weight; provided that up to 500 milligrams per
liter may be discharged by permit authorization;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 300 milligrams per liter
by weight of suspended solids; provided that up to 500 milligrams per liter may
be discharged by permit authorization;
      (9)   Any waters or wastes having an objectionable color which is not
removable in the existing sewage treatment plant processes;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or
any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with waste
treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving stream at the sewage treatment plant;
      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant;
      (12)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      (13)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 200 milligrams per liter
of chlorides; provided that up to 500 milligrams per liter may be discharged by
permit authorization;
      (14)   All new sewers and services shall be designed and constructed to
prevent such inflow sources. Likewise, sanitary sewage shall not be discharged
by permit authorization;
      (15)   Any water or wastes having an ammonia concentration in excess of
30 milligrams per liter by weight when expressed as nitrogen; and
      (16)   Stormwater, ground water, rain water, street drainage, subsurface
drainage or yard drainage shall not be discharged through direct or indirect
connection to a sanitary sewer unless a permit is issued by the town. The town
shall approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative
method of disposal is available. If a permit is granted for the discharge of
such water into a sanitary sewer, the user shall pay such charges and fees and
meet such other conditions as required by the town.
   (B)   Waiver of requirements.
      (1)   Since the intent of this section is to protect the sewerage system
of the town while treating as much of the industrial waste of the town as
practicable, the Town Manager shall have the authority to waive the foregoing
provisions when, in his or her opinion, the quantity of waste discharged by any
person is so small in relation to the overall flow into the town sewerage
system as to make the offending characteristics of the waste negligible.
      (2)   The waiving of any of the foregoing provisions at any time shall
not prohibit the enforcement of these same provisions at a later date when the
cumulative effect of the discharge from several industrial establishments and
businesses may become detrimental to the sewage system.
      (3)   However the waiver of any such requirements shall in no way violate
nor be less stringent than any applicable federal pretreatment standard or
categorical regulation pursuant to § 307 of the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. § 1317.
   (C)   Pretreatment. This subchapter shall be amended as may become necessary
to incorporate the national pretreatment standards which means any regulations
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental
Protection Agency in accordance with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., as amended, and which apply to industrial
users.
   (D)   Special agreement or arrangement. No statement contained in this
section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the town and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be admitted into the sanitary sewers by the town either before
or after approved pretreatment or prehandling, and subject to payment thereof
by the industry as hereinafter provided. However, such discharges shall neither
violate the provisions of § 403.5 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1343, as amended, nor contravene the town’s NPDES permit.
   (E)   Notice. Notice shall be given to the Town Manager whenever a change in
the industrial process of waste discharge is contemplated or when the normal
operation of the industry discharging industrial waste into the town sewer
system will be interrupted for three days or longer with no industrial
discharge.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 STRUCTURES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Storage tanks.
      (1)   In order to equalize flows over a 24-hour period, each person
discharging a waste into the town’s sanitary sewers having a volume in excess
of 40,000 gallons in any one day, shall construct and maintain at his or her
own expense a suitable storage tank as determined by the Town Board.
      (2)   Said tank shall have a capacity of at least 80% of the normal
volume of one 24-hour production period of waste and whose outlet to the sewer
is controlled by a water works type rate controller, or other approved devices,
the setting of which shall be directed by the Town Manager.
   (B)   Control manhole.
      (1)   Any person discharging industrial wastes into the town sanitary
sewer shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole, downstream from
any treatment, storage or other approved works, to facilitate observation,
measurement and sampling of all wastes including domestic sewage, from the
industry. The control manhole shall be constructed at a suitable and
satisfactory location and built in a manner as proved by the Town Manager.
      (2)   The control manhole shall be equipped with a permanent type volume
measuring device such as a nozzle, flume, weir or other suitable devices as may
be approved by the Town Manager. The Town Manager may require the installation
of an automatic sampling device for the collection of sewage samples within the
control manhole.
      (3)   The manhole shall be installed by the person discharging the wastes
at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe,
accessible and in proper operating condition at all times.
   (C)   Plans. Plans for the construction of said storage tank, control
manhole and controlling devices shall be approved by the Town Manager prior to
beginning of construction.
   (D)   Preliminary treatment. Where preliminary treatment or holding
facilities and measuring or sampling devices are provided for any purpose in
connection with the discharge of industrial wastes into the town sewer system,
such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her own expense.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.04 PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge or who is now
depositing or discharging any industrial waste into the sanitary sewers shall
make application for the disposal of industrial waste to the town.
      (2)   The Town Manager or Director of Public Works may approve such
applications only when evidence is submitted by the applicant that the
discharge into the sanitary sewers shall extend no more than two years from the
date the application is approved. Such authorization shall the end of which
time the person depositing or discharging an industrial waste into the sanitary
sewers shall again make application for the disposal of industrial waste to the
town.
      (3)   Upon finding that any person discharging into the sanitary sewers
has failed to comply with all the regulations of this subchapter the town may
revoke the authorization to discharge of that person. The town has and shall
exercise its authority to sample, or cause to be sampled, discharges from each
industry on a regular basis during the year and shall utilize those results in
making a determination regarding renewal of the permit or authorization to
discharge.
   (B)   Should any person fail to secure a permit or fail to have his, her or
its application approved or be subsequently found to exceed the limits set
forth in his, her or its permit, the Director of Public Works, upon 24-hour
notice, if such person is using town water, shall disconnect such a person’s
connection with the town water system, and the same will only be reconnected at
such owner’s expense; and if such person, after 24 hours notice, shall have his
or her connection with the town sewer system severed, such services will only
be restored at such person’s expense.
   (C)   Industrial users are encouraged to discharge uncontaminated cooling
water to the storm sewer system and only discharge contaminated wastes to the
sanitary sewers, thereby extending the useful life of the town’s wastewater
transport and treatment facilities. Permits for such discharges of
uncontaminated cooling waters are not regulated by the town but should rather
be obtained from the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management.
(Prior Code, § 50.04) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 OUTSIDE CONNECTIONS.
   Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate
limits of the town and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of
discharging domestic sewage and/or industrial waste into the sanitary sewers of
the town may do so by complying with the requirements of this subchapter and by
paying an additional permit fee and a yearly sewer rental charge to be fixed by
the Town Board of Councilmembers.
(Prior Code, § 50.05) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 GREASE TRAPS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person discharging wastes from any establishment other than
a residence in which food preparation and serving occurs shall, when so
directed by the Town Manager, install, and properly operate and maintain, a
grease trap.
      (2)   Grease traps, where required, shall be of either single or
multichamber design equipped with inlet and outlet baffles, and have a grease
retention capacity, in pounds, of at least twice the flow capacity, in gallons
per minute, before average grease removal percentage drops below 90%. Grease
traps shall be designed and constructed so as to readily allow inspection and
cleaning. The minimum size of the grease trap for restaurants shall be
determined in accordance with the following formula:
 
Size, in gallons = D x (HR/2) x 8
Where:   D = Number of Seats
      HR = Number of Hours Open
 
   (B)   The minimum size of the grease trap for hospitals, nursing homes and
other type commercial kitchens shall be determined in accordance with the
following formula:
 
Size, in gallons = M x 9 x LF
Where:   M = Meals served per day
      LF = 1.25 if garbage disposal and dishwashing are employed, 1.0 without
garbage disposal, 0.75 without dishwashing and garbage disposal
 
   (C)   (1)   The Town Manager may allow smaller grease traps than calculated
using the above formulas to be installed only if evidence is presented that
advanced design features, or special unique considerations, allow the use of
smaller tanks while maintaining an equivalent grease removal efficiency.
      (2)   The Town Manager may allow smaller grease traps than calculated
using the above formulas if installation of tanks of the calculated size are
economically or physically not practical, provided the owner of the
establishment agrees to payment to the town of any and all costs associated
with sewer system cleaning of grease originating at, or reasonably presumed to
originate at, the establishment for which the grease trap is required.
      (3)   The Town Manager may require use of grease traps larger than those
calculated using the given formulas wherever tanks of the calculated size have
proven ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 50.06) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Town Manager, Director of Public Works and other duly
authorized employees and agents of the town bearing proper credentials and
identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to, in any way,
release the owner of a property which has been entered by duly authorized
employees and agents of the town from liability if such person or persons is
injured or otherwise involved in a mishap while performing authorized
inspections on the property.
   (B)   Authority is hereby granted to the Town Manager after approval of the
Town Board of Councilmen to temporarily exclude any industrial waste, whether
pre-treated or not, from the sanitary sewers whenever, in the opinion of the
Town Manager, such action is necessary for the purpose of determining the
effects of such wastes upon the sewage system and sewage treatment plant or for
the purpose of preventing detrimental effects to said system and plant or to
the receiving stream.
(Prior Code, § 50.07) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (A)   (1)   The volume of flow used in computing industrial waste surcharges
shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the Town Water Department. In the event that a person
discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system produces evidence to the Town
Manager that more than 10% of the total annual volume of water used for all
purposes does not reach the town sanitary sewer, an estimated percentage of
total water consumption to be used in computing charges may be agreed upon
between the Manager and the persons discharging industrial wastes into said
sewers.
      (2)   In the event that the Town Manager determines that the volume of
industrial waste being discharged is more than 10% greater than the metered
water consumption, then the industrial waste charges shall be based upon the
volume discharged as measured by a town approved volume measuring device such
as a flow meter installed within the control manhole as provided in §
50.03.
   (B)   Where the person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary
sewers of the town procures any part, or all of, his or her water supply from
sources other than the Town Water Department, all or part of which is
discharged into the sanitary sewer, the person discharging said waste shall
install and maintain at his or her expense, water meters or other measuring
devices of a type as proved by the Town Manager for the purpose of determining
the proper volume of flow to be charged.
(Prior Code, § 50.08) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 DUTIES OF USER UPON UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   Any user who discharges wastes in violation of this subchapter
shall, upon discovery thereof, immediately notify the town so that the town may
take necessary countermeasures to minimize the damage to the wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, treatment processes and receiving waters.
      (2)   In addition, such user shall, within 15 days of such, occurrence,
deliver to the town a written detailed report describing the cause of such
discharge and the measures taken or to be taken to prevent a reoccurrence in
the future.
   (B)   A user who gives the notice and report required by division (A) of
this section shall thereby be relieved from the imposition of any criminal
sanctions, and if the discharge was accidental, from the imposition of any
civil fines, authorized by this subchapter, but shall remain liable to the town
for any expenses incurred by the town as a result of the violation of this
subchapter and for any loss, or damage to the town’s sewer system or wastewater
treatment facility, treatment processes or receiving waters, and shall further
be liable to the town for any liability or for any fines imposed upon the town
by:
      (1)   The state’s Department of Natural Resources and Community
Development, Division of Environmental Management under provisions of G.S. §§
143-215.6A through 143-215.6C; and/or
      (2)   The Environmental Protection Agency, under any applicable federal
laws or regulations and shall further be subject to termination of service,
suspension or revocation of any discharge permit or injunctive relief as deemed
appropriate by the town should the measures taken by the violator be deemed
inadequate by the town to prevent reoccurrence of the violation.
(Prior Code, § 50.09) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985)
§ 50.10 INJUNCTION AND ABATEMENT.
   The violation of this subchapter is declared to be a public nuisance, and
this subchapter may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement in an
action instituted in the general court of justice, as provided in G. S. § 160A-
175.
(Prior Code, § 50.10) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985)
§ 50.11 TERMINATION OF SERVICES; REVOCATION OF PERMITS; ISSUANCE OF CEASE AND
DESIST ORDERS.
   If any person violates any provisions of this subchapter, the town may:
   (A)   Terminate water or sewer service, or both, to the property in or upon
which such violation occurred;
   (B)   Suspend a specified period of time or permanently revoke any permit
granted to such under any provisions of this subchapter; or
   (C)   Issue a cease and desist order directing such user to:
      (1)   Comply with this subchapter forthwith;
      (2)   Comply with this subchapter in accordance with a time schedule set
forth by the town;
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action; or
      (4)   A combination of divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 50.11) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985)
§ 50.12 NOTICE AND BEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Water and sewer service shall be terminated, cease and desist
orders shall be issued and permits shall be denied, suspended or revoked by the
town only after the town shall have given written notice to the user of
contemplated action.
      (2)   Such notice shall notify the alleged violator that a hearing may be
requested before the Town Council and that if such hearing is requested within
ten days after town’s notice to the user, such hearing shall be held within 30
days after the request for such hearing.
      (3)   At that hearing the Town Council shall hear evidence from the Town
Manager and from the alleged violators and any other pertinent evidence shall
be received by the town and the town shall render a decision making appropriate
findings of fact and conclusions of law prior to any service being terminated,
cease and desist orders issued, or permit denied, suspended or revoked.
   (B)   Provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be
applicable and the town may, without notice and opportunity for hearing to be
had, temporarily suspend water or sewer services, or both, to any user, if an
emergency exists or is eminent which threatens the public health, or is likely
to cause severe injury or damage to or interruption of the town’s sewer system
or wastewater treatment plant, treatment processes or threatens the lives or
severe injury to the town’s employees, agents or other authorized personnel.
(Prior Code, § 50.12) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985)
LATE PAYMENT
§ 50.25 WATER AND SEWER LATE PAYMENT POLICY.
   (A)   All water bills (inclusive of water, sewer, landfill and garbage
charges) sent out by the town will have posted on the bill a due date and a cut
off date.
   (B)   A late charge of $2 will be added to the bill if it is not paid by the
due date. An additional late charge of $15 will be added to the bill if not
paid by the cutoff date. A customer’s water can be cut of at any time on or
after the cut off date if the bill is not paid.
(Prior Code, § 50.20) (Ord. 96-4, passed 8-12-1996)
ACCEPTING GROUNDWATER REMEDIATION DISCHARGE WATERS
INTO WASTEWATER FACILITIES
§ 50.40 PURPOSE OF POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The stated purposes of this policy are: to protect the employees
of the town; to protect the public health and the environment; to protect the
equipment, materials, processes and operations of the publicly owned wastewater
treatment facilities; to protect the ability of the wastewater treatment
facility to meet its NPDES permit discharge limitations; and to protect the
town from undue expenses resulting from the discharge of groundwater
remediation systems.
      (2)   In keeping with these stated purposes, this policy sets forth
general information needed and guidelines for the issuance of special use
discharge permits to these types of discharges.
   (B)   (1)   This document is intended to serve as a basis for town public
policy regarding any groundwater remediation or similar activity operator
(hereinafter referred to as operator) and shall not be construed as replacing,
substituting for or any way differing from the limitations or restrictions
otherwise regulated in the town’s sewer use ordinance, or state or federal
regulations.
      (2)   The policy applies only to groundwater remediation discharges
originating within the town limits. Groundwater remediation wastewater
originating outside the town limits will not be accepted into the town publicly
owned wastewater collection and treatment system (POTW).
(Prior Code, § 50.35) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.41 INFORMATION REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL USE DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   The following is a list of minimum information to be submitted to the Town
Manager before issuance of a special use discharge permit will be considered.
Submission of the information will not ensure issuance of a special use
discharge permit, nor will such submission prevent the Town Manager, or his or
her representative, from requesting additional information deemed necessary due
to the nature of the remediation activity:
   (A)   A written narrative generally describing the history of the
groundwater remediation site, the need for the remedial activity, proposed
daily operations, any temporary and permanent structures to be erected or
constructed, and the planned length of operations for each phase of the
remedial activity, as applicable;
   (B)   A statement of the projected maximum discharge rate, the projected
average discharge rate and the maximum and average expected concentrations of
each pollutant known or suspected to be present in the discharge;
   (C)   Full analytical data on all test wells with a summary of all
components present above detectable limits;
   (D)   An engineering report with any and all relevant reports, plans and
specifications stamped and sealed by a state registered professional engineer.
The engineering report is to include, but is not limited to, the following
items:
      (1)   Detailed plans and specifications for proposed pretreatment
facilities, including design criteria and projected removal efficiency rates;
      (2)   Location and means of sample collection for pretreatment influent
and effluent monitoring to establish treatment efficiency;
      (3)   Flow monitoring device specifications which must be capable of
recording and totalizing flow and reading in gallons per day or million gallons
per day. Alternatively, where pumped flow is involved, the plan may allow for
calibration of pump discharge rates and use of pump running time meters for
flow discharge determination;
      (4)   Full remediation program description including scope of project,
term of project, pumping rates and summary of the means by which the
requirements of this policy are to be met; and
      (5)   Proposed point of discharge into sewer system.
   (E)   State regulatory certification will be required by an official with
the operator stating that all state and federal regulatory requirements have
been met.
(Prior Code, § 50.36) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.42 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   The following general conditions represent the policy of the town for any
groundwater remediation, or any similar type, operation entreating to discharge
wastewater into the town’s sewer system. These conditions shall be in addition
to any special use discharge permit issued by the Town Manager, the town’s
sewer use ordinance, state or federal regulations.
   (A)   The discharge of the operator shall be subject to, following complete
application and approval of the Town Manager, the regulations and limitations
of the local pretreatment program and this policy.
   (B)   Best available technology (BAT) shall be required of the operator to
comply with the limitations of the operator’s special use discharge permit.
Compliance with special use discharge permit limits must be documented in
accordance with the procedures established in §§
50.40 through
50.43 and
50.55 through
50.58 prior to commencement of continuous discharge. Unless alternative limits
are specifically given, the discharge shall at a minimum have less than 100
parts per billion of BETX.
   (C)   Operation and maintenance records are to be complete and maintained by
the operator and are to be made available for inspection by the Town Manager or
his or her representative upon request.
   (D)   Effluent from the operator’s pretreatment facility, prior to entering
the town’s wastewater system, shall comply with all state water quality
standards applicable to the surface waters of the state, unless other levels
are specifically set forth in the special use discharge permit.
   (E)   (1)   The operator’s special use discharge permit may stipulate
discharge levels of a certain pollutant or pollutants in excess of the state’s
water quality standards where such pollutants can be adequately treated and
discharged by the town’s wastewater treatment facility, and may stipulate
limits for pollutants not listed in the state water quality criteria.
      (2)   Such limits, if established, will be based on the limits of what is
technologically achievable. If the Town Manager determines that even with
application of best available technology the best interests of the town would
not be served by acceptance of the wastewater, then permission to discharge the
pollutant into the POTW will be denied.
   (F)   A comprehensive sludge management plan shall be submitted to the Town
Manager 30 days prior to the removal of solids. The plan shall detail step by
step the procedure proposed for solids removal and disposal. This condition is
applicable to pretreatment systems that produce solid residuals.
   (G)   The operator will be prohibited from discharging holding or
equalization lagoon sediments to the POTW.
   (H)   The town reserves the right to reissue with additional conditions any
special use discharge permit. A 30-day notice will be given by the town to the
operator in such cases. Reissuance of a permit may be due to changes in local,
state or federal regulations; changes in the operator’s operating procedures;
monitoring test results; or noncompliance with current permit conditions.
   (I)   The operator shall also be responsible for stormwater management at
the groundwater remediation site(s), any pretreatment facility site(s) and any
other applicable site(s) in compliance with all state and federal regulations.
(Prior Code, § 50.37) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.43 FEES AND CHARGES.
   The following fees and charges shall be assessed groundwater remediation
discharge operators.
   (A)   Normal sewer connection fees and user charges. User charges shall be
based on the actual quantity of wastewater discharged to the POTW.
   (B)   Administrative charges. The Town Manager shall establish a standard
special use discharge permit fee schedule which will be applicable to all
discharges.
   (C)   Application specific review charges. Groundwater remediation
discharges will often require the town to utilize the services of outside
consultants to conduct technical reviews and evaluations. Under these
circumstances, the permit applicant (operator) will be required to reimburse
the town for any costs it has incurred in using outside consultants to review
an application and establish permit conditions.
   (D)   Wastewater monitoring charges. The town will inspect, sample and have
tested groundwater remediation discharges no less than twice per year, and more
often when, in the opinion of the Town Manager, such monitoring would benefit
the town. The operator will be required to reimburse the town for any costs
incurred in inspecting, sampling and testing the discharges. Costs will be
determined as direct labor costs, including the costs of benefits prorated on
an hourly rate basis, sample shipping costs, sample container costs and
laboratory fees.
   (E)   NPDES monitoring and sludge monitoring costs. Should the town be
required by state or federal agencies to increase monitoring of its wastewater
treatment facilities or sludge to include pollutants associated with
groundwater remediation, than a schedule of charges will be developed that
apportions the cost of that additional monitoring to all groundwater
remediation discharge operators discharging those pollutants.
   (F)   Self-monitoring costs. Groundwater remediation dischargers will be
required to conduct self- monitoring. Testing parameters and frequencies will
be set forth in the special use discharge permit issued each discharger. All
costs for self-monitoring will be borne by the operator.
(Prior Code, § 50.38) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
PROCEDURE FOR VERIFICATION OF PRETREATMENT
SYSTEM EFFICIENCY PRIOR TO DISCHARGE TO POTW
§ 50.55 INTENT.
   (A)   Groundwater remediation discharges generally involve materials that
are flammable, toxic, mutagenic, carcinogenic or otherwise potentially harmful
to the POTW or environment.
   (B)   Accordingly, the town will require extraordinary measures to be taken
to demonstrate the capabilities of any pretreatment system utilized prior to
the allowing of any discharge into its system from a groundwater remediation
system.
(Prior Code, § 50.50) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.56 PURPOSE.
   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this procedure is to operate the pretreatment
system under normal conditions, verify its performance by actual wastewater
testing, and only after the testing has occurred and substantiated the
capability of the pretreatment system, to allow a discharge to the POTW to
occur.
      (2)   This will be done by requiring that the discharge from groundwater
remediation systems be first directed to one or more holding vessels, the
quality of the water determined by laboratory testing, and only upon receipt of
satisfactory test results, a discharge be allowed.
   (B)   (1)   The Town Manager will determine on a case by case basis whether
or not this procedure will be followed on a continuous basis, or only during
the start-up phase for the groundwater remediation program.
      (2)   In making this determination the Town Manager will consider the
specific nature of the pollutants involved, the concentration of the pollutants
in the wastewater before pretreatment, the rate of flow of the wastewater, and
the vulnerability of the pretreatment system employed to mechanical failure and
operational failures.
(Prior Code, § 50.51) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.57 PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of a special use discharge permit the operator will construct
all required pretreatment facilities and provide one or more storage vessels.
The storage vessel(s) will be sized to hold not less than one day’s wastewater
production. The pretreatment system will be put into operation and its
discharge directed to the holding vessel. After the holding vessel is filled,
the operator, at his or her option, may either cease discharging or direct the
discharge to another holding vessel(s). The filled vessel will be sampled and
tested. If the test results verify that the wastewater meets the special use
discharge permit conditions, it can then be discharged to the POTW. If the test
results show that the wastewater does not meet the special use discharge permit
conditions, then the wastewater shall be retreated and tested again until such
time as it does meet permit conditions. The operator may, at the operator’s
option, use multiple storage vessels, so that one or more vessels are being
filled while others are being tested. All storage vessels shall be equipped
with devices that allow the rate of flow of the discharge from the vessels to
be controlled. The Town Manager will establish and inform the operator of the
appropriate setting for the devices. The Town Manager may allow a continuous,
direct discharge to the town wastewater system after this procedure of
treating, holding and then testing has demonstrated that the pretreatment
system employed can successfully achieve permit limits. In general, this will
require verification of pretreatment system capabilities by testing of at least
four days of the normal expected discharge volume. A continuous discharge will
not be allowed until four consecutive days testings show full compliance with
discharge standards.
(Prior Code, § 50.52) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.58 COST.
   All costs for following this procedure, including sampling and testing
costs, will be borne by the groundwater discharger.
(Prior Code, § 50.53) (Ord. 95-1, passed 3-13-1995)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person (including any responsible officer or employees of a
corporate violator) who willfully or negligently violates any provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.08, or falsifies any information or data in any application, report or other
document given to the town under §§
50.01 through
50.08, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by fine not to
exceed $1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both, in the discretion
of the court.
      (1)   Any person (including any corporation) who violates any provisions
of §§
50.01 through
50.08, shall in addition to the criminal penalties as outlined above be subject
to the imposition by the Town Council of the civil penalty payable to the town
not to exceed $5,000 for each violation, and, in addition, shall reimburse the
town upon demand for any expenses, loss or damage actually sustained by the
town to its sewer system or wastewater treatment plant, treatment processes or
receiving waters as a result of such violation, and in addition to any civil
penalty imposed by the town shall be liable for the amount of any fine or
penalty imposed upon the town by the state or federal agency as a result of
such violation.
      (2)   Such civil penalty shall be assessed only after the town shall have
given the alleged violator notice in writing of the alleged violation. Such
notice shall notify the alleged violator that a hearing before the Town Board
will be held at a designated time and place not more than ten days after the
date the notice is sent to the alleged violator. At such hearing the Town Board
shall hear evidence from the Town Manager and consulting engineers and any
other appropriate officials regarding the alleged violation and shall also hear
evidence from or offered by the alleged violator regarding the alleged
violation. After hearing such evidence the Town Board shall make appropriate
findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the alleged violation and
shall determine whether or not a civil penalty is to be assessed against the
alleged violator. If a civil penalty is deemed appropriate, the Town Board
shall have authority to assess a civil penalty against the alleged violator in
the amounts provided above.
      (3)   The Town Clerk shall certify in writing to the alleged violator the
decision of the Town Board within ten days after such decision is made by
mailing by certified mail to the alleged violator, a copy of that decision
setting forth the findings of fact and conclusions of laws as made by the Town
Board.
      (4)   After receiving notice of the Town Board’s decision, the alleged
violator shall have the right to appeal that decision to Washington County
Superior Court and any act on the part of the town to collect such imposed
civil penalty shall be stayed until a decision is either upheld or reversed by
the Superior Court.
      (5)   If the alleged violator does not appeal the decision of the Town
Board within ten days after receipt of the same, then the civil penalty
assessed shall become immediately due and payable and shall be lien upon all of
the property of the alleged violator located in the town or county. The town
shall have the authority to begin a civil action in the nature of a debt to
recover the civil penalty imposed by the town.
(Prior Code, § 50.99) (Ord. 89-2, passed 8-19-1985)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND WASTEWATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Purpose and policy
   
51.002   Definitions
   
51.003   Authority of Town Council
   
51.004   Administrative authority
   
51.005   Visiting utility stations
   
51.006   Tampering with equipment
   
51.007   Refusal of service to persons or premises outside corporate limits
   
51.008   Connections and meters to remain property of town
   
51.009   Maintenance of meters
   
51.010   Right to shut off water for repairs and the like
   
51.011   No claim for damages on account of accident
Operation of System
Division 1: General Provisions
   
51.025   Connections work to be done by the town
   
51.026   Application
   
51.027   Separate connections required; exceptions
   
51.028   Connections inside corporate limits
   
51.029   Connections beyond corporate limits
Division 2: Water
   
51.040   Public water system defined; approval of plans and specifications
   
51.041   Provision of water system
   
51.042   Financing outside corporate limits
   
51.043   Specification; ownership
   
51.044   Additional improvements
   
51.045   Provision of sewer service
   
51.046   Financing outside corporate limits
   
51.047   Specifications; ownership
   
51.048   Additional improvements
Division 3: Restrictions and Prohibitions - Water
   
51.060   Alterations affecting quantity of supply; unauthorized turning of curb
cocks
   
51.061   Interference with supply pipes and curb cocks by plumbers
   
51.062   Opening or closing of curb cocks generally
   
51.063   Unauthorized use of service pipe; separate consumers on same premises
   
51.064   Supply and service pipes to be approved by town; interproperty
connections
   
51.065   Street or yard sprinklers
   
51.066   Excessive or wasteful use generally
   
51.067   Use of fire hydrants
   
51.068   Discontinuance of service for permitting unlawful uses
Division 4: Restrictions and Prohibitions - Sewer
   
51.080   Intent of regulation of sewer use
   
51.081   Applicability of sewer use provisions
   
51.082   Special agreements
   
51.083   Use of public sewers required
   
51.084   Discharge to natural outlets
   
51.085   Prohibition of septic tanks, privies and the like
   
51.086   Building sewer required
   
51.087   Building sewer connections and fees
   
51.088   Separate connections required
   
51.089   Method of sewer connection
   
51.090   Elevation of sewer connection
   
51.091   Prohibited connections
   
51.092   Public hazard
   
51.093   Grease removal
   
51.094   Sand and grit removal
   
51.095   Preliminary treatment devices
   
51.096   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.097   Sewer service connection fees
   
51.098   Basic user charges
   
51.099   Extra strength wastewater surcharges
   
51.100   Enforcement
Division 5: Industrial Waste Discharge Permit
   
51.115   Generally
   
51.116   Required
   
51.117   Application
   
51.118   Pretreatment requirements
   
51.119   Cancellation of permit
   
51.120   Fees
   
51.121   Ownership changes
   
51.122   Effect of approvals
   
51.123   Property rights
   
51.124   Prior approval required
Division 6: Use of Public Sewers
   
51.135   Prohibited discharges generally
   
51.136   Prohibited wastes and limitations
   
51.137   BOD limit
   
51.138   Chemical oxygen demand (COD)
   
51.139   Suspended solids
   
51.140   Flow equalization
   
51.141   Deleterious discharges
   
51.142   Water quality changes
   
51.143   Standards of waste discharge and delivery
   
51.144   Septic tank and portable toilet wastes
Division 7: Cross Connections
   
51.155   Introduction
   
51.156   Objectives
   
51.157   Responsibilities
   
51.158   Definitions
   
51.159   Right of entry
   
51.160   Elimination of cross connections: degree of hazard
   
51.161   Installation of assemblies
   
51.162   Testing and repair of assemblies
   
51.163   Facilities requiring protection
   
51.164   Connections with unapproved sources of supply
   
51.165   Fire protection systems
   
51.166   Enforcement
Payment for Construction Cost
   
51.180   General requirements within town
   
51.181   Water and sewer connection fees and capital investment fees
Rates and Charges
   
51.195   Service fees; new customers
   
51.196   Service fees; transfers
   
51.197   Water deposits
   
51.198   Water rates and bills
   
51.199   Sewer rates and bills
   
51.200   Billing, payment, penalties
   
51.201   Meter testing; protested bills
   
51.202   Adjustment of water and sewer bills
   
51.203   Suspension of service generally
   
51.204   Severability
   
51.205   Conflict
   
51.206   Effective date
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-
500) and subsequent amendments, including the Water Quality Act of 1987 (Pub.
Law No. 100-4) and other state and federal regulations have resulted in an
unprecedented program dedicated to cleaning and safeguarding the nation’s
waters. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges to the POTW
and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and
the pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403). The objectives of this
chapter are: to prevent discharges to the POTW which will interfere with the
operation of the POTW or contaminate the resulting sludge; to prevent
discharges to the POTW which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere; to improve the opportunity to
recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge; to protect town personnel and the
general public from affects due to operation and maintenance of wastewater
system; and to provide for the regulation of discharge to the POTW through the
issuance of permits, authorizes monitoring activities, requires user reporting
and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of
expenditures. This chapter shall apply to the town and to persons who are, by
permit or agreement with the town, users of the POTW. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Town Manager shall administer the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.001) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1343, and
amendments.
   AMMONIA NITROGEN. The total amount of nitrogen in wastewater in the form of
ammonia or ammonium.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A responsible corporate officer as defined in 40 C.F.R. part
403.12, if the industrial user is a corporation;
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
      (3)   A director or the highest official appointed or designated to
oversee operations, if the user is a governmental facility; or
      (4)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the discharge originates.
   BILLABLE BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The discharge in pounds of BOD
calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the wastewater
in excess of 250 mg/l.
   BILLABLE CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The discharge in pounds of COD calculated
using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the wastewater in excess of
600 mg/l.
   BILLABLE FLOW. Recorded water usage as determined by the appropriate water
utility, plus measured water from wells and other sources, times the approved
percentage factor for wastewater entering the wastewater system. Alternatively,
industrial users may have their billable flow determined by continuously
measuring their discharge in a manner approved by the Town Manager.
   BILLABLE TOTAL NITROGEN. The discharge in pounds of total nitrogen
calculated using the billable flow and concentration of total nitrogen in the
wastewater in excess of 40 mg/l.
   BILLABLE TOTAL PHOSPHORUS. The discharge in pounds of total phosphorus
calculated using the billable flow and concentration of total phosphorus in the
wastewater in excess of seven mg/l.
   BILLABLE TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The discharge in pounds of TSS calculated
using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the wastewater in excess of
250 mg/l.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days
at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives wastewater and is located inside the walls of a building
and conveys the wastewater to the building sewer which begins five feet outside
the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the sanitary sewer
or other discharge location.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. The total amount of oxygen required to oxidize the
organic matter in waste as described in standard methods.
   COLOR. The true color due to the substances in solution.
   COMPOSITE BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a pollutant
in wastewater, usually expressed in mg/l.
   CONCENTRATION BASED LIMIT. A limit based on the relative strength of a
pollutant in wastewater, usually expressed in mg/l.
   COOLING WATER. The water used for air conditioning, refrigeration or other
cooling applications.
   CUSTOMER. The person that contracts with the town for provision of water or
wastewater service.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of wastewater directly to the waters of the
state.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or the town’s authorized
representative.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling,
storage and sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A single “dip and take” sample collected at a representative
point in the discharge.
   HEADWORKS ANALYSIS. An evaluation of the capability of the POTW to receive
pollutants performed in accordance with DEM and EPA regulations.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of nondomestic pollutants from any source
regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act to the POTW, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317
(b) and (c), respectively.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge, which does not constitute a
discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   INFILTRATION. The extraneous groundwater entering the wastewater system
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections or manhole walls.
   INFLOW. The surface water entering the wastewater system from such sources
as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar yard and area drains, foundation
drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy
areas, manhole covers, cross connections, from storm sewers and/or combined
sewers, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters or
drainage.
   INSTANTANEOUS MEASUREMENT. A single reading, observation or measurement of
the discharge.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes
of operations, which contributes to a violation of any requirements of the
POTW’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1345, or any criteria, guidelines or regulation developed pursuant to Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the
Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or more
stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6941
et seq.) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
   LOCAL LIMITS. Concentration or mass-based limits developed by the Director
for controlling the discharge of pollutants.
   MASS-BASED LIMIT. A limitation based on the actual quantity of a pollutant
in a discharge usually expressed in pounds per day or pounds per unit of
production.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317(b) and
(c), respectively, which applies to a specific category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMIT. A permit issued for
discharge to the navigable waters of the United States.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
surface water or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1317 (c), which will be
applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that sections provided that:
      (1)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
      (2)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source;
      (3)   (a)   The production or wastewater generating process of the
building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site.
         (b)   In determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the
existing plant, and the extent to which the new type of facility is engaged in
the same general type of activity as existing source, should be considered.
      (4)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of division (2) or (3) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or
adds to existing process or production equipment; and
      (5)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a NEW SOURCE has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program;
            1.   Any placement, assembly, on installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures of facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into building contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect, not
including debt service and capital related expenditures, but inclusive of
expenditures attributable to administration, monitoring, inspections, reviewing
applications, maintenance of equipment, and treatment and collection of
wastewater, necessary to assure adequate wastewater collection and treatment on
a continuing basis which conforms to applicable regulations and assures optimal
long term facility management.
   PASS THROUGH. Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations which alone or with discharges from other sources,
causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation, of the POTW’s NPDES or nondischarge permit, or downstream water
quality standard.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the
plural where indicated by context.
   pH. The term used to express the intensity of the acid or base condition of
a solution as determined by standard methods.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, commercial and agricultural waste discharged into water.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging such
pollutants to the POTW. Physical chemical or biological processes, or process
changes of other means can obtain the reduction or alteration, except as
prohibited by 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial
user.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards and local limits.
   PRIVATE SEWER. Sewer which is not owned by the town.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the town and is
separate from and does not include sewers owned by other governmental units.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.
      (1)   Treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1292, which owned by the town.
      (2)   This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the
POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances
not connected to a facility providing treatment.
   QUALIFIED LABORATORY. Laboratories currently certified by the state to
perform water and wastewater analyses.
   SANITARY CLOSET. A privy, closet, urinal or other device for receiving human
excrement, connected with proper fittings so that its contents may empty into
sanitary sewer.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries wastewater.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the POTW who is subject
to categorical pretreatment standards; discharges more than 25,000 gallons per
day to the POTW; discharges are than 5% of any design or treatment capacity of
the POTW; or is found by the town, DEM or EPA to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other discharges, on the POTW, the quality
of sludge, the system’s effluent quality the receiving stream, or air emissions
generated by the system.
   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or REPORTABLE NONCOMPLIANCE. A status of
noncompliance defined as follows:
      (1)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits.
         (a)   Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent or more of the
measurements exceed (by any magnitude) the same daily maximum limit or the same
average limit in a six-month period.
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations.
            1.   Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements are more than
the TRC times the limit (maximum or average) in a six-month period.
            2.   There are two groups of TRCs:
               a.   For conventional pollutants BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease
TRC = 1.4; and
               b.   For all other pollutants TRC = 1.2.
         (c)   Other violations. Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit
(average or daily maximum) that the control authority believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through; or
endangered the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the public.
         (d)   Discharge of a pollutant. Any discharge of a pollutant that has
caused imminent endangerment to human/welfare or to the environment and has
resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge.
      (2)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date;
      (3)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-monitoring
data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports and periodic
compliance reports within 30 days from the due date;
      (4)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
      (5)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority considers to be significant.
   SLUG. Any discharge of wastewater which in concentration of any given
constituent or its quantity flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than
15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flow
during normal operation or which causes interference.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION. A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition
of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, prepared and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, American Water
Works Association and Water Pollution Control Federation or an other procedures
recognized by the DEM and EPA.
   STATE. State of North Carolina.
   STORM SEWER. Sewer that carries only stormwater, surface runoff, street wash
and drainage, and to which wastewater is not intentionally admitted.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN. The sum of organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen
content of a wastewater as determined by standard methods.
   TOTAL NITROGEN. The sum of TKN, nitrates and nitrites intent of a wastewater
as determined by standard methods.
   TOTAL PHOSPHORUS. All orthophosphates and condensed phosphates both
dissolved and particulate, organic and inorganic.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspensions with wastewater and is removable by laboratory
filtration as described in standard methods.
   TOWN. The Town of Plymouth.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCES. Any substances whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which
when discharged to the POTW in sufficient quantities may tend to interfere with
any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute a hazard to the environment
or recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the POTW. These
substances include, but are not limited to, those pollutants listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of § 307(a) of the Act,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), or other acts.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of sufficient quality that it could not be violation
of federal or state water quality standards if such water were discharged to
waters of the state.
   USER. A person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater
to the POTW.
   USER CHARGE SYSTEM. The system charges levied on users for the operation and
maintenance costs of the water or wastewater system.
   WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, including
cooling water, holding tank waste and infiltration/inflow.
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment and shall include the wastes
from pretreatment facilities and cooling water.
      (2)   SANITARY WASTEWATER. The combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
      (3)   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the Director as a
necessary condition to being granted, or retaining, publicly provided access
point for connection to a public sewer for an industrial user.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(Prior Code, § 51.002) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.003 AUTHORITY OF TOWN COUNCIL.
   All utilities owned, leased or used by the town, whether inside or outside
the corporate limits, shall be under the full control of the town pursuant to
authorization in Session Laws of 1953, Chapter 300. The duty enacting and
enforcing rules and regulations governing the management and control of town
properties shall be vested in the town, and the duty of enforcing such rules
and regulations may be delegated.
(Prior Code, § 51.003) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.004 ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall have overall
supervision of the entire water and sewer system under the general direction of
the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall prescribe the duties and
responsibilities of the Director. The Director of Public Utilities and the Town
Manager at all times shall have free access to all premises for the purpose of
examining hydrants, fixtures and connections on which town water pressure is
maintained. The Fire Department personnel shall have free access to fire
hydrants at all times.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by an act or decision of the Director of Public
Works may appeal his or her decision in writing to the Town Manager. The Town
Manager shall meet and confer with the respective parties. Within ten days of
this meeting the Town Manager shall render his or her decision in writing to
the aggrieved person. Only the Town Council for any action for action brought
to the attention of the Town Manager as described above considers those matters
of complaint or request.
(Prior Code, § 51.004) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.005 VISITING UTILITY STATIONS.
   No visitors shall be permitted to enter the water and wastewater treatment
plant or any pumping station unless accompanied by the person in charge, and
under no circumstances shall any visitor handle or in any way come in contact
with any part of the machinery.
(Prior Code, § 51.005) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.006 TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove or
otherwise interfere with any equipment, apparatus or materials belonging to the
public water and wastewater systems or to dig in the vicinity of any water
lines or public sewer without first obtaining permission. It shall likewise be
unlawful for any person to remove or damage property of any kind belonging to
the town.
   (B)   A reward of up to $200 shall be offered to any person furnishing
information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating this
section.
(Prior Code, § 51.006) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.007 REFUSAL OF SERVICE TO PERSONS OR PREMISES OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The Town Council reserves the right to serve any person or premises outside
the corporate limits with water sewer service from the system.
(Prior Code, § 51.007) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.008 CONNECTIONS AND METERS TO REMAIN PROPERTY OF TOWN.
   All water meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used
by the town in installing any water or sewer connection shall be and remain the
property of the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.008) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.009 MAINTENANCE OF METERS.
   All meters except such as are required to be furnished by particular users
of water, shall be kept in good repair and working order by and at the expense
of the town. The town shall keep meters furnished by particular users of water
in good repair and working order, but the expenses thereof shall be borne by
such users. Meters for measuring the flow of wastewater, where required, shall
be provided and maintained by and at the expense of the customer.
(Prior Code, § 51.009) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.010 RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER FOR REPAIRS AND THE LIKE.
   The town reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in case of
accident for the purpose of making connections or repairs.
(Prior Code, § 51.010) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.011 NO CLAIM FOR DAMAGES ON ACCOUNT OF ACCIDENT.
   It is expressly agreed between the town, users and customers that no claim
for damages shall be made against the town on account of accidental failure to
supply water, whether by quantity or quality.
(Prior Code, § 51.011) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
OPERATION OF SYSTEM
DIVISION 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.025 CONNECTIONS WORK TO BE DONE BY THE TOWN.
   The construction of laterals for the connection of the public sewer or water
lines on any lot with public sewer or water lines in any street and the
necessary excavation thereof shall be done only by the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.025) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.026 APPLICATION.
   (A)   No connection shall be made to any public sewer or water line except
after approval of the written application therefor.
   (B)   Every application for a sewer or water connection shall state the name
of the owner of the lot, the name of the street on which lot is situated, the
number of the house, if there is one on the lot or, if not, a description of
the location of the lot, the number and kind of connections required and the
character of surface shall be signed by the person making the application and
shall be accompanied by the proper fee for making the connection applied for.
The town may require that the applicant submit as part of the written
application such information, plans or other data as may be required to
adequately determine if the requirements of §§
51.025 through
51.029 are to be met.
   (C)   No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, area drains or other sources of inflow, groundwater or other
unpolluted waters to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is
connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer.
   (D)   After the effective date of this chapter, the owner and/or his or her
authorized agent, shall make application for service, in person, at the office
of the town and at the same time make the deposit guarantee required below.
   (E)   The town may reject any application for service not available under a
standard rate or which involves excessive service cost, or which may affect the
supply of service to other customers, or for other good and sufficient reasons.
   (F)   (1)   The town may reject any application for service when the
applicant is delinquent in payment of bills incurred for service previously
supplied at any location within the system. If a delinquent customer is not the
owner of the premises to which the services are delivered, the payment of
delinquent amounts may not be required before providing service at the request
of new or different customer or owner, tenant or occupant of the premises but
this restriction shall not apply when the premises are occupied by two or more
tenants whose services are measured by the same meter.
      (2)   Rents, rates, fees, charges and penalties for commercial units
shall be the legal obligation of the owner of the premises served when the
property or premises is leased or rented to more than one tenant and services
rendered to more than one tenant are measured by the same meter. Provided
further, when the owner of the premises has been served water and sewer and has
not paid for the same, the town shall not be required to render services to
anyone at the location where such water and sewer was used, until such water
and sewer bill has been paid (G.S. § 160A-314). The town reserves the right to
change multimetered property to single metered property where experience and
delinquencies cause a loss to the town.
   (G)   For violation of any kind of the provisions of these rules relating to
application for service, the town may, at the expiration of ten days after
mailing a written notice to the last known address of the owner, remove the
meter and discontinue service. Where the meter is thereafter reinstalled, the
owner shall first pay to the town the current reinstallation charge.
   (H)   When an application is made for water and sewer extension to serve an
area or development project that is planned as part of a larger project or
subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time such application
is made, the owner shall submit plans in sufficient detail to determine the
sizes and types of facilities which will be necessary to serve the entire
development or subdivision when completed.
   (I)   No extension to the water and sewer system of the town shall be made
and no application shall be approved, except in accordance with the
requirements of §§
51.025 through
51.029.
   (J)   Under no circumstances will water only or sewer only be extended to
any undeveloped area. The applicant will be responsible for the engineering and
construction of all improvements for connection to the system.
   (K)   (1)   The Town Council shall determine the minimum distance for any
extension of water and sewer service.
      (2)   In general, the minimum distance for extensions shall be no less
than one platted block or, wherever possible, no less than the distance to
connect both ends of the extension to an existing water and sewer system.
   (L)   The size of the improvements to be installed and other required system
facilities shall be determined by the Town Council in accordance with
recognized standards and accepted engineering practices and designs.
(Prior Code, § 51.026) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.027 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Every house or building abutting any water line or public sewer shall
have a separate connection. The town may construct a single water line of
sufficient size to the curblinc; provided that each house or business is
connected through a separate water meter.
   (B)   This section is not intended to prevent the owner of a building
containing three or more apartments from furnishing water to all tenants within
the building through one meter; provided, that this exception will not apply to
a building owned by more than one person, nor shall it apply to several
buildings connected by breezeways, carports or anything similar.
(Prior Code, § 51.027) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.028 CONNECTIONS INSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Water and sewer connections shall be made into existing
connections constructed by the town to serve a lot. If a connection is not
existing, one shall be provided as close as possible to the location requested
by the customer.
      (2)   When lines are constructed by the town, water service lines shall
be constructed to the point where the meter box will be set, and the building
sewer shall be constructed to the cleanout at approximately the start of the
right-of-way or property line.
   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, upon examination and testing by the Director, to meet all
requirements of the town and this chapter. All new building sewers including
any necessary replacement of existing building sewers shall comply with the
State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing.
   (C)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the town from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer provided, however, that
such indemnification shall not extend to loss or damage due solely to willful
misconduct or negligence on the part of the town.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to keep and maintain
the building sewer connected to the public sewer in good repair. The owner
shall be responsible for making necessary repairs, at his or her own expense,
to the building sewer when notified in writing by the Director that repairs are
necessary.
      (2)   Should the owner fail to repair the building sewer within 15 days
after receiving written notification that such repairs are necessary, the town
may make the necessary repairs and shall assess the owner for the cost of the
repairs.
   (E)   (1)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
wastewater carried by such building drain may be lifted by a means approved by
the town and discharged to the building sewer.
      (2)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of applicable building codes and plumbing codes and
other applicable rules and regulations of the town. All such connections shall
be made gastight and watertight.
      (3)   The town, before installation, shall approve any deviation from the
prescribed procedures.
(Prior Code, § 51.028) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.029 CONNECTIONS BEYOND CORPORATE LIMITS.
   Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate
limits and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of discharging
wastewater into the public sewer may do so by complying with the requirements
of this subchapter and paying all applicable fees and charges.
(Prior Code, § 51.029) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
DIVISION 2: WATER
§ 51.040 PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM DEFINED; APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   A public water system is a publicly- or privately-owned water system
regularly serving drinking water to the public and having at least 15 service
connections that are used at least 60 days of the year or serve an average of
25 individuals at least 60 days a year.
   (B)   Plans and specifications must be approved by the State Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources, Division of Health Services,
Environmental Health Section.
(Prior Code, § 51.035) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.041 PROVISION OF WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Area outside corporate limits.
      (1)   With adequate water lines existing. Upon receipt of a request for
water service and payment of all fees and charges, the town may construct a
water connection to serve the property. The property owner shall pay the then
existing water connection fee and capital investment fee prior to receiving a
tap.
      (2)   Public water not existing.
         (a)   Upon receipt of a request for sewer service, the town may
approve and authorize construction of a line to serve the property. When a
public water line is constructed, it shall extend across the entire frontage of
the property to be served.
         (b)   The party requesting service shall pay the entire cost of
construction, including materials, labor and equipment.
         (c)   If the town determines that sufficient advantages exist, it may
choose to bear the cost of constructing a public water line from the nearest
adequately sized public water line to the property to be served.
         (d)   Each property requesting service and abutting a public water
line constructed according to division (A)(2)(b) or (A)(2)(c) of this section
shall comply with division (A)(1) of this section.
         (e)   Water from the municipal water system shall be supplied to
owner/customers outside the corporate limits only through meter service, and
the minimum charge to any owner/customer shall be double the rate or charge
prescribed for meter service inside such corporate limits, unless otherwise
provided by the Town Council.
         (f)   Connections to the town’s water system by property owners
outside the corporate limits may require the installation of a service
connection line of a length greater than 60 feet in order to reach the property
line of the applicant. In all such cases, the property owner applying for
connection shall be responsible for either full payment of all costs incurred
by the town to make the connection, or the standard tap fee, whichever is
greater.
         (g)   Prior to making the connection, the owner shall deposit with the
town an amount equal to the total estimated cost of such connection. Upon
receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered into by and between
the town and the property owner in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. Such contract shall provide that in the event the amount of the total
funds deposited exceeds the amount of the total connection cost when completed,
that portion in excess of the total cost shall be refunded to the owner without
interest. Such contract shall also provide that if the amount deposited is less
than the total cost, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town.
      (3)   Charges after annexation into the town. After annexation into the
town, property, which abuts an existing public water line, shall pay the then
existing inside capital investment fee and connection fee prior to receiving a
connection.
      (4)   Water rates. Customers outside the town shall be charged the
regular outside rate.
   (B)   Area inside corporate limits.
      (1)   With adequate public water existing. The town shall construct a
water connection after receipt of the then existing connection fee.
      (2)   Public water not existing. When a property owner within the town
requests water service, the town may order the extension of public water line
to serve the property and assess all abutting property owners, an amount equal
to the cost of materials, but such assessments shall not exceed $10 per front
foot under the authority granted to the town by G.S. Chapter 160A. The cost of
fire hydrants, hydrant laterals and any costs of installation for larger
pipelines over and above the cost of a six-inch main shall be borne by the town
from funds appropriated for this purpose. Any property owner shall have the
opportunity to pay his or her proportionate share of the cost of such
extensions after the assessment roll is confirmed rather than paying his or her
share in equal annual installments with interest as required by state law.
   (C)   Other conditions.
      (1)   After receipt of application. When an application is received
requesting the extension of water service to proposed developments or
subdivisions within the corporate limits which have not been approved by the
Town Council, the Town Manager or other person designated by the Council, shall
estimate the cost of the project and present the application for such
extension, the estimated cost and other required information to the Town
Council for their consideration. If the application is approved and subject to
the approval of the development or subdivision by the town, and subject to the
availability of funds, the town may install, or have installed by contract
under its supervision, such extensions, which shall be financed in accordance
with §§
51.040 through
51.048.
      (2)   Prior to the beginning of any construction. Prior to the beginning
of any construction, the property owner shall advance to the town an amount
equal to 100% of the total estimated cost of the proposed extensions. Upon
receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered into by and between
the town and the property owner, under which the town will use funds upon the
following terms and conditions:
         (a)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the town
for which a separate accounting will be made;
         (b)   At the time construction of the extension is completed and the
total cost thereof is determined; if the amount deposited exceeds the total
cost, that portion in excess of the amount deposited will be refunded to the
owner without interest; if the amount deposited is less than the total cost,
the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town, and this condition
shall be part of the written contract;
         (c)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may provide a surety bond
acceptable to the town or some other form of security that will insure payment
to the town of the owner’s proportionate share of the cost of extensions in
accordance with §§
51.040 through
51.048;
         (d)   No refund or reimbursement of funds shall be made to the owner,
who pays the total cost of extension under the requirements of this division
(C)(2)(d), except as provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this section; and
         (e)   All administration, legal and engineering costs involved in the
town’s accomplishment of such extensions shall be considered a part of the
total cost and shall be included in all estimates and accountings under §§
51.040 through
51.048.
      (3)   Financing. The town will finance, from funds appropriated for this
purpose, the town for overall system benefits and for construction requires
only such additional portions of such extensions as. Such additional costs
shall be for air relief valves, increase in size of mains over six inches,
special cross connections to existing facilities and special connections made
for the town’s purposes.
      (4)   Other conditions. When a subdivision or developer requests water
service and conditions in division (A) or (B) of this section do not apply, or
if an unusually large amount of construction is required, the conditions of
payment shall be determined through negotiations and established in a contract
between the property owner and town.
   (D)   Facilities excluded in determining owner’s share of cost.
      (1)   When the town determines that it is advisable to install larger
facilities than are necessary to serve the property requesting such extension,
as set out above, the difference in the cost of the larger facility over the
cost of the facilities required to serve the property requesting such extension
shall be paid for by the town excluded from the total cost to be shared by the
property owner and the town as provided herein. All mains up to six inches in
size shall be considered as being required to serve the property requesting
extensions.
      (2)   Fire hydrants, pumping facilities, storage tanks and other
facilities installed for general public use shall be paid for by the town and
excluded from the total cost to be shared by the property owners and the town,
as provided herein.
   (F)   Exceptions authorized. Nothing in §§
51.040 through
51.048 shall prevent the Town Council from extending water service within the
corporate limits on their motion without receipt of an application for property
owners, or from accessing the cost of such extensions in accordance with
division (A) of this section when, in the opinion of the Town Council, the
general public interest demands such extension of service.
(Prior Code, § 51.037) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.042 FINANCING OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   All applications for water extensions outside the corporate limits
shall be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as provided in
the above sections.
   (B)   If an application is approved by the Town Council, the owner shall be
required to pay the entire cost of all extensions; provided that the town may
participate, to the extent agreed upon by the Town Council, in the cost mains
which are in excess of the size required to serve the project. No reimbursement
shall be made upon annexation, and all water lines connected to the town system
and located outside the corporate limits shall become the property of the town
at the time such facilities are connected.
   (C)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the owner shall deposit
with the town an amount equal to the total estimated cost of such extension.
Upon receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered into by and
between the town and the property owner in accordance with the requirements of
§§
51.040 through
51.048. Such contract shall provide that in the event the amount of the total
funds exceeds the amount of the total extension cost when completed, that
portion in excess of the total cost shall be refunded to the owner without
interest. Such contract shall also provide that if the amount deposited is less
than the total cost, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town.
   (D)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may execute surety bonds
guaranteeing payment for such extensions, which is acceptable to the town, or
the owner may have such extension work performed under private contract with
the approval of the Town Council; provided, that the work is to be performed in
accordance with all construction requirements of the town and subject to
inspection and approval by the town and its agents.
   (E)   If the property for which application has been made for water service
is contiguous to the corporate limits, and the owner(s) of such property
petitions the town for annexation, applicants requesting annexation shall pay
for and extend all town utilities to the properties proposed for annexation
prior to annexation. The utilities shall meet the requirements of the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.038) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.043 SPECIFICATION; OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Any water mains extended under the provisions of §§
51.040 through
51.048 shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the approved
plans, specifications and other requirements of the town. All facilities
installed under the provisions of §§
51.040 through
51.048, whether within or without the corporate limits, shall become the sole
property of the town and be under its jurisdiction and control for all purposes
at the time such facilities are connected to the town system.
   (B)   When required, the property owner shall grant to the town such utility
easements as the town may require. In addition, a deed to the town for water
facilities installed outside the corporate limits, the cost of which is borne
by individual property owners, shall be executed prior to the time any
extensions provided for in §§
51.040 through
51.048 are connected to the town system.
(Prior Code, § 51.039) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.044 ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council may, at its discretion, require as a condition under
which water service will be extended, that the owner of a proposed subdivision
enter into an agreement to improve the proposed streets therein at his or her
own expense and in accordance with the ordinances then in force governing the
acceptance of public streets for the town.
   (B)   If required, this section shall apply to subdivisions, which are
located either within or without the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 51.040) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.045 PROVISION OF SEWER SERVICE.
   (A) Area outside the corporate limits.
      (1)   With adequate public sewer existing. Upon receipt of a request for
sewer service and payment of all fees and charges, the town may construct a
sewer connection to serve the property. The property owner shall pay the then
existing connection fee and capital investment fee prior to receiving a tap.
      (2)   Public sewer not existing.
         (a)   Upon receipt of a request for sewer service, the town may
approve the request and authorize construction of a line to serve the property.
When a public sewer is constructed, it shall extend across the entire frontage
of the property to be served.
         (b)   The party requesting service shall pay the entire cost of
construction, including materials, labor, equipment and necessary lift
stations.
         (c)   If the town determines that sufficient advantages exist, it may
choose to bear the cost of constructing a public sewer from the nearest
adequately sized public sewer to the property to be served.
         (d)   Each property requesting service and abutting a public sewer
constructed according to division (A)(2)(b) or (A)(2)(c) of this section shall
comply with division (A)(1) of this section.
         (e)   Sewer service from the municipal sewer system shall be supplied
to owner/customers outside the corporate limits only through meter service, and
the minimum charge to any owner/customer shall be double the rate or charge
prescribed for meter service inside such corporate limits, unless otherwise
provided by the Town Council.
         (f)   Connections to the town’s sewer system by property owners
outside the corporate limits may require the installation of a service
connection line of a length greater than 60 feet in order to reach the property
line of the applicant. In all such cases, the property owner applying for
connection shall be responsible for either full payment of all costs incurred
by the town to make the connection, or the standard tap fee, whichever is
greater.
         (g)   Prior to making the connection, the owner shall deposit with the
town an amount equal to the total estimated cost of such connection. Upon
receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered into by and between
the town and the property owner in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. Such contract shall provide that in the event the amount of the total
funds deposited exceeds the amount of the total connection cost when completed,
that portion in excess of the total cost shall be refunded to the owner without
interest. Such contract shall provide that if the amount deposited is less than
the total cost, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town.
      (3)   Charges after annexation into the town. After annexation into the
town, property, which abuts an existing public property owner shall advance to
the town an amount equal to 100% of the total estimated cost of the proposed
extensions. Upon receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered
into by and between the town and the property owner, under which the town will
use funds upon the following terms and conditions.
         (a)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the town
for which a separate accounting will be made.
         (b)   At the time construction of the extension is completed and the
total cost thereof is determined; if the amount deposited exceeds the total
cost, that portion in excess of the amount deposited will be refunded to the
owner without interest; if the amount deposited is less than the total cost,
the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town, and this condition
shall be part of the written contract.
         (c)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may provide a surety bond
acceptable to the town or some other will insure payment to the town of the
owner’s proportionate share of the cost of extensions in accordance with §§
51.040 through
51.048.
         (d)   No refund or reimbursement of funds shall be made to the owner,
who pays the total cost of extension under the requirements of this division
(A)(3)(d), except as provided in division (A)(3)(b) of this section.
         (e)   All administration, legal and engineering costs involved in the
town’s accomplishment of such extensions shall be considered a part of the
total cost and shall be included in all estimates and accountings under §§
51.040 through
51.048.
      (4)   Finance. The town will finance, from funds appropriated for this
purpose; the town for overall system benefits for construction requires only
such additional portions of such extensions as. Such additional costs shall be
for air relief valves, increase size of mains, special cross connections to
existing facilities and special connections made for the town’s purposes.
      (5)   Other conditions. When a subdivision or developer requests sewer
service and conditions in division (A) or (B) of this section do not apply, of
if an unusually large amount of construction is required, the conditions of
payment shall be determined through negotiations and established in a contract
between the property owner and the town.
   (B)   Facilities excluded in determining owner’s share of cost.
      (1)   When the town determines that it is advisable to install larger
facilities than are necessary to serve the property requesting such extension,
as set out above, the difference in the cost of the larger facility over the
cost of facilities required to serve the property requesting such extension
shall be paid for by the town and excluded from the total cost to be shared by
the property owner and the town as provided herein. All mains up to six inches
in size shall be considered as being required to serve the property requesting
such extensions.
      (2)   Pumping facilities and special facilities installed for general
public use shall be paid for by the town and excluded from the total cost to be
shared by the property owners and the town, as provided herein.
   (C)   Exceptions authorized. Nothing in §§
51.040 through
51.048 shall prevent the Town Council from extending sewer service within the
corporate limits on their own motion without receipt of an application for
property owners, or from accessing the cost of such extensions in accordance
with division (A) of this section when, the opinion of the Town Council, the
general public interest demands such extension of service.
(Prior Code, § 51.041) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.046 FINANCING OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   All applications for sewer service outside the corporate limits shall
be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as provided for in
the above sections.
   (B)   If an application is approved by the Town Council, the owner shall be
required to pay the entire cost of all extensions; provided that the town may
participate, to the extent agreed upon by the Town Council, in the cost mains
which are in excess of the size required to serve the project. No reimbursement
shall be made upon annexation, and all sewer lines connected to the town system
and located outside the corporate limits shall become the property of the town
at the time such facilities are connected.
   (C)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the owner shall deposit
with the town an amount equal to the total estimated cost of such extensions.
Upon receipt of such funds, a written contract shall be entered into by and
between the town and property owner in accordance with the requirements of §§
51.040 through
51.048. Such contract shall provide that in the event the amount of the total
funds deposited exceeds the amount of the total extension cost when completed,
that portion in excess of the total cost shall be refunded to the owner without
interest. Such contract shall also provide that if the amount deposited is less
than the total cost, the owner shall pay such additional amount to the town.
   (D)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner may execute surety bonds
guaranteeing payment for such extensions, which is acceptable to the town, or
the owner may have such extensions work performed under private contract with
the approval of the Town Council; provided, that the work is to be preformed in
accordance with all construction requirements of the town and subject to
inspection and approval by the town and its agents.
   (E)   If the property for which application has been made for sewer service
is contiguous to the corporate limits, and the owner(s) of such property
petitions the town for annexation, applicants requesting annexation shall pay
for and extend all municipal utilities to the properties proposed for
annexation prior to annexation. The utilities shall meet the requirements of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.042) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.047 SPECIFICATIONS; OWNERSHIP.
   Any sewer mains extended under the provisions of §§
51.040 through
51.048 shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the approved
plans, specifications and other requirements of the town. All facilities
installed under the provisions without the corporate limits shall become the
sole property of the town and be under its jurisdiction and control for all
purposes at the time such facilities are connected to the town system. When
required, the property owner shall grant to the town such utility easements as
the town may require. In addition, a deed to the town for sewer facilities
installed outside the corporate limits, the cost of which is borne by
individual property owners, shall be executed prior to the time any extensions
provided for in §§
51.040 through
51.048 are connected to the town system.
(Prior Code, § 51.043) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.048 ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Council may, at its discretion, require as a condition under which sewer
service will be extended, that the owner of a proposed subdivision enter into
an agreement to improve the proposed streets therein at his or her own expense
and in accordance with the ordinances then in force governing the acceptance of
public streets for the town. If required, this section shall apply to
subdivisions, which are located either within or without the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 51.044) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
DIVISION 3: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS - WATER
§ 51.060 ALTERATIONS AFFECTING QUANTITY OF SUPPLY; UNAUTHORIZED TURNING OF CURB
COCKS.
   No person other than an employee or designated individual of the town water
sewerage department or a licensed plumber shall alter or extend any service
pipe or any cock or fixture connected therewith so as to increase the quantity
of water used through such pipe or place any additional fixture thereon
designed to increase or capable of increasing the quantity of water used
through such service pipe, without a permit therefor in each case. No persons,
except such as are specially authorized so to do in this chapter, shall turn
off or turn on the water at any curb cock.
(Prior Code, § 51.055) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.061 INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPLY PIPES AND CURB COCKS BY PLUMBERS.
   No person shall tap, repair or in any way interfere with water supply pipes
or curb cocks; except, that licensed plumbers may use the cock for testing
their work, in which case the curb cock shall be left in the same condition and
position as found.
(Prior Code, § 51.056) (Ord. passed 1-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.062 OPENING OR CLOSING OF CURB COCKS GENERALLY.
   Except in the case of plumbers when testing their work in the case of the
Building Inspector when in the discharge of his or her duties, curb cocks shall
under no circumstances be opened or closed by any person not an authorized
employee of a designated individual of the Department of Public Works. When new
water service pipes are installed on any premises, the curb cocks shall be left
closed and will thereafter be opened by the Department only upon request of the
owner, which request must be in writing if the Department so requires. The
holder of the permit to use water for building purposes or other such work or
the agents of such permit holder, shall not open, close or otherwise interfere
with the curb cocks.
(Prior Code, § 51.057) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.063 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SERVICE PIPE; SEPARATE CONSUMERS ON SAME PREMISES.
   No service pipe supplying water at fixture rates shall be used to furnish
water in any manner to any premises or for any purpose which such service pipe
was not designed or approved by the Department of Public Works to supply. In
case of a violation of this rule, the Director of Public Works or the
designated individual of the town may turn off the water from such service
pipe.
(Prior Code, § 51.058) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.064 SUPPLY AND SERVICE PIPES TO BE APPROVED BY TOWN; INTERPROPERTY
CONNECTIONS.
   Water from the system shall be taken and used only through supply and
service pipes established by or laid under the supervision or approval of the
town. No connection by which water may pass from one property to another shall
exist, even when the ownership of both such properties is the same.
(Prior Code, § 51.059) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.065 STREET OR YARD SPRINKLERS.
   Street or yard sprinklers shall not be converted into hydrants, jets or
fountains or be allowed to run wastefully. Such sprinklers must be kept closed
except when used for sprinkling.
(Prior Code, § 51.060) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.066 EXCESSIVE OR WASTEFUL USE GENERALLY.
   Excessive or unnecessary use or waste of water, whether caused by
carelessness or by defective or leaky plumbing or fixtures, is strictly
forbidden, even where the service is metered. For disregard or repeated
violations of this requirement, the Department of Public Works may turn off the
water.
(Prior Code, § 51.061) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.067 USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants are to be opened and used only by Fire Department or employees
of the town, or by such persons as may be specially authorized by the
Department of Public Works or by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.062) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.068 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR PERMITTING UNLAWFUL USES.
   The service of any water user who, having the right to use from the
municipal system, shall permit others to use his or her fixtures for purposes
not set forth in his or her contract will be discontinued at once.
(Prior Code, § 51.063) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
DIVISION 4: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS - SEWER
§ 51.080 INTENT OF REGULATION OF SEWER USE.
   (A)   It is intended that §§
51.080 through
51.100 include provisions for prohibiting the discharge by any wastewater
customer into a public sanitary sewer of substances which may endanger the
public health and safety; or of unpolluted waters which do not require
treatment and therefore reduce the effectiveness of the biological operations
of treatment facility.
   (B)   (1)   It is further understood that the biological and chemical
operations, which can be designed for wastewater treatment, do, by their
scientific nature, limit the types of constituents in wastewater which may be
treated by facilities, constructed and maintained within a reasonable cost to
the public. Consequently, the treatment facilities are designed for the primary
purpose of treating domestic wastewater in sufficient manner to protect public
health.
      (2)   Certain industrial wastewater constituents can be treated without
interference at the wastewater facilities, but only in limited quantity or
concentration.
      (3)   To ensure that discharges of industrial wastewater into the public
sanitary sewer are within such quantity and concentration limits, reasonable
and adequate regulations are provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.075) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.081 APPLICABILITY OF SEWER USE PROVISIONS.
   All public sanitary sewer users shall comply with all applicable provisions
of this subchapter, as amended, and shall further comply with applicable
federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations, including EPA/DEM
pretreatment standards, which are at the time, in effect. In the event of a
conflict, the more stringent requirement or higher standard shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 51.076) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.082 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as preventing
special agreement or special arrangement between the town and any customer or
potential customer whereby an industrial waste of strength or character in
excess of that defined as standard strength may be accepted by the town for
treatment, subject to payment by the customer pursuant to the industrial waste
treatment surcharge provisions of this subchapter. However, no special
agreement may be established except by authority of the Town Council, upon
recommendation of the Town Manager, and in no event shall any such agreement be
entered into that would be indirect violation of any EPA/DEM pretreatment
standard. All special agreements for treatment of wastewater shall be approved
by the Town Manager. Such approval or disapproval shall be accomplished in a
timely manner not to exceed 30 days after receipt of the completed application.
(Prior Code, § 51.077) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.083 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or discharge or to permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town, any human or animal excrement, solid waste or other materials which are
or may become hazardous, toxic or injurious to public health or safety.
(Prior Code, § 51.078) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.084 DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with requirement of EPA/DEM.
(Prior Code, § 51.079) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.085 PROHIBITION OF SEPTIC TANKS, PRIVIES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   From and after November 1, 1973, the construction or use of any
facility other than the public sanitary sewer for treatment and/or disposal of
wastewater inside the town limits shall be prohibited, except when the facility
is constructed and/or used under a condition set forth below.
      (1)   The construction and use of a septic tank, or similar facility as
determined by the Director or the designated individual of the town, may be
permitted when it shall have been determined that a premises cannot, at the
time the facility is considered, be connected to a public sanitary sewer, and
that there is reasonable expectation that a septic tank can function
effectively.
      (2)   Any septic tank installed prior to and operating on November 1,
1973 may continue in operation until such time as the sanitary facilities on
the premises shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer pursuant to this
subchapter. No tank shall be allowed once the public sanitary sewer and
treatment facility is completely operational.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, repair, reconstruct
or rebuild any septic tank or septic privy within the town limits unless such
act is permitted under the provisions of this section. Any person convicted of
a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished
pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
   (C)   (1)   Except for those existing and presently operating septic tanks
unable to connect to the sanitary sewer because of location and grade, and as
determined by the Director of Public Works or the agent of the town, the
Director or the agent is authorized to discontinue water service to any
premises using a septic tank.
      (2)   Notice of disconnection shall be given to the owner/customer at the
address upon the billing for water service at least ten days prior to
disconnection by first class mail and posting at the property.
      (3)   The Town Manager is authorized to grant reasonable extension of
time for restored water service and connection to the sanitary sewer on a
demonstration of hardship and undue burden not to exceed 60 days from the date
of the original notice to the owner/customer.
(Prior Code, § 51.080) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.086 BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED.
   (A)   When a owner of a property inside the town limits shall use such
property in any manner which results in the generation of wastewater, and
pursuant to this subchapter such wastewater shall be discharged into a public
sanitary sewer, the owner shall install at his or her expense a suitable
building sewer and other facilities necessary to connect the building sewer
directly to the public sewer at an access point provided by the town.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a building sewer connected to the public sanitary sewer
becomes clogged, broken, out of order or detrimental to the use of the public
sewer, the owner having charge of any building or premises through which the
building sewer collects wastewater, shall, upon notification by the Director,
reconstruct, alter, clean or repair the building sewer as the condition of such
may require within ten days after receiving notification.
      (2)   Failure to correct the facilities of the building sewer as required
should result in termination of water services to the premises, and any other
action deemed necessary to protect public health and safety.
(Prior Code, § 51.081) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.087 BUILDING SEWER CONNECTIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation of facilities to
connect the privately owned building sewer to the public sanitary sewer system
shall be borne by the owner through a connection/tap fee levied by the town.
   (B)   The owner shall pay such fees upon application for connection. Prior
to the required installation of the sewer connection by the town, all
connection/tap fees shall be paid at the time of receiving building permits.
Sewer services connection fees shall be set forth in the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 51.082) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.088 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building or unit; an exception may be granted where one building stands at the
rear of another on an interior lot and it is not economically feasible for the
town to construct a public sewer and access point to the rear of the building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard, driveway or other access. In such
event, the building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer. However, if separate water meters service
each building or unit, separate wastewater service fees shall be charged to
each building or unit.
(Prior Code, § 51.083) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.089 METHOD OF SEWER CONNECTION.
   (A)   All connections to the town sanitary sewer system shall be made in
accordance with provisions and requirements of the Plumbing Code. All such
connections shall be made at access points prescribed and provided by the town.
The applicant is responsible for constructing the building sewer in a manner
necessary to ensure connection at the access point.
   (B)   (1)   If, at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this
subchapter derives, any connection exists between a building sewer and a public
sanitary sewer at a point other than the access point prescribed and provided
by the town, the town may serve notice upon the owner immediately upon
discovery.
      (2)   The owner shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter,
and if service is disconnected, the owner may receive access to a public
sanitary sewer only by applying for and paying a connection fee.
(Prior Code, § 51.084) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.090 ELEVATION OF SEWER CONNECTION.
   All building sewers shall be brought to the building at an elevation below
the lowest floor level having sanitary facilities. In all buildings in which
any building drain is below a point, which will permit a minimum average slope
of the building, the State Plumbing Code will apply.
(Prior Code, § 51.085) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.091 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   No connections that will allow inflow to enter the town’s wastewater
collection and treatment system shall be permitted. The prohibited connections
shall include, but not limited to, the connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains or other sources of stormwater or groundwater to a building
sewer which is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Prior Code, § 51.086) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.092 PUBLIC HAZARD.
   All excavations for building sewer installation within the public right-of-
way shall be performed by public works personnel or under permit issued by the
Director of Public Works/agent of the town, and shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, plazas and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town subject to the terms and
conditions of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 51.087) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.093 GREASE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Grease and oil traps or other interceptors shall be provided at the
user’s expense, when such user operates an establishment preparing, processing
or serving food and/or food products. Grease interceptors may also be required
in other industrial or commercial establishments when they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing oil and/or grease in amounts in
excess of 75 mg/l, or for any flammable wastes.
   (B)   All such traps, tanks, chambers or other interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Director/agent and shall be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (C)   All such interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of waste content
as required, but not less often than every 30 days, in order to maintain their
minimum design capability to intercept oils and greases from the wastewater
discharged to the public sanitary sewer. Wastes removed from grease
interceptors shall not be discharged into the public sanitary sewer. The owner
shall be responsible for the sanitary disposal of such wastes.
(Prior Code, § 51.088) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.094 SAND AND GRIT REMOVAL.
   (A)   (1)   Sand and grit traps or other interceptors shall be provided at
the owner’s expense when they are necessary for the proper handling and control
of liquid wastes containing sand and grit in excessive amounts.
      (2)   All such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Director/agent and shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All such interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of their solid
contents as required, but not less often than every 30 days, in order to
maintain their minimum design capability to intercept grit and sand prior to
the discharge of wastewater’s to the public sanitary sewer. Failure to comply
may result in the implementation of legal enforcement procedures.
   (B)   Wastes removed from sand and grit interceptors shall not be discharged
into the public sanitary sewer. The owner shall be responsible for the sanitary
disposal of such wastes.
(Prior Code, § 51.089) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.095 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT DEVICES.
   Where preliminary treatment, pretreatment, flow-equalizing facilities or
grease, oil, grit and sand traps or other interceptors are provided for any
wastewater, they shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory condition and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 51.090) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.096 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   (1)   The Director and other duly authorized agents or employees of
the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties, privately and publicly owned, for the purposes of meter
reading, inspection, observation, measurement, gauging, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   The Director or his or her representative shall have no authority
to inquire into any processes including those of the metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the volume, nature and source of discharges to the town’s
wastewater collection system and/or storm sewers or other natural outlets.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
above, the Director or duly authorized employees and agents of the town shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner.
   (C)   The property owner shall not be released from liability to any extent
in the event that a town agent or employee is injured while making inspections
which are pursuant as a result of negligence on the part of the private
property owner or any of his or her agents or employees.
(Prior Code, § 51.091) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.097 SEWER SERVICE CONNECTION FEES.
   Sewer service connection fees shall be charged pursuant to the fee schedule
to cover the cost of providing an access point to the public sewer for the
applicant. Such fees shall be as specified in the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 51.092) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.098 BASIC USER CHARGES.
   Sanitary sewer service rates shall be as established in the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 51.093) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.099 EXTRA STRENGTH WASTEWATER SURCHARGES.
   (A)   Standard strength wastewater shall be defined as that wastewater
having a maximum BOD5, COD and suspended solids concentration as follows:
 
BOD5             250 mg/l
COD              750 mg/l
Suspended solids 200 mg/l
 
   (B)   Industrial wastewater surcharges shall be assessed to any industrial
users discharging wastewater, including constituents, at a concentration
exceeding any of the limits established in this section. Surcharge rates shall
be set forth in the fee schedule and in consultation with the Director of
Public Works or the town’s agent.
(Prior Code, § 51.094) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.100 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   A government agency having jurisdiction informs the town that the
effluent from the publicly owned wastewater treatment facility is no longer of
a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the
customer is delivering wastewater to the wastewater system that cannot be
sufficiently treated or that requires treatment that is not provided by the
town.
   (B)   The customer commits any of the following violations:
      (1)   Discharges industrial wastewater of quality or quantity that is in
violation of the waste discharge permit; commits any action prohibited by such
permit or provision of this subchapter; or fails to comply with any required
provision of such permit or provision of this subchapter;
      (2)   Discharges waters or wastes having a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater system;
      (3)   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater system and/or the
wastewater treatment process;
      (4)   Fails to pay user charges or other fees for wastewater services
when due;
      (5)   Discharges prohibited wastes to the public sanitary sewer;
      (6)   Makes a connection of building sewer to a public sewer at a point
other than the publicly provided access point;
      (7)   Discharges inflow, or uncontaminated cooling water or process water
into the public sanitary sewer;
      (8)   Fails to properly clean and dispose of wastes collected in grease
or grit interceptors;
      (9)   Discharges industrial wastewater under provisions of a waste
discharge permit issued to a person other than the customer discharging the
wastewater;
      (10)   Fails to renew expired waste discharge permit;
      (11)   Fails to meet compliance schedule established upon mutual
agreement of the customer and the town; or
      (12)   Otherwise violates the provisions of this article or fails or
omits to perform in such a manner as to constitute good cause for disconnection
contrary to the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.095) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
DIVISION 5: INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT
§ 51.115 GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who owns or operates a facility producing or proposed
to produce wastewater of any quantity, strength or other quality which would
not, or may not, meet the conditions and limitations set forth in this
subchapter, and who is connected to, or desires to make connection to the
public sanitary sewer, shall make application to the town for a waste discharge
permit authorizing continued discharge, or an industrial connection for
discharging, of the described attendant wastewater.
      (2)   No industrial waste, pretreated waste or any waste other than
normal wastewater shall be permitted to connect to the town’s sanitary sewer
system without the prior approval of the town.
   (B)   The Building Inspector will not issue a building permit or certificate
of compliance for any structure for an industrial user until the applicant
presents to him or her a certified copy of a completed and approved industrial
sewer connection and waste discharge application.
(Prior Code, § 51.105) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.116 REQUIRED.
   All persons whose plants, buildings or premises are connected to the public
sanitary sewer from and after November, 1973, who may be subject to the
provisions herein, and who have not heretofore obtained an industrial waste
discharge permit shall have 30 calendar days after notification within which to
make application to the town for a permit as required.
(Prior Code, § 51.106) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.117 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Users seeking a waste discharge permit shall complete and file with
the Director or the town’s agent an application on a form prescribed by the
Town Manager, accompanied by the applicable fees.
   (B)   The town may further require that the application include any
additional information deemed necessary by the town in order to determine if
pretreatment will be required to meet the conditions and limitations of this
subchapter, or to meet EPA/DEM pretreatment standards.
   (C)   The town may further require any information, which is required by
EPA/DEM.
(Prior Code, § 51.107) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.118 PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The town will determine through review of the industrial discharge
permit application and in cooperation with the applicant whether the waste
produced shall be pretreated by the applicant before it is discharged into the
town sewer. When appropriate, at facilities already in operation, sampling of
wastes to determine characteristics may be performed by the town at the
applicant’s cost. The town shall advise the applicant of the level of
pretreatment required and of a compliance schedule. If the town determines that
such wastes must be pretreated, the applicant shall submit to the town for
approval, plans and specifications of the pretreatment facilities.
   (B)   If such plans and specifications are approved as submitted, or amended
by the town, the applicant shall proceed according to an agreed schedule to
provide such pretreatment facilities.
   (C)   The construction plans for such pretreatment plants or facilities
shall be placed on file in permanent reproducible form with the town without
cost to the town.
   (D)   If the pretreatment facilities are completed according to the approved
plans and specifications, and the applicant demonstrates its effective use and
provides a proper sewer connections and industrial waste discharge application,
the town shall issue the applicant a waste discharge permit. The permit shall
authorize such connection and permit the applicant to discharge such waste into
the public sewer at the rate and in the quantity and/or connection stated
herein. The owner at his or her expense shall maintain these pretreatment
facilities continuously in satisfactory and effective operation.
   (E)   (1)   The conditions and limits in this subchapter shall be used as
pretreatment plant design criteria and shall be applied to the maximum
estimated rate of flow through the plant. The minimum pretreatment for
industrial or other wastewater, which is consistently within pH limits but
requires pretreatment, shall be to pass wastewater through a grease trap or
other interceptor providing a minimum detention period of ten minutes between
the influent and effluent baffles with 20% of total volume of the grease trap
or interceptor being allowed for a sludge pocket.
      (2)   This sludge pocket shall be serviced as required, but at intervals
of not longer than 30 days at the owner’s expense. It shall be kept free of
inorganic solids which settle into the required sludge pocket, and all grease
or other floating material shall be skimmed from the trap or basin tank at
intervals of a frequency sufficient to avoid accumulation of scum covering the
surface of the liquid, but not less frequently than each 30 days.
   (F)   Upon written notification by the town that a grease interceptor is
required for a given discharge, the user will have a period of 120 days for
compliance. Such compliance consists of the provision to the town of detailed
plans and specifications for approval and the method of installation and
operability of a grease trap or other interceptor device. Failure to comply
will result in the implementation of the enforcement procedures of this
subchapter.
   (G)   There shall be a debris screen included in pretreatment facilities
immediately preceding or following the grease interceptor through which all
industrial waste, excepting flow from toilet and personal sanitary facilities
shall pass. A debris screen may be required as the final feature of a
pretreatment facility with a maximum size opening necessary to protect the
public sewer system.
   (H)   The solid matter removed from any interceptor or that which is
retained by the debris screen shall be disposed of in a lawful manner, without
nuisance, by the owner at his or her expense, but shall in no case be placed in
the town’s wastewater system.
   (I)   Should the wastewater system customer operate a grease trap, an
interceptor or other pretreatment device in which inorganic sludge is collected
and stored, such inorganic sludge shall not be placed in the town’s wastewater
system and all effluent from such pretreatment plant or device must pass
through the required debris screen.
   (J)   If it is determined that an applicant discharges wastewater which does
not require pretreatment, the applicant will be issued a permit permitting the
applicant to discharge wastewater to the public sewer at a publicly provided
access point at a rate, and in the quantities and qualities stated in the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 51.108) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.119 CANCELLATION OF PERMIT.
   If any industrial user is in violation of any condition of his or her waste
discharge permit, or any other provision of this subchapter, and it is
determined pursuant to this subchapter that the user’s service shall be
disconnected, the waste discharge permit shall be cancelled upon the
disconnection. Any industrial user whose permit has been cancelled may receive
a publicly provided access to the public sanitary sewer only after making an
application for a new waste discharge permit.
(Prior Code, § 51.109) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.120 FEES.
   Each waste discharge permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter
shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance.
Permit fees for initial permit issuance, annual permit renewal and restoration
of the permit shall be set forth in the fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 51.110) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.121 OWNERSHIP CHANGES.
   If an industrial user authorized to connect the wastewater system for
industrial waste disposal under the provisions hereof is sold, leased or its
ownership is otherwise changed or the industrial operation thereof is operated
by a person other than that named in the permit, a new application for a waste
discharge permit shall be made by the new owner. No permit issued under the
provisions hereof shall be assignable to any other person.
(Prior Code, § 51.111) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.122 EFFECT OF APPROVALS.
   (A)   (1)   Any approval by the town of a type, kind or capacity of a
pretreatment facility installation shall not relieve a person of the
responsibility of subsequently revamping, enlarging or otherwise modifying such
pretreatment installation to accomplish the original intended purpose or to
meet new or revised standards.
      (2)   Nor shall any written or oral agreement as to limits of waste
constituents or volumes of wastewater be considered as final approval for
continuing operation or otherwise prevent the town from subsequently
withdrawing its approval.
      (3)   These limits will be subject to monitoring, study and change as
considered necessary to serve their intended purpose.
   (B)   (1)   Changes in the characteristics or volumes of wastewater of any
permit holder will constitute a basis for the town’s requiring a new
application for a waste discharge permit.
      (2)   Furthermore, permits issued may be notified as may be necessary due
to changes in pretreatment requirements by EPA/DEM.
(Prior Code, § 51.112) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.123 PROPERTY RIGHTS.
   The issuance of a permit by the town does not convey any property rights in
either real or personal property, or any exclusive privileges, nor does it
authorize any injury to private property or any invasion of personal rights,
not violation of applicable federal, state or local laws, ordinances or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 51.113) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.124 PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   No industrial waste, pretreated waste or any waste other than normal
wastewater shall be permitted to connect to the town’s sanitary sewer system
without the prior approval of the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.114) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
DIVISION 6: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.135 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES GENERALLY.
   No person shall charge to be discharged inflow, groundwater, uncontaminated
cooling water or uncontaminated process water to any public sanitary sewer.
Such water and other unpolluted water may be discharged to a sewer designated
specifically as a storm sewer, or to a natural outlet, provided such discharge
is approved by the local, state or federal jurisdiction having authority.
(Prior Code, § 51.125) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.136 PROHIBITED WASTES AND LIMITATIONS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any point any of
the following described wastewaters to any public sanitary sewers:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a discharge temperature higher than 120°F,
nor any liquid or vapor having heat in such quantities that the temperature at
the treatment plant and influent exceeds 104°F;
   (B)   Any wastewater which contains more than 75 mg/l by weight of oil and/
or grease, or containing any substance that will solidify or become viscous at
temperature between 32°F and 150°F at the point of discharge into the system;
   (C)   Liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances
to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any way to the sewerage
facilities or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the sewer
system, be neither more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Such potentially explosive materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
   (D)   Any wastewater that contains more than two mg/l by weight, of
hydrochloric acid, hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or nitrous oxide;
   (E)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metals, glass, tars,
plastics, wood, rags and other fibrous solids, feathers, offal, whole blood,
paunch contents, manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, lime slurry and lime
residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, fiberglass, paint, paint
thinners, latex, lacquers or ink residues, cannery waste, unshredded bulk
solids with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension; discharges
from photographic laboratories; or any other solid or viscous substance capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with proper
operation of the wastewater collection system and the wastewater treatment
facilities;
   (F)   Any wastewater having a stabilized pH lower than six or higher than
nine or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to sewers which are constructed of vitrified clay, cast iron, ductible iron,
ABS plastic and/or concrete; associated or connected structures; equipment;
and/or personnel of the wastewater collection system, the wastewater treatment
facilities and/or the treatment process;
   (G)   Any wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances in such
concentrations as to constitute a hazard to humans, animals, fish or birds; or
to interfere with any wastewater treatment process; or to create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant;
   (H)   (1)   In no event shall any person exceed the following limits on
toxic or poisonous substances:
Toxic or Poisonous Substance Limit (mg/l)
Toxic or Poisonous Substance Limit (mg/l)
Ammonia                      30.00
Arsenic                      0.05
Barium                       1.00
Cadmium                      0.02
Chlorinated hydro-carbons    0.40
Chromium                     0.50
Chromium                     1.00
Copper                       0.10
Cyanide                      0.10
Fluorides (total)            1.00
Iron                         3.00
Lead                         0.10
Manganese                    1.00
Mercury                      0.005
Methylene chloride           0.50
Nickel                       1.00
Organic nitrogen             15.00
Phosphates (total)           10.00
Selenium                     0.02
Silver                       0.10
Sulfates (total)             100.00
Sulfides (total)             5.00
Surfactants                  8.00
Zinc                         0.50
 
      (2)   The limits fixed herein shall be minimum requirements of all
industrial users but do not relieve the user from limiting concentrations of
these or other elements or chemical substances which may constitute a public
health or safety hazard, or interfere with the public wastewater treatment
process.
   (I)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, singly or by interactions
with other wastes being capable of creating a public health or safety nuisance
or hazard to life or preventing entry into public sanitary sewers for their
maintenance, inspection and repair;
   (J)   Any wastes which are of unusual volume, concentration of solids or
composition that may create obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater works and the proper
treatment of the influent;
   (K)   Wastewater containing substances which are not responsive to treatment
by the wastewater processes employed, or are responsive to treatment to only
such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters;
   (L)   Any wastewater containing more than 1,500 mg/l total solids;
   (M)   Wastewaters at a flow rate or containing such concentrations or
quantities of pollutants, that exceed for any period longer than 15 minutes
more than five times the average 24-hour concentration as defined during normal
operation and that would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of
treatment efficiency;
   (N)   Any wastewater containing phenols or other taste producing substances
in such concentrations as to produce odor or taste in the effluent as to effect
the taste or odor of the receiving water;
   (O)   Any wastewater containing boron or chlorides in such concentrations as
to interfere with any operation of the town’s wastewater treatment facility, or
to cause the wastewater treatment plant to fail to meet requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;
   (P)   Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration that
they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by the appropriate state
or federal agency having control over their use, and which will or may cause
damage or hazards to the sewerage facilities or personnel operating the system;
   (Q)   Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other wastes
with objectionable color, not removable by the treatment process; and
   (R)   Any wastewater containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB=S).
(Prior Code, § 51.126) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.137 BOD LIMIT.
   The admission into the public sewers of any wastewaters having a five-day
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of having 250 mg/l by weight on a 24-
hour composite sample basis, or, for any sample taken at random, having a five-
day biochemical oxygen demand in excess of three times average influent valve
for the affected wastewater treatment facility during the previous calendar
year, will be subject to review by the town. When, in the opinion of the town,
discharge of wastewater into the public sewer system in strength exceeding the
limits stated above may not be treatable at the publicly owned treatment works
according to standards or as required by EPA/DEM, or when such discharge may
interfere with the operation of the treatment works, the user shall, at his or
her own expense, provide and operate pretreatment facilities and pretreat
wastes to be discharged as may be required to meet the limits stated in this
section. When the discharge of wastewater of strength exceeding these limits is
permitted by the town, the user may, in addition to any other remedy, be
assessed surcharge, rates.
(Prior Code, § 51.127) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.138 CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD).
   The admission into the public sewers of any water or waste having a chemical
oxygen demand (COD) in excess of 750 mg/l, by weight, on a 24-hour composite
sample basis or for any grab sample having a chemical oxygen demand in excess
of three times the average influent valve for the affected wastewater treatment
facility during the previous calendar year, will be subject to review by the
town. Discharges exceeding these limits may, in addition to any other remedy,
be assessed surcharge rates. Where necessary, in the opinion of the town,
pretreatment may be required as stated for BOD heretofore.
(Prior Code, § 51.128) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.139 SUSPENDED SOLIDS.
   The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
suspended solids content in excess of 200 mg/l, by weight, on a 24-hour
composite basis or having a suspended solids content for any grab sample
greater than three times the average influent valve recorded at the affected
wastewater treatment facility during the previous calendar year, will be
subject to review by the town. Discharges exceeding these limits may (in
addition to any other remedy) be assessed surcharge rates. Where necessary, in
the opinion of the town, pretreatment may be permitted as stated for BOD
heretofore.
(Prior Code, § 51.129) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.140 FLOW EQUALIZATION.
   (A)   The admission into the public sewers of any wastewater in volumes, or
with constituents, such that the transportation of such wastewater through the
public sewer to the treatment facility will not sufficiently dilute such
wastewater to prevent interference with treatment or to prevent endangerment of
public health and safety at the treatment facility shall be prohibited.
   (B)   (1)   Where necessary, facilities for varying the rate of discharge
may be required as part of the building sewer in order to bring constituents or
volume of flow discharged within the limits previously prescribed or to an
otherwise acceptable level, and/or to hold or equalize flows such that no peak
flow conditions may hamper the operation of any unit of the public sewer or
treatment facility.
      (2)   Such equalization unit shall have a capacity suitable to serve its
intended purpose, and be equipped with acceptable outlet control facilities to
provide flexibility in operation and accommodate changing conditions in the
waste flow. Equalizing facilities shall be provided to prevent flows from
exceeding the following limits:
 
Average Flow Gallons/Day Allowable Ratio of Peak to Average Flow
10,000 to 100,000        3
100,000 to 500,000       2
More than 500,000        1.5
 
(Prior Code, § 51.130) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.141 DELETERIOUS DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any wastewater is discharged, or is proposed to be discharged to
the public sewers, which contains the constituents or processes the
characteristics enumerated in the preceding sections of this subchapter, and
which may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater collection system,
wastewater treatment processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the town may
as a condition to the waste discharge permit:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities, concentrations or rates of
discharges; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of receiving, handling and
treating the wastes not covered by current charges of fees for wastewater
service.
   (B)   If the town permits or requires the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design, installation of the plants and equipment and their
effective operation shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the
town and the state/federal agencies having jurisdiction and shall be subject to
the requirements of all other applicable rules, regulations, ordinances and
laws.
   (C)   In the event a spill or loss into the building sewer of any
deleterious materials is threatened or occurs, the owner shall promptly notify
the town of the nature of the spill or threatened spill, the quantity, and if
it has occurred, the time of the spill. The cause of spills and losses of
deleterious materials shall be corrected, and the costs of such correction,
together with all resulting damages, shall be borne by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 51.131) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.142 WATER QUALITY CHANGES.
   (A)   (1)   The town shall, from time to time, have tests made to determine
the quality of waste being discharged into the public sewer from individual
users of the wastewater system or from connections of building sewers carrying
composite waste from domestic users and/or industrial users and from
connections including the premises of industrial waste discharge permit holders
under the provisions hereof.
      (2)   If, at any time, such waste becomes of such quality and/or
quantity, that requires pretreatment, then the town shall have the authority to
require that proper permits be obtained and proper pretreatment facilities be
installed by the permit holder at his or her expense.
   (B)   In the event of a significant change in a wastewater system user’s
wastes being discharged to the public sanitary sewer, the user shall promptly
notify the town of the nature of the change in quality or strength and in
volume. These changes shall be subject to verification by the town. The town
may require appropriate remedies for the adequate treatment of such wastes thus
tested. SIGNIFICANT is defined here to mean a change of 10% or more in strength
and/or volume of wastes, based on the average flow.
(Prior Code, § 51.132) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.143 STANDARDS OF WASTE DISCHARGE AND DELIVERY.
   The delivery of all effluent from a user to the public sanitary sewer shall
be at a reasonable and uniform discharge rate, as produced without storage
except that which is necessary in the pretreatment or equalization facilities
of the waste producer. Wastes will be accepted which have satisfactory
conditions or quality after pretreatment by the industrial user in a
pretreatment facility and/or by a process which has been approved by the town,
and which is continuously maintained and operated by the producer at no cost to
the town and which is continuously subject to inspection by the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.133) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.144 SEPTIC TANK AND PORTABLE TOILET WASTES.
   From and after November 1, 1973, discharge of septic tanks waste into the
public sanitary sewer system by any means shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 51.134) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
DIVISION 7: CROSS CONNECTIONS
§ 51.155 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   The purpose of this cross connection control subchapter is to define
the authority of the town as the water purveyor in the elimination of all cross
connections within its public potable water supply.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply to all users connected to the town’s
public potable water supply regardless of whether the user is located within
the town limits or outside of the town limits. This subchapter will comply with
the federal, state and local laws and regulations as they pertain to cross
connections within the public water supply.
(Prior Code, § 51.135) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.156 OBJECTIVES.
   The specific objectives of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the town against actual
or potential contamination by isolating, within the consumer’s water system,
contaminants or pollutants which could, under adverse conditions, backflow
through uncontrolled cross connections into the public water system;
   (B)   To eliminate or control existing cross connections, actual or
potential, between the consumers’s potable water system(s) and non-potable or
industrial piping system (s); and
   (C)   To provide a continuing inspection program of cross connection control
which will systematically and effectively control all actual or potential cross
connections that may be installed in the future.
(Prior Code, § 51.136) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.157 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Responsibility: North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and
Natural Resources.
      (1)   The North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural
Resources has the responsibility for promulgating and enforcing laws, rules,
regulations and policies to be followed in carrying out an effective cross
connection control program.
      (2)   The NCDENR also has the primary responsibility of ensuring that the
water purveyor operates the public potable water system free of actual or
potential sanitary hazards, including unprotected cross connections. They have
the further responsibility of ensuring that the water purveyor provides an
approved water supply at the service connection to the consumer’s water system
and, further, that he or she requires the installation, testing and maintenance
of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service connection when
required.
   (B)   Responsibility: water purveyor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the water purveyor’s
responsibility to provide a safe water supply begins at the source and includes
all of the public water distribution system, including the service connection,
and ends at the point of delivery to the consumer’s water system(s).
      (2)   When it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is
required for the protection of the public system, the town shall require the
consumer, at the consumer’s expense, to install an approved backflow prevention
assembly at each service connection, to test it immediately upon installation
and thereafter at a frequency of one time each year, to properly repair and
maintain such assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate records of each test
and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials and/or replacement
parts.
   (C)   Responsibility: plumbing inspections. The inspection department of the
town has the responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect
plumbing as it is installed; but, has the explicit responsibility of preventing
cross connections from being built into the plumbing system within its
jurisdiction. Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the
potential for cross connections being made an integral part of the plumbing
system, the plumbing inspector has the responsibility, under the North Carolina
Building Code, for requiring that such cross connections be either eliminated
or provided with backflow prevention equipment.
   (D)   Responsibility: consumer. The consumer has the primary responsibility
of preventing pollutants and contaminants from entering his or her potable
water system(s) or the public potable water system. The consumer’s
responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the public potable water
system and includes all of his or her water system(s). The consumer, at his or
her own expense, shall install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow
prevention assemblies as directed by the town. The consumer shall maintain
accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies
and shall maintain such records for a minimum period of three years. The
records shall be on forms approved by the town and shall include the list of
materials or replacement parts used. Following any repair, overhaul, re-piping
or relocation of an assembly, the consumer shall have it tested to ensure that
it is in good operating condition and will prevent backflow. The consumer will
be responsible notifying the town of any and all repairs or replacements to the
existing backflow assembly, as well as testing information.
   (E)   Responsibility: certified backflow prevention assembly tester. When
employed by the consumer to test, repair and overhaul or maintain backflow
prevention assemblies, a backflow prevention assembly tester will have the
following responsibilities.
      (1)   (a)   The tester will be responsible for making competent
inspections and for repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies and
making reports of such repair to the consumer and responsible authorities on
forms approved by the town. The tester shall include the list of materials or
replacement parts used. It will be the tester’s responsibility to ensure that
original manufactured parts are used in the repair of or replacement of parts
in a backflow prevention assembly. It will be the tester’s further
responsibility not to change the design, material or operational
characteristics of an assembly during repair or maintenance.
         (b)   A certified tester shall perform the work and be responsible for
the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports. A certified tester shall
provide a copy of all test and repair reports to the consumer and to the town
within ten business days of any completed test or repair work. A certified
tester shall maintain such records for a minimum period of three years.
      (2)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and
employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment that has been evaluated and/
or approved by the town.
      (3)   All test equipment shall be registered with the town. All test
equipment shall be checked for accuracy annually (at a minimum), calibrated and
certification of the accuracy supplied to the town.
      (4)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must maintain
their certification through continuing education hours each year.
(Prior Code, § 51.137) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.158 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AIR-GAP SEPARATION. Physical separation between the free flowing
discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure
receiving vessel. An APPROVED AIR-GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the
receiving vessel but in no case less than one inch (2.54 cm).
      APPROVED.
         (a)   As herein used in reference to a water supply shall mean a water
supply that has been approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment,
Health and Natural Resources.
         (b)   APPROVED is herein used in reference to air-gap separation, a
pressure vacuum breaker, a double check valve assembly, a double check detector
assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, a reduced
pressure principle detector assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or
methods used.
      BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water
and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the
consumer or public potable water system from any source or sources.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY-APPROVED.
         (a)   An assembly used for containment and/or isolation purposes that
has been tested and approved by the town and has been shown to meet the design
and performance standards of the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE),
the American Water Works Association (AWA) or the Foundation for Cross
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California.
         (b)   The approval of backflow prevention assemblies by the town or
its contractor(s) is based on approval by the Foundation for Cross Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California,
recommending such an approval.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER-CERTIFIED. A person who has proven
their competency to the satisfaction of the town. Each person who is certified
to make competent tests, or to repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow
prevention assemblies shall be knowledgeable of applicable laws, rules and
regulations, and must hold a certificate of completion from an approved
training program in the testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TYPE. An assembly used to prevent backflow
into a consumer or public potable water system. The type of assembly used
should be based on the degree of hazard either existing or potential (as
defined herein). The types are:
         (a)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA);
         (b)   Double check detector assembly (fire system) (DCDA);
         (c)   Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB);
         (d)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP); and
         (e)   Reduced pressure principle-detect assembly (fire system) (RPDA).
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY-UNAPPROVED. An assembly that has been
investigated by the town and has been determined to be unacceptable for
installation within the town’s water system. Consideration for disapproval and
removal from the approved list shall be based upon, but not limited to, the
following criteria:
         (a)   Due to poor performance standards (i.e., significant failure
rate);
         (b)   Lack of or unavailability of repair parts; and/or
         (c)   Poor service or response from assembly’s factory representative
(s).
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE-APPROVED. A non-testable device used for
isolation purposes that has been shown to meet the design and performance
standards of the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) and the American
Water Works Association (AWWA).
      BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Any elevation in the consumer water system (by
pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply
pressure at the point of delivery, which would cause or tend to cause a
reversal of the normal direction of flow.
      BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in
the pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply
line with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
      CHECK VALVE APPROVED. A check valve that is drip-tight in the normal
direction of flow when the inlet pressure is at least one psi and the outlet
pressure is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a direction
reversed to the normal flow. The closure element (e.g., clapper, poppet or
other design) shall be internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure.
An approved check valve is only one component of an approved backflow
prevention assembly.
      CONSUMER. Any person, firm, corporation using, or receiving water from
the town’s water system.
      CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Shall include any water system commencing at the
point of delivery and continuing throughout the consumer’s plumbing system,
located on the consumer’s premises, whether supplied by public potable water or
an auxiliary water supply. The system or systems may be either a potable water
system or an industrial piping system.
      CONTAINMENT. Preventing the impairment of the public potable water supply
by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly at the service
connection.
      CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water, which creates a
potential or actual hazard to the public health, through the introduction of
hazardous or toxic substances or through the spread of disease by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste.
      CROSS CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer’s water system and any
other source or system through which it is possible to introduce any
contamination or pollution, other than the intended potable water with which
the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable
sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent
devices through which or because of which a backflow can or may occur are
considered to be CROSS CONNECTIONS.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves,
attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test
cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard
(i.e., pollutant).
      DOUBLE CHECK-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly composed of
a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific bypass water
meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall
register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall
show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to
protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant).
      HAZARD, DEGREE OF. Shall be derived from the evaluation of conditions
within a system which can be classified as either pollution (non-health) or a
contamination (health) hazard.
      HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical, hazardous or toxic nature to the public or consumer’s potable water
system to such a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health.
      HAZARD, NON-HEALTH. An actual or potential threat to the quality of the
public or the consumer’s potable water system. A NON-HEALTH HAZARD is one that,
if introduced into the public water supply system, could be a nuisance to water
customers, but would not adversely affect human health.
      HAZARD, POLLUTION. An actual or potential threat to the quality or the
potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system but which would
not constitute a health or a system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree or
intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable
or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.
      HEALTH AGENCY. The North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and
Natural Resources (NCDEHNR).
      INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health or non-health hazard if introduced into a
public or consumer potable water system. Such fluids may include, but are not
limited to: process waters; chemicals in fluid form; acids and alkalis; oils,
gases and the like.
      INDUSTRIAL PIPING SYSTEM-CONSUMER’S. Any system used by the consumer for
transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid or gaseous substance
other than an approved water supply. Such a system would include all pipes,
conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures equipment and appurtenances used to
produce, convey or store substances that are or may be polluted or
contaminated.
      ISOLATION.
         (a)   The act of confining a localized hazard within a consumer’s
water system by installing approved backflow prevention assemblies.
         (b)   The town may make recommendations, upon facility inspections, as
to the usages of isolation devices/assemblies, but does not assume or have
responsibility whatsoever for such installations.
      POINT OF DELIVERY. Shall generally be at the property line of the
customer or at a point on the customer’s property where the meter is located.
The customer shall be responsible for all water piping and control devices
located on the customer’s side of the water meter.
      POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which
does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely
and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic
use.
      POTABLE WATER. Water from any source, which has been approved by the
North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources for
human consumption.
      PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly or privately owned water system
operated as a public utility, under a current North Carolina Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources permit, to supply water for public
consumption or use. This system will include all sources, facilities and
appurtenances between the source and the point of delivery such as valves,
pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and
appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat or store potable water for public
consumption or use.
      REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly
containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved
check valves, together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically
independent, pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The first check valve
reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow
and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of failure of either check valve, the
pressure differential relief valve, by discharge to atmosphere, shall operate
to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The
unit shall include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the
assembly and each assembly shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
The assembly is designed io protect against a health hazard (i.e.,
contaminant).
      REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed
assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly with a specific bypass water meter and a meter-sized
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter
shall register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and
shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to
protect against health hazard (i.e., contaminant).
      SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The service connection from the public potable water
system, to the consumer’s water system.
      VACUUM BREAKER-ATMOSPHERIC TYPE.
         (a)   A device containing an air inlet valve, a check seal and air
inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes an air inlet valve to close
the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops, the air inlet valve falls and
forms a check against back siphonage.
         (b)   An AVB has no test cocks and as such is considered a device. It
can be used for non-health hazards (pollution) or a health hazard (contaminant)
under back siphonage only. It is non-testable and cannot be used for
containment or isolation protection of the town’s potable water system.
      VACUUM BREAKER-PRESSURE TYPE. An assembly containing an independently
operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly
is to be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off
valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to
protect against a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a back-siphonage
condition only.
      WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or operator of a public potable water system,
providing an approved water supply to the public.
      WATER SUPPLY-APPROVED. Any public potable water supply that has been
investigated and approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment,
Health and Natural Resources. The system must be operating under a valid permit
to operate.
      WATER SUPPLY-AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other that the purveyor has approved public potable water supply. These
auxiliary water may include water from another purveyor’s public water supply
or any natural source such as well, spring, river, stream and the like, used
water or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted, contaminated or
objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water
purveyor does not have sanitary control.
      WATER SUPPLY-UNAPPROVED. A water supply which has not been approved for
human consumption by the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and
Natural Resources.
      WATER-USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water
system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the point of
delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
   (B)   This subchapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and vice versa. SHALL is mandatory, MAY is permissive and
discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.
(Prior Code, § 51.138) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.159 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Authorized representative(s) from the town or its contractor(s) shall
have the right to enter, upon presentation of proper credentials and
identification, any building, structure or premises during normal business
hours, or at any time during the event of an emergency, to perform any duty
imposed by this subchapter. Those duties may include sampling and testing of
water or inspections and observations of all piping systems connected to the
public water supply. Where a user has security measures in force that would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with the security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, town personnel will be permitted
to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities. Refusal to allow entry for these purposes may result in
discontinuance of water service.
   (B)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the town, any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on such property where cross
connections and backflow are deemed possible.
(Prior Code, § 51.139) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.160 ELIMINATION OF CROSS CONNECTIONS: DEGREE OF HAZARD.
   (A)   When cross connections are found to exist, the owner, his or her
agent, occupant or tenant will be notified in writing to disconnect the same
within the time limit established by the town. Degree of protection required
and maximum time allowed for compliance will be based upon the potential degree
of hazard to the public water supply system.
   (B)   The maximum time limits are as follows:
      (1)   Cross connections with private wells or other auxiliary water
supplies: immediate disconnection;
      (2)   All facilities that pose a health hazard to the potable water
system must have a containment assembly in the form of a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly within 60 days;
      (3)   All industrial and commercial facilities not identified as a health
hazard shall be considered non-health hazard facilities. All non-health hazard
facilities must install, as a minimum containment assembly, a double check
valve assembly within 90 days;
      (4)   If, in the judgment of town, an imminent health hazard exists,
water service to the building or premises where a cross connection exists may
be terminated unless an air gap is immediately provided, or the cross
connection is immediately eliminated;
      (5)   Based upon recommendation from the town, the consumer is
responsible for installing sufficient isolation backflow prevention assemblies
(i.e., air gap, pressure vacuum breakers, reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly, double check valve assembly);
      (6)   Water mains served by the town but not maintained by the town
should be considered cross connections, with the degree of hazard to be
determined by the town. Degree of protection shall be based upon the degree of
hazard, as determined by town;
      (7)   In the event that the town does not have sufficient access to every
portion of a private water system (i.e., classified research and development
facilities; federal government property) to allow a complete evaluation of the
degree of hazard associated with such private water systems, an approved
reduced pressure principle assembly shall be required as a minimum of
protection; and
      (8)   No person shall fill special use tanks or tankers containing
pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or their residues from the
public water system except at a location equipped with an air gap or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly properly
installed on the public water supply.
(Prior Code, § 51.140) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.161 INSTALLATION OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions or in the latest edition of
the North Carolina Building Code, whichever is most restrictive.
   (B)   Ownership, testing and maintenance of the assembly shall be the
responsibility of the customer and/or consumer.
   (C)   All double check valve assemblies must be installed in drainable pits
whenever below ground installation is necessary, in accordance with detailed
specifications provided by the manufacturer.
   (D)   (1)   Reduced pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a
position and location in which no portion of the assembly can become submerged
in any substance under any circumstances (pit and/or below grade installations
are prohibited).
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies may be installed in a vertical
position with prior approval from the town provided the flow of water is in an
upward direction.
   (E)   The installation of a backflow prevention assembly that is not
approved must be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly.
   (F)   The installer is responsible to make sure a backflow prevention
assembly is working properly upon installation and is required to furnish the
following information to the town within 15 days after a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer (RP), double check-valve assembly (DCVA), pressure
vacuum breaker (PVB), double check-detector assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure
principle detector assembly (RPDA) is installed:
      (1)   Service address where assembly is located;
      (2)   Owner (and address, if different from service address);
      (3)   Description of assembly’s location;
      (4)   Date of installation;
      (5)   Installer (include name, tester certification number and test kit
certification);
      (6)   Type of assembly, size of assembly;
      (7)   Manufacturer, model number, serial number; and
      (8)   Test results/reports.
   (G)   When it is not possible to interrupt water service, provisions shall
be made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention assemblies. The town
will not accept an unprotected bypass around a backflow preventer when the
assembly is in need of testing, repair or replacement.
   (H)   The consumer shall, upon notification, install the appropriate
containment assembly not to exceed the following time frame:
 
Health hazard     30 days
Non-health hazard 45 days
 
   (I)   Following installation, all RP, DCVA, PVB, DCDA and RPDA are required
to be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester within ten
days.
(Prior Code, § 51.141) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.162 TESTING AND REPAIR OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester at the customer’s expense. Such tests are
to be conducted upon installation and annually thereafter or at a frequency
established by the town. A record of all testing and repairs is to be retained
by the customer. Copies of the records must be provided to the town within ten
business days after the completion of any testing and/or repair work.
   (B)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual or required testing or routine inspection by
the owner or by the town, these repairs must be completed within a specified
time in accordance with the degree of hazard. In no case shall this time period
exceed:
      (1) Health hazard facilities: 14 days; and
      (2)   Non-health hazard facilities: 21 days.
   (C)   (1)   All backflow prevention assemblies with test cocks are required
to be tested annually by the tester. Testing requires a water shutdown usually
lasting five to 20 minutes.
      (2)   For facilities that require an uninterrupted supply of water, and
when it is not possible to provide water service from two separate meters,
provisions shall be made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention
assemblies.
   (D)   (1)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain
and employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment, which has been
evaluated and/or approved by the town. All test equipment shall be registered
with the town by the tester.
      (2)   All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy annually (at a
minimum), calibrated and certified to the town as to such accuracy/calibration
by the tester.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to submit
any record to the town that is false or incomplete in any material respect. It
shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to fail to submit to the
town any record that is required by this subchapter. Such violations may result
in any of the enforcement actions outlined in §
51.166.
(Prior Code, § 51.142) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.163 FACILITIES REQUIRING PROTECTION.
   (A)   (1)   Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on
the service line to any premises that the town has identified as having a
potential for backflow.
      (2)   The following types of facilities or services have been identified
by the town as having a potential for backflow of non-potable water into the
public water supply system. Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly
will be required on all such services according to the degree of hazard
present.
   (B)   (1)   Other types of facilities or services not listed below may also
be required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined
necessary by the town.
      (2)   As a minimum requirement, all commercial services will be required
to install a double check valve assembly, unless otherwise listed below.
DCVA = Double check valve assembly
RP = Reduced pressure principle assembly
DCDA = Double check detector assembly
RPDA = Reduced pressure detector assembly
AG = Air gap
PVB = Pressure vacuum breaker
DCVA = Double check valve assembly
RP = Reduced pressure principle assembly
DCDA = Double check detector assembly
RPDA = Reduced pressure detector assembly
AG = Air gap
PVB = Pressure vacuum breaker
1.  Aircraft and missile plants                                                         RP
2.  Automotive services stations, dealerships and the like                              RP
3.  Automotive plants                                                                   RP
4.  Auxiliary water systems
       a.   Approved public/private water supply                                  RP
       b.   Unapproved public/private water supply                                AG
       c.   Used water and industrial fluids                                      RP
5.  Bakeries
       a.   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
       b.   Health hazard                                                         RP
6.  Beauty shops/barber shops                                                           RP
7.  Beverage bottling plants                                                            RP
8.  Breweries                                                                           RP
9.  Buildings hotels, apartment houses, public and private buildings, or other          RP
    structures having unprotected cross connections
10. Canneries, packing houses and rendering plants                                      RP
11. Chemical plants manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment                 RP
12. Chemically contaminated water systems                                               RP
13. Commercial carwash facilities                                                       RP
14. Commercial greenhouses                                                              RP
15. Commercial sales establishments (department stores, malls and the like)              
       a.   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
       b.   Health hazard                                                         RP
16. Concrete/asphalt plants                                                             RP
17. Dairies and cold storage plants                                                     RP
18. Dye works                                                                           RP
19. Film laboratories                                                                   RP
20. Fire systems
       Systems 3/4 inch to 2 inch:
         a.   No health hazard                                                DCDA
         b.   Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution and the RPDA)
       Systems 2 1 inch to 10 inch (or larger)
         a.   No health hazard                                                DCDA
         b.   Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution and the RPDA)
21. Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, RP
    nursing and convalescent homes, medical clinics and veterinary hospitals
22. Industrial facilities
       a.   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
       b.   Health hazard                                                         RP
23. Laundries                                                                           RP
24. Lawn irrigation systems                                                             RP
25. Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants                    RP
26. Mobile home parks                                                                   RP
27. Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties                          RP
28. Paper and paper products plants                                                     RP
29. Pest control (exterminating and fumigation)                                         RP
30. Plating plant                                                                       RP
31. Power plants                                                                        RP
32. Radioactive materials or substances-plants or facilities handling                   RP
33. Restaurants                                                                         RP
34. Restricted, classified or other closed facilities                                   RP
35. Rubber plants (natural or synthetic)                                                RP
36. Sand and gravel plants                                                              RP
37. Schools and colleges                                                                RP
38. Sewage and storm drain facilities                                                   RP
39. Swimming pools                                                                      RP
40. Waterfront facilities and industries                                                RP
All assemblies and installations shall be subject to inspection and approval by the town
 
(Prior Code, § 51.143) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.164 CONNECTIONS WITH UNAPPROVED SOURCES OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water
not approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and
Natural Resources to the water system supplied by the town.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a public or consumer
potable water system, the consumer shall notify the town immediately in order
that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome and eliminate the
contamination or pollution.
(Prior Code, § 51.144) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.165 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system, two inches and smaller, shall be protected with an approved
double check valve assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire systems using
toxic additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an approved reduced
pressure principle assembly at the main service connection.
   (B)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system, greater than two inches, shall be protected with an approved
double check detector assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire protection
systems using toxic or hazardous additives or booster pumps shall be protected
by an approved reduced pressure principle detector assembly at the main service
connection.
   (C)   All existing backflow prevention assemblies, two and one-half inches
and larger, installed on fire protection systems (that were initially approved
by the town shall be allowed to remain on the premises, as long as they are
being properly maintained, tested and repaired as required by this subchapter.
If, however, the existing assembly must be replaced (once it can no longer be
repaired), or in the event of proven water theft through an unmetered source,
the consumer shall be required to install an approved double check detector
assembly or reduced pressure principle detector assembly as required by this
provision.
(Prior Code, § 51.144A) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
§ 51.166 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The owner, manager, supervisor or person in charge of any installation
found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be
notified in writing with regard to the corrective action(s) to be taken. The
time for compliance shall be in accordance with §
51.160.
   (B)   The owner, manager, supervisor or person in charge of any
installation, which remains in noncompliance after the time prescribed in the
initial notification, as outlined in §
51.160, shall be considered in violation of this subchapter and may be subject
to the discontinuation of water service by the town.
   (C)   Any offender who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in the aforementioned notification shall be subject to
discontinuation of water service.
   (D)   If, in the judgment of town, any owner, manager, supervisor or person
in charge of any installation found to be in noncompliance with the provisions
of this subchapter, neglects their responsibility to correct any violation, it
may result in discontinuance of water service until compliance is achieved.
   (E)   If a certified backflow prevention assembly tester submits falsified
records to the town, the town shall revoke the tester’s certification to test
backflow prevention assemblies within the areas served by the town’s potable
water system.
   (F)   Enforcement of this program shall be administered by the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.144B) (Ord. 2014-05, passed 9-8-2014)
PAYMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION COST
§ 51.180 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS WITHIN TOWN.
   (A)   Water and sewer extensions shall be made upon order of the town as it
deems necessary, and in accordance with provisions of state law the cost of
such extensions shall be borne by the owners of property abutting the water or
sewer extension improvement, according to this policy.
   (B)   Corner lots are exempt from front foot water or sewer improvement
assessments for a maximum of 150 feet on one side of a corner lot. In the event
a water or sewer line is constructed across only one side of a corner lot, that
side shall be assessed at the then existing rate for its full distance. At such
time in the future that a water or sewer line is extended across the other side
of that corner lot, that side will be assessed at then existing rate; except,
that a corner lot exemption up to 150 feet, but not exceeding the distance
along that side, shall be allowed, provided an assessment has been paid for the
first side. Lots having a double frontage shall be assessed for water and sewer
improvements on both sides if both sides can be developed according to the
zoning ordinance. If the double frontage lot is also a corner lot, only one
corner lot exemption shall be allowed, unless both frontages can be developed
according to the zoning ordinance and both frontages have been assessed. In
such case the property shall be entitled to two corner lot exemptions.
   (C)   An assessment for water and sewer extensions made under this policy
may be spread over a period of ten years if requested by the property owner.
Such assessments shall bear interest at the highest rate provided by state law
per annum on the unpaid balance, with the first assessment becoming due in
October next succeeding the date of improvements within the town limits only.
(Prior Code, § 51.145) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.181 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND CAPITAL INVESTMENT FEES.
   (A)   Water and sewer connection fees.
      (1)   Water and sewer fees shall be established by the Town Council from
time to time.
      (2)   (a)   Any minimum fee as established by the Town Council shall be
paid prior to construction of the tap. Any additional fees to equal the total
actual construction cost shall be paid prior to customer making a tie-in to the
tap.
         (b)   For any tap larger than those set by the Town Council from time
to time, the town staff shall estimate the cost at the time of the request. Any
additional cost to equal the total actual construction costs shall be paid
prior to the customer making a tie-in to the tap.
         (c)   For taps requiring more than usual construction work, the town
may require the customer to employ an outside contractor to make the tap.
Contractors shall obtain a permit from the town and all work shall be in
accordance to town specifications.
   (B)   Capital investment fees.
      (1)   Capital investment fees are charges for the construction of water
lines and sewer lines, which, at the time of construction, abut property
outside the corporate limits. Fees shall be charged as follows before water or
sewer services is provided:
 
Type  Fee per front foot
Water As established by Town Council
Sewer As established by Town Council
 
      (2)   Property which is annexed into the town and abuts an existing water
line or sewer line, and has not previously paid a capital investment fee, shall
pay the following capital investment fees before service is provided:
 
Type  Fee per front foot
Water As established by Town Council
Sewer As established by Town Council
 
      (3)   Property owners within the corporate limits may pay their equal
investment fees in ten equal annual installments, if requested by the property
owners. Such capital investment fees will bear interest at the highest rate
provided by state law per annum on the unpaid balance, with the first payment
becoming due in October next succeeding the date the capital investment fee
charge is made.
(Prior Code, § 51.146) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-11, passed 4-11-2016)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 51.195 SERVICE FEES; NEW CUSTOMERS.
   New customers to the water and wastewater system will be charged a service
fee in an amount as established by the Town Council from time to time and shall
be charged the deposit fees as required in §
51.197.
(Prior Code, § 51.155) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-12, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 51.196 SERVICE FEES; TRANSFERS.
   Customers moving from one location to another within the water and
wastewater system shall be charged a non-refundable service fee in an amount as
established by the Town Council from time to time, which should be paid at the
time of the transfer request.
(Prior Code, § 51.156) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-13, passed 4-11-2016)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.197 WATER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   The deposit for residential water service shall be as follows: any
person applying for water to be furnished to a residential premises shall make
a deposit to the town in an amount as established by the Town Council from time
to time.
   (B)   (1)   The deposit for commercial water service shall be as follows:
      (2)   Any person applying for water to be furnished to commercial
premises shall make a deposit according to the following schedule:
         (a)   Commercial customers one-sixth of annual charges;
         (b)   The initial deposit shall be based upon the town estimate of
customer’s usage; and
         (c)   After six billing periods following the initial deposit, the
customer’s actual usage will be reviewed, and the deposit adjusted to reflect
such actual usage.
         (d)   If the amount of the required deposit is decreased, the
difference shall be credited to the customer’s account; if the amount of the
required deposit is increased, the differences shall be billed to the customer.
   (C)   Building contractors requesting temporary water services shall be
required to provide a deposit to the town as established by the Town Council
from time to time. However, each building contractor or his or her
representative will be required to make a written request showing the date, the
location of the service and the name in which the service is required.
   (D)   A deposit may be required on any account not having the same if the
customer fails to pay his or her bill and service is disconnected for failure
to pay. Such deposit shall be made before service is reconnected.
   (E)   The deposit may be increased, in the town’s discretion upon the
customer’s third failure to pay a bill in a timely manner, having service
terminated for nonpayment or having a check or draft returned because of
insufficient funds or a check or draft returned because of insufficient funds
or a closed account. This increase shall be an amount equal to one-twelfth of
the estimated annual charges for residential premises or two-twelfths of the
estimated annual charges for commercial premises.
   (F)   When service is disconnected at the customer’s request, the deposit
shall be credited to the customer’s final bill. If any deposit remains, the
town shall hold the final bill and mail it along with a town check to the
customer at the address given by the customer. If the departing customer does
not leave a valid forwarding address with the town, the refund shall be held
for 30 days before being placed into an inactive status file. Deposit returns
apply only to customers who are moving off the town’s system and not to those
customers, who are transferring service from one location to another within the
town’s system, the deposit shall be transferred with the service.
   (G)   Each customer shall appear personally or fax or send a letter to apply
for or terminate water service with the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.157) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 51.198 WATER RATES AND BILLS.
   (A)   Single-family residential service.
      (1)   This schedule is available for the supply of drinking water to
single-family residences within the town and outside the town limits where the
town’s water supply facilities are extended.
      (2)   Service is not available under this schedule for any non-domestic
use, such as for a business operated in the residence; for commercial or multi-
family use, such as master metered apartments, motel, inns and mobile home
parks; or for resale.
      (3)   This schedule is applicable when a water service lateral up to one
inch in diameter services the customer’s residence.
      (4)   The minimum monthly charge and the town water rates for inside town
customers will be established by the Town Council from time to time and noted
in the official meeting minutes to be effective at the beginning of the next
billing cycle. The minimum monthly charge for outside town customers will be
double (two times) the minimum monthly charge for inside town customers.
      (5)   Commodity charges exceeding minimum charges will be based on the
customer’s total water consumption during the billing period. Water consumption
will be metered and rounded to the nearest ten gallons for billing except, that
when the amount of water used is not registered because of a defective meter,
the bill rendered shall be for the average amount theretofore used by the
premises served by such meter during the preceding three months or during the
portion of such period for which water use records are available, or if water
was not consume by the premises through the meter during such preceding period,
the bill rendered shall be for the average period and for the same class in the
town during the period covered by the bill. Bills shall be rendered separately
for each service or connection. All bills shall be made out and mailed as early
as practicable after the close of the period covered by such bills.
   (B)   General service for customers who are not single-family residential
customers.
      (1)   This schedule is available for the supply of drinking water to
commercial, industrial, institutional and other customers within the town and
outside the town limits where the town’s water supply facilities are extended.
Service is not available under this schedule for resale service.
      (2)   The minimum monthly charge and the town water rates for inside town
customers will be established by the Town Council from time to time and noted
in the official meeting minutes to be effective at the beginning of the next
billing cycle. The minimum monthly charge for outside town customers will be
double (two times) the minimum monthly charge for inside town customers.
      (3)   Commodity charges exceeding minimum charges will be based on the
customer’s total water consumption during the billing period. Water consumption
will be metered and rounded to the nearest ten gallons for billing. When total
use is not known, the town will render bills on the basis of estimates.
      (4)   The minimum monthly charge and the town water rates for inside town
customers will be established by the Town Council from time to time and noted
in the official meeting minutes to be effective at the beginning of the next
billing cycle. The minimum monthly charge for outside town customers will be
double (two times) the minimum monthly charge for inside town customers.
(Prior Code, § 51.158) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-15, passed 4-11-2016)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.199 SEWER RATES AND BILLS.
   (A)   Single-family residential service.
      (1)   This schedule is available for the collection and treatment of
domestic sewage from single-family residences within the town and outside the
town limits where the town’s collection facilities are extended.
      (2)   Service is not available under this schedule for any non-domestic
sewage; such as from business operated in the residence, for commercial for
multifamily use, such as master metered apartments, motels, inns and mobile
home parks; or for resale.
      (3)   This schedule is applicable when a water service lateral up to one
inch in diameter serves the customer’s residence.
      (4)   The minimum monthly charge and the town sewer rates for inside town
customers will be established by the Town Council from time to time and noted
in the official meeting minutes to be effective at the beginning of the next
billing cycle. The minimum monthly charge for outside town customers will be
double (two times) the minimum monthly charge for inside town customers.
      (5)   Customers not receiving town water service shall provide a meter to
measure total use. When total use is not known, the town will render bills on
the basis of estimates.
      (6)   The sewer service charge shall be billed to each customer at the
same time that water bills are rendered and shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as water accounts.
   (B)   General service for customers, who are not single-family residential
customers.
      (1)   This schedule is available for the collection and treatment of
sewage discharged by commercial, industrial, institutional and other customers
within the town and outside the town limits where the town’s collection
facilities are extended. Service is not available under this schedule for
resale service.
      (2)   The minimum monthly charge and the town sewer rates for inside town
customers will be established by the Town Council from time to time and noted
in the official meeting minutes to be effective at the beginning of the next
billing cycle. The minimum monthly charge for outside town customers will be
double (two times) the minimum monthly charge for inside town customers.
      (3)   The minimum monthly charge and the town sewer rates for inside
customers will be established by the Town Council from time to time and noted
in the official meeting minutes to be effective at the beginning of the next
billing cycle. The minimum monthly charge for outside town customers will be
double (two times) the minimum monthly charge for inside customers.
      (4)   Charges will be established periodically for billing of some costs
attributable to wastewater with greater pollutant concentrations than normal
domestic sewage.
      (5)   Sewer consumption will be metered and rounded to the nearest ten
gallons for billing. Customers not receiving town sewer service shall provide a
meter to measure total use. When total use is not known, the town will render
bills on the basis of estimates.
      (6)   The sewer service charge shall be billed to each customer at the
same time that water bills are rendered and shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as water accounts.
(Prior Code, § 51.159) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-16, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 51.200 BILLING, PAYMENT, PENALTIES.
   (A)   All water and wastewater meters shall be read monthly, and bills shall
be mailed on a cycle basis.
   (B)   Every bill shall be due when mailed to the customer at the last
address provided by the customer. A bill shall reflect a due date of 15 days
from the billing date shown on the bill. The same notice will serve as a notice
of possible disconnect if payment is not received within 32 days of the billing
date, allowing greater than the statutory minimum.
   (C)   A late payment penalty as established by the Town Council from time to
time will be imposed on balances not paid on or before the due date and an
additional late fee penalty as established by the Town Council from time to
time will be imposed if the bill remains unpaid after five additional working
days.
   (D)   If payment has not been received within 32 days from the original
billing date, services may be disconnected and a service fee as established by
the Town Council from time to time will be imposed.
   (E)   A customer whose services are disconnected for such delinquency may
have services restored during regular working hours within 24 hours after the
bill is paid in full. If a customer requests that services be reconnected after
regular working hours (3:30 p.m.), on the same day, then an additional non-
refundable service fee in the amount as established by the Town Council from
time to time must be paid at the time of the request, if town staff determines
that it can be done on the same day.
   (F)   The customer shall pay all billed utility charges before transferring
service from one location to another. The final bill shall be mailed to the
customer’s new billing address. If a customer fails to pay his or her utility
bills for any account where he or she is listed as the customer and such
account becomes delinquent, the town may transfer the amount owed to any other
account where the customer is a primary recipient of utilities and cutoff
utilities to such account for nonpayment. The town may also refuse to transfer
an account to a new customer’s name or connect services to a new account where
the delinquent customer will be primary recipient of utilities wherever he or
she is listed as a customer, resides as a head of household or conducts a trade
or business. The town’s determination that a customer is primary recipient of
utilities shall be effective until the customer proves otherwise.
   (G)   Any customer who has a check or draft returned from any financial
institution because of insufficient funds or a closed account shall be charged
a service fee in accordance with G.S. § 25-3.
   (H)   Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from
becoming delinquent, nor relieve the owner/customer from payment.
   (I)   (1)   Service for residential and commercial units which are normally
rented and for which tenants have made deposits and paid water bills shall, if
they become vacant and unoccupied, be the responsibility of the property owner.
      (2)   Billing shall be made to such owner for each full month’s vacancy
at the minimum meter rate for that service, unless usage dictates otherwise.
Failure of an owner to pay such bills shall result in suspension of service
until all accounts due are paid in full.
   (J)   Charges for water and sewer are stated separately on all bills. All
charges for sewer service, regardless of occupancy, tenants or number of meters
servicing the premises shall be the legal obligation of the owner.
(G.S. § 160A-314(d)(2))
   (K)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-314(b), all payments
received upon bills rendered for water, sewer and sanitation/trash upon a
monthly basis shall be applied to the customer’s account as follows: first to
fees for sanitation/trash; second to fees for sewer; and third to fees for
water. All unpaid balances shall be collected as provided in this chapter for
collection and/or disconnection.
(Prior Code, § 51.160) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. passed 4-9-2007; Ord. 2016-
17, passed 4-11-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.201 METER TESTING; PROTESTED BILLS.
   (A)   If a customer has an excessive bill and thinks that a faulty meter
causes it, he or she may, by making a deposit as established by the Town
Council from time to time with the town, request that the meter be removed and
checked.
   (B)   If the meter is found to be in error, the deposit will be refunded and
the bill adjusted for the three preceding months. The adjustment will be based
on the percentage of error in the meter. If the meter is found to be accurate,
the town will retain the deposit.
(Prior Code, § 51.161) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998; Ord. 2016-18, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 51.202 ADJUSTMENT OF WATER AND SEWER BILLS.
   (A)   If the town determines that it has overcharged or undercharged a
customer on account of its error, the town shall refund or recover the
difference subject to the following:
      (1)   The adjustment period shall be limited to the lesser of the actual
period during which the error occurred or 12 months;
      (2)   The amount of adjustment shall be determined by the town based upon
such evidence as he os she deems appropriate and must be approved by the Town
Manager; and
      (3)   Any overcharge may be either refunded or credited to the customer
and any undercharge shall be billed to the customer.
   (B)   If the town determines that it has undercharged a customer on account
of any lawful or materially misleading act of such customer, the undercharge
shall be determined and collected as set out above except the adjustment period
shall be greater of the actual period during which the 12 months, if the
adjustment period cannot be determined. The town shall, in addition to
collecting such undercharge, have the right to take such other action against
such customer as is permitted by law.
   (C)   If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the town’s
representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for
any cause, the owner/customer shall pay an account estimated from the record of
his or her previous bills or from other proper data.
   (D)   Adjustments of bills may be made by the Town Manager upon submission
of an invoice from a licensed plumber verifying the existence of a leak and
repair of it. The adjustment will be made by averaging the current excessive
bill plus the previous two months’ bills. The adjustment will be made on water
charges. Determining the average of the previous 12 months’ sewer bills will
make adjustments for sewer charges.
(Prior Code, § 51.162) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.203 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE GENERALLY.
   (A)   When services are discontinued and all bills paid, the deposit will be
refunded.
   (B)   Any person tampering with, reconnecting or bypassing any meter upon
premises where service has been discontinued for failure to pay bills shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and punished pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
   (C)   The town may, in addition to prosecution, permanently refuse service
to any owner/customer who tampers, adjusts or resets, or otherwise interferes
with meters or measuring devices.
(Prior Code, § 51.163) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.204 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or subchapter of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 51.164) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 51.205 CONFLICT.
   All other ordinances and provisions of the previous Chapter 22 of the town
code inconsistent with the foregoing ordinances are repealed.
(Prior Code, § 51.165)
§ 51.206 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in force and effect on November 1, 1998.
(Prior Code, § 51.166) (Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY
Section
   
52.01   Authority
   
52.02   Stormwater utility
   
52.03   Boundaries and jurisdiction
   
52.04   Definitions
   
52.05   Stormwater management fee
§ 52.01 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 16, the town is authorized to create
a stormwater utility and establish a schedule of stormwater fees for property
in the corporate limits and later annexed into the town.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) (Ord. passed 4-9-2007)
§ 52.02 STORMWATER UTILITY.
   A stormwater utility is hereby established to provide stormwater management
services, as authorized by state law. Stormwater service charges will be
determined and modified from time to time so that the total revenues generated
by said charges will be used to pay any costs incurred by the town for
stormwater purposes and such expenses as are reasonably necessary or convenient
in the planning, construction, operation and maintenance of the stormwater
system.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) (Ord. passed 4-9-2007)
§ 52.03 BOUNDARIES AND JURISDICTION.
   The boundaries and jurisdiction of the stormwater management utility shall
extend to the corporate limits of the town, as they may exist from time to
time, and such areas lying outside the corporate limits of the town as shall be
approved by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 52.03) (Ord. passed 4-9-2007)
§ 52.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property which has been altered from its natural
state by the addition and attachment of any improvements such as buildings,
structures or other impervious area. For new construction, property shall be
considered DEVELOPED PROPERTY upon final approval of site improvements by the
town.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). The total impervious area of a typical
single-family residential property, and is determined as the median impervious
area of a representative sample, as determined by the town, of all developed
residential properties in the single-family residential category.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA. A surface which, because of its composition or
compacted nature, impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the
soil, including, but not limited to, roofs, decks, driveways, patios,
sidewalks, parking areas, tennis courts, streets or compacted gravel surfaces.
   PROPERTY OWNER OF RECORD. The person identified as owner by county tax
records.
   REVENUES. All fees, assessments or other income received by the stormwater
utility, including, but not limited to, amounts received from the investment or
deposit of monies in any fund or account, and all amounts received as gifts or
donations, and the proceeds from the sale of bonds to finance the stormwater
management program, or any other type of funds derived from grants, fees or
loans which by purpose or effect relate to stormwater management activities.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Developed property which serves the
primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit, regardless of the
zoning district in which such property is located, for single-family detached
units, and which may or may not have accessory uses related to the purpose of
providing permanent dwelling facilities.
   STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE FEE. The monetary amount charged each parcel of
real property for the services provided by the stormwater utility system and
program as set forth in the town schedule of rates and fees, a copy of which is
located in the office of the Town Clerk and is incorporated by reference
herein.
(Prior Code, § 52.04) (Ord. passed 4-9-2007)
§ 52.05 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEE.
   (A)   The stormwater management fee shall be effective and commence on June
1, 2007. Said fee shall be initially assessed and billed on the basis of
improved property as defined herein, owned on June 1, 2007 and this fee will be
billed on the monthly utility bill received by all properties receiving water,
sewer, garbage and/or landfill charges.
   (B)   The stormwater management fee shall be assessed, billed and collected
by the Utility Collections Clerk from the owners/occupiers of all property
receiving a town utility bill.
   (C)   The stormwater management fee shall be assessed to owners at a rate of
$3 per month on the utility bill.
   (D)   The stormwater management fee shall be billed with monthly utility
bills, shall be payable in the same manner as utility bills and in the case of
nonpayment, shall be collected in any manner by which the delinquent utility
bills can be collected.
(Prior Code, § 52.05) (Ord. passed 4-9-2007)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
73.   ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
74.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Short title
   
70.02   Definitions
   
70.03   Compliance with chapter required
   
70.04   Application of regulations to public employees
   
70.05   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.06   Application to persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or
animals
   
70.07   Use of toy devices restricted to play streets
   
70.08   Entering, jumping on or riding vehicle without permission of owner or
driver
   
70.09   Boarding moving vehicle prohibited
   
70.10   Persons to stay inside vehicles; hanging onto vehicles prohibited
   
70.11   Limitation on number of persons permitted in front seat
   
70.12   Riding within space not intended for passengers
   
70.13   Unauthorized use of police or fire department whistles or sirens
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.25   Obedience to police required
   
70.26   Authority of police in emergencies
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.40   Obedience required; when signs required for enforcement
   
70.41   Placement of official traffic-control devices; types
   
70.42   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.43   Flashing signals
   
70.44   No turn signs and turning markers
   
70.45   Yield signs
   
70.46   No parking zone and safety zone markers
   
70.47   Zones of quiet
   
70.48   Play streets
   
70.49   School zones
   
70.50   Truck routes
Trains
   
70.65   Trains not to block streets
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This code shall be known and may be cited as the “Traffic Code of Plymouth,
North Carolina”, or simply as the “traffic code”.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and such ambulances designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
      BLOCK. The length of that portion of any street which is located between
two adjacent street intersections.
      BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway, when 50% or
more of frontage thereon, for a distance of 300 feet or more, is occupied by
buildings which are in use for business purposes.
      CROSSWALK. That portion of a roadway which lies between the prolongations
of the lateral sidewalk or boundary lines over an intersection. Any portion of
a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing, by lines or other
markings on the surface.
      DRIVER. The operator of a vehicle, as defined below. The terms “operator”
and DRIVER and their cognates are synonymous.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(7))
      INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curblines or, if none, then the lateral edge of the roadway lines of two or
more highways which join one another at any angle whether or not one such
highway crosses the other. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a SEPARATE INTERSECTION. In the event
that such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded
as a SEPARATE INTERSECTION.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(16))
      MOPED. A vehicle, other than a motor-driven bicycle or electric assisted
bicycle, that has two or three wheels, no external shifting device, a motor
that does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement and cannot propel
the vehicle at a speed greater than 30 mph on a level surface. The motor may be
powered by electricity, alternative fuel, motor fuel, or a combination of each.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(27))
      MOTORCYCLES. Vehicles having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground,
including autocycles, motor scooters and motor-driven bicycles, but excluding
tractors and utility vehicles equipped with an additional form of device
designed to transport property, three-wheeled vehicles while being used by law-
enforcement agencies, electric assisted bicycles and mopeds as defined in this
section.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(27))
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.
Except as specifically provided otherwise, this term shall not include mopeds
or electric assisted bicycles.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(23))
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this title
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the town.
      OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of the
Town Council, or an official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
      OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually or automatically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
      OPERATOR. A person in actual physical control of a vehicle which is in
motion or which has the engine running. The terms OPERATOR and “driver” and
their cognates are synonymous.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(25))
      OWNER. A person holding the legal title to a vehicle, or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of a chattel mortgage or an agreement for the
conditional sale or lease thereof or other like agreement, with the right of
purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement, and with
the immediate right of possession vested in the mortgagor, conditional vendee
or lessee, said mortgagor, conditional vendee or lessee shall be deemed the
OWNER for the purpose of this title. For the purposes of this title, the lessee
of a vehicle owned by the government of the United States shall be considered
the owner of the vehicle.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(26))
      PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than
temporarily for the purpose of loading or unloading.
      PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
      POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic
regulations.
      PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of
the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(30))
      PUBLIC CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle which is engaged in the business of
transporting persons for fare.
      RAILROAD. A carrier, other than streetcars, of persons or property, with
cars operated on stationary rails.
      RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other locomotor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, not including streetcars.
      RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway not comprising
a business district, when the frontage on such highway, for a distance of 300
feet or more, is mainly occupied by residential dwellings, but also by
dwellings or buildings which are in use for business purposes.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway, not
inconsistent with regulations and conditions imposed by this code, other town
ordinances or state law.
      ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways the term ROADWAY, as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(38))
      SAFETY ZONE. Traffic island or other space officially set aside within a
highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly marked or
indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart
as a SAFETY ZONE.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(39))
      SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, exclusively intended for
use of pedestrians.
      STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
      STOP. When required, complete cessation of movement.
      STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, any stopping of a vehicle, except when
conflict with other traffic is imminent or when otherwise directed by a police
officer.
      STREET. A highway, as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(13). The terms “highway”
and STREET and their cognates are synonymous.
(G.S. § 20-4.01(46))
      TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for
purposes of travel.
      TRAFFIC SIGNS. Authorized signs or markers which are assumed to be
permanently or temporarily placed or erected or installed at certain places and
which purport to give notice of direction or to convey a prohibition or
warning. The presence of such signs, though not compulsory, is generally
dictated by necessity or common sense, with a view to furtherance of public
safety.
      VEHICLE.
         (a)   Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks, provided that for the
purposes of this title, bicycles and electric assisted bicycles shall be deemed
VEHICLES and every rider of a bicycle or an electric assisted bicycle upon a
highway shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the
driver of a vehicle except those which by their nature can have no application.
         (b)   This term shall not include a device which is designed for and
intended to be used as a means of transportation for a person with a mobility
impairment, or who uses the device for mobility enhancement, is suitable for
use both inside and outside a building, including on sidewalks, and is limited
by design to 15 mph when the device is being operated by a person with a
mobility impairment, or who uses the device for mobility enhancement.
         (c)   This term shall not include an electric personal assistive
mobility device as defined in G.S. § 20-401(7b).
(G.S. § 20-4.01(49))
(G.S. § 20-4.01)
   (B)   Words, terms and phrases not defined in division (A) of this section
but which are defined in G.S. Chapter 20 shall, for purposes of this title, be
as so defined in G.S. Chapter 20.
(Prior Code, § 70.02)
Statutory reference:
   Statutory definitions, see G.S. § 20-4.01
§ 70.03 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required, in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of, the United States government, the state,
county or town, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of
the provisions of this title or state law.
   (B)   While actually engaged in maintenance or construction work on the
highways, but not while traveling to or from such work, drivers of vehicles
owned or operated by the state or this town are exempt from all provisions of
this title except as set forth in G.S. § 20-168(b).
(G.S. § 20-168(b))
(Prior Code, § 70.04)
§ 70.05 EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing
of vehicles shall also apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in §
70.02, except as follows.
   (A)   Unless otherwise directed by a police officer, a driver, when
operating such vehicle in any emergency, may:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits, so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions, so long as he or she does not endanger life or property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the
safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 70.05)
§ 70.06 APPLICATION TO PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING BICYCLES OR
ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to
the provisions of this title which are applicable to any driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this title which, by their very nature, can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 70.06)
§ 70.07 USE OF TOY DEVICES RESTRICTED TO PLAY STREETS.
   No person on roller skates or riding on any coaster, toy vehicle or similar
device shall go upon any sidewalk except upon a street set aside as a play
street.
(Prior Code, § 70.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.08 ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLE WITHOUT PERMISSION OF OWNER OR
DRIVER.
   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle,
without the consent of the owner or driver.
(Prior Code, § 70.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.09 BOARDING MOVING VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle
while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 70.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.10 PERSONS TO STAY INSIDE VEHICLES; HANGING ONTO VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude beyond the
limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding, except to give such signals
as are by law required, and no person shall hang on to any vehicle whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 70.10) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PERSONS PERMITTED IN FRONT SEAT.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor
vehicle to permit more than three persons, including the driver, to ride in the
front or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.11) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Overloaded or overcrowded vehicle, see G.S. § 20-140.2
§ 70.12 RIDING WITHIN SPACE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.
   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle not designated or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty nor to persons riding
within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 70.12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.13 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENT WHISTLES OR SIRENS.
   No person, without special authority from the Police Department or Fire
Department, shall carry or use any whistle, bell, horn or siren similar in
appearance or sound to the whistles, horns or sirens used by the Police
Department or Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 70.13) Penalty, see §
70.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.25 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE REQUIRED.
   No person shall refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer made pursuant to this title or other traffic ordinances or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 70.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.26 AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN EMERGENCIES.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when it is necessary to
expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct
traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this
title.
(Prior Code, § 70.21)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.40 OBEDIENCE REQUIRED; WHEN SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official
traffic-control device placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of the
town, subject to certain exceptions which are granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle in §
70.05, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   No provision of this title which provides for signs shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
such official sign is not in proper position or is insufficiently legible to an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not stipulate
signs, such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give
notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 70.30) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to erect traffic-control devices, compel obedience, see G.S. §§
20-158 and 20-169
§ 70.41 PLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; TYPES.
   (A)   Traffic-control devices of the town shall be placed, erected,
installed, changed or removed only upon order of the Town Council pursuant to
action taken by the Town Council and entered upon its minutes, and any such
action shall be by ordinance when so required by law.
   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by the Town Council in any instance, such
orders of the Council shall be executed under the direction of the Town
Manager.
   (C)   All traffic-control devices heretofore installed by authority of the
Town Council and which are in place on the effective date of this traffic code
shall continue to be official until such time as they may be removed by
authority of the Town Council; and until they are so removed it shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any instruction or directive
indicated by any such official traffic-control device.
   (D)   Traffic-control devices of the town within the purview of division (A)
of this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, those indicating
stop and yield intersections; speed restrictions; limited or prohibited turning
movements; one-way streets; prohibited and restricted parking areas; truck
routes and other restrictions as to vehicle types permitted to be driven upon
the streets; school zones; safety zones; zones of quiet; play streets; bus
stops; taxicab stands; loading zones; and spaces reserved for the parking of
certain vehicles only, as, for example, vehicles of town officers and
physicians.
(Prior Code, § 70.31) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.42 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the
words “go”, “caution” or “stop” or exhibiting differently colored lights,
successively, one at a time, the following colors only shall be used and the
terms and lights shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Green alone, or “go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through,
or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either such turn.
But vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians, lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone, or “caution” when shown following the green or “go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in
safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone, or “stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at such other point as may be
indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until green or
“go” is shown alone.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may
cautiously enter the intersection, only to continue the movement in the
direction indicated by such arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic.
No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway unless he or she can do
so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 70.32) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.43 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
(Prior Code, § 70.33)
§ 70.44 NO TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are placed which indicate that no
turn, or that no right, left or “U” turn is permitted, the driver of a vehicle
shall obey the directions of any such sign, and when official traffic-control
markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection which
indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning, the
driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions of such indications.
(Prior Code, § 70.34) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Turning at intersections, see G.S. § 20-153
§ 70.45 YIELD SIGNS.
   Whenever official traffic-control “yield” or “yield right-of-way” signs are
placed at street intersections, the driver of a vehicle approaching any such
sign shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from any
direction and he or she shall not proceed into the intersection until he or she
has determined that he or she can do so in safety and without conflict with any
other vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.46 NO PARKING ZONE AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs or markings are placed which
indicate no parking zones or safety zones, the driver of a vehicle shall obey
such regulatory indications.
(Prior Code, § 70.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Driving through safety zones prohibited, see G.S. § 20-160(a)
§ 70.47 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are placed which indicate a zone of
quiet, the person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall not
sound the horn or any other warning device of the vehicle, except in an
emergency, nor shall he or she operate therein any radio or sound-emitting
device at such volume as to be heard beyond the distance to the nearest curb
line of the street, or make any unnecessary noise whatever.
(Prior Code, § 70.37) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.48 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs, barriers or other devices are
placed which prescribe any street or part thereof as a play street, no person
shall drive a vehicle upon any such prescribed street, except persons who have
business or who reside within such prescribed area. Any such person shall
exercise the greatest care when driving upon any such play street.
(Prior Code, § 70.38) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.49 SCHOOL ZONES.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are placed which prescribe any
street or part thereof as a school zone, drivers of motor vehicles using such
street or part thereof shall exercise the greatest care for the protection of
children.
(Prior Code, § 70.39) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.50 TRUCK ROUTES.
   See
Chapter 75, Schedule I.
(Prior Code, § 70.40)
TRAINS
§ 70.65 TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any railroad train, railroad car, locomotive or
other vehicle attached to any railroad train, railroad car, locomotive or other
like vehicle to block any street in the town for any length of time in excess
of ten minutes so as to impede or interfere with the use of the streets by
vehicles, pedestrians or traffic in any manner.
(Prior Code, § 70.60) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this traffic code or any provision
of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this code
regulating the operation or parking of vehicles, for which no other penalty is
provided, shall constitute an infraction punishable, upon conviction, by a
penalty of not more than $100.
   (B)   Any violation of §
70.65 shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any corporation convicted of such
violation shall, for the first offense, be subject to a fine of $25, and for
each subsequent offense a fine of $50. Any individual convicted of such
violation shall, for the first offense, be subject to a fine of $25, and for
each subsequent offense a fine of $50 or imprisonment for not exceeding 30
days. Each and every ten-minute period that a street shall be so blocked in
excess of the first ten-minute period herein allowed shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 70.60)
   (C)   A violation of §
71.05, driving the wrong way, is a $50 fine.
   (D)   A violation of §
71.06, exceeding the posted speed limit, is a $50 fine.
   (E)   A violation of §
71.07, failure to stop for a traffic control or stop sign, is a $50 fine.
(G.S. § 14-4)
(Prior Code, § 70.99)
(Res. passed 9-13-2010)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
   
71.01   Vehicles not to obstruct intersections
   
71.02   Emerging from alley or private drive
   
71.03   Driving through funeral processions
   
71.04   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
71.05   One-way streets
   
71.06   Speed limits
   
71.07   Stop intersections
   
71.08   Limitations on turning around
   
71.09   Backing of vehicles
§ 71.01 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT INTERSECTIONS.
   No driver shall move his or her vehicle across an intersection or a marked
crosswalk, unless he or she observes that there is sufficient space on the
other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate his or her vehicle
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, although a
traffic-control signal may be indicating his or her right to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVE.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to reaching the sidewalk or the sidewalk
areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway, he or she
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle may be driven through a funeral procession, except authorized
emergency vehicles and then only if the same are responding to calls.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates
or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any public
conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are in place indicating that any
street or portion thereof is a one-way street upon which traffic shall proceed
only in an indicated direction, drivers of vehicles on such street or portion
of street shall proceed only in the direction indicated by such signs.
(Prior Code, § 71.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 SPEED LIMITS.
   Except in those cases in which speed limits differing from those provided by
state law have been adopted by ordinance, and made effective by the adoption of
a concurring ordinance by the State Board of Transportation where required by
state law, and by the erection within the town of signs giving notice of the
authorized speed limits, the speed limits established by G.S. § 20-141 shall
apply within the town.
(Prior Code, § 71.06) (Res. passed 9-13-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Local authority as to speed limits, see G.S. § 20-141
§ 71.07 STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   When official traffic-control “stop” signs are placed at street
intersections, the driver of a vehicle approaching any such sign shall bring
his or her vehicle to a stop before entering the intersection, and he or she
shall not proceed into or across the intersection until he or she has first
determined that no conflict with traffic will ensue.
(Prior Code, § 71.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Control of vehicles at intersections, see G.S. § 20-158(b)
§ 71.08 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   No driver shall turn any vehicle and proceed in the opposite direction
within the business district, except at street intersections; no vehicle,
however, shall make such a turn at any place at which an official traffic-
control sign prohibits such a turn.
(Prior Code, § 71.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 BACKING OF VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection or over a
crosswalk, nor shall he or she back it otherwise unless such movement can be
made in safety and unless ample warning has been given by hand, horn or other
signal.
(Prior Code, § 71.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
72.01   Vehicles not to stop in streets
   
72.02   Vehicles not to obstruct passage of other vehicles
   
72.03   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places
   
72.04   Standing or parking prohibited for certain purposes
   
72.05   Limited parking
   
72.06   Reserved parking places
   
72.07   Loading zones
   
72.08   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
72.09   Limitation on number of taxicabs parked within same block
   
72.10   Parking parallel to curb
   
72.11   Vehicles backed up to curb
   
72.12   Left side to curb prohibited in the business district
   
72.13   Parking within lines
   
72.14   Moving vehicles from parked positions
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 VEHICLES NOT TO STOP IN STREETS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking
as prescribed in this title, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach
of an authorized emergency vehicle, by the approach of a funeral or other
procession which is given right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance,
by the lowering of railway gates, by being given countermanding traffic
signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some
emergency.
   (B)   In all cases covered by these exceptions, vehicles shall stop so as
not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street
intersection, if such obstruction can be avoided.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with
the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when conflict with
other traffic is imminent or when so directed by a police officer or traffic-
control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   Within an intersection;
   (C)   On a crosswalk;
   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
   (E)   On either side of any street leading to a railroad underpass or an
overhead bridge, within 50 feet in any direction of the outer edge of such
underpass or overhead bridge;
   (F)   On either side of any street leading to a grade crossing, within 50
feet of the closest rail; provided, that where existing permanent structures
are located closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted in front of such
structures, unless otherwise prohibited, and if such parking does not block the
view in either direction of the approach of a locomotive or train;
   (G)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, if such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (H)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass
structure;
   (I)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium or any public building;
   (J)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopping, standing or parking at
the edge or curb of a street;
   (K)   Within five feet of the entrance of an alley;
   (L)   Where official traffic-control signs are posted indicating that
parking is prohibited; and
   (M)   Where, in lieu of official traffic-control signs, the curbing of a
street has been painted yellow by authority of the Town Council, except for a
period not in excess of 60 seconds and then only to receive or discharge
passengers.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) Penalty, see §
72.99
Statutory reference:
   Prohibited parking, see G.S. § 20-162
§ 72.04 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal
purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, excepting repair
necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons;
   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit has been
disconnected;
   (E)   Transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another; and
   (F)   Advertising.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 LIMITED PARKING.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted indicating that parking
is prohibited for a period in excess of a specified length of time (i.e., two
hour parking only), or that parking is prohibited on specified days or during
specified periods of time (i.e., parking prohibited 4:00 to 6:00 p.m.), no
person shall park a vehicle in violation of the prohibitions indicated by such
signs.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) (Ord. passed 5-14-2007) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 RESERVED PARKING PLACES.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted indicating that parking
is “reserved”, or reserved for specified categories (such as “reserved for town
officers” or “reserved for physician”), no person other than one for whom such
parking space is reserved shall park a vehicle within that space.
(Prior Code, § 72.07) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 LOADING ZONES.
   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted indicating “loading
zone”, no person shall stand or park a vehicle thereat except for the purpose
of loading or unloading cargo; provided, that drivers of other vehicles may
stand their vehicles in a loading zone for a period not in excess of 60 seconds
to receive or discharge passengers.
(Prior Code, § 72.08) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted indicating “bus
stop”, no person other than the driver of a bus authorized by the town shall
stand or park a vehicle thereat except for a period not in excess of 60 seconds
to receive or discharge passengers, and then only when no bus can be seen
approaching such designated bus stop.
   (B)   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted indicating “taxicab
stand” or “taxi stand”, no person other than the driver of a taxicab authorized
by the town shall stand or park a vehicle thereat except for a period not in
excess of 60 seconds to receive or discharge passengers, and then only when no
taxicab can be seen approaching such designated taxicab stand.
(Prior Code, § 72.09) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF TAXICABS PARKED WITHIN SAME BLOCK.
   Not more than two taxicabs owned by the same company shall be parked in one
block at the same time, unless parked in established taxi stands as set out in
§
72.08.
(Prior Code, § 72.10) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.
   All vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than six inches
therefrom, except where provided otherwise by official traffic-control devices.
(Prior Code, § 72.11) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 VEHICLES BACKED UP TO CURB.
   In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when
actually loading or unloading. If the vehicle is animal-drawn, the animal shall
stand parallel to the curb and face the direction of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 72.12) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 LEFT SIDE TO CURB PROHIBITED IN THE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business
district.
(Prior Code, § 72.13) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.13 PARKING WITHIN LINES.
   On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces
for vehicles, vehicles shall be parked wholly within the parking spaces so
marked.
(Prior Code, § 72.14) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.14 MOVING VEHICLES FROM PARKED POSITIONS.
   (A)   Parked vehicles shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are
parked at an angle with the curb, they shall back out at that angle until they
have cleared the other vehicles and shall then proceed in the direction they
are most nearly headed in.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any
prohibited area or sufficiently away from a curb to make such distance
unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 72.15) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
70.99.
   (B)   (1)   The violation of §§
72.03,
72.06,
72.07 or
72.08 shall constitute an infraction punishable, upon notification and
ticketing by a town police officer or assign, by a penalty of $10.
      (2)   This penalty shall be payable by cash or check within ten days to
the Plymouth Town Hall. If the penalty of $10 is not paid within the required
ten days, then this shall subject the offender to a civil penalty and will be
increased to $50 and collectable by any lawful means the town has available for
collection, including, but not limited to, a civil action in the nature of a
debt and any other remedy described in G.S. § 160A-175.
(Prior Code, § 72.99)
   (F)   A violation of §
72.03, illegally parking, is a $50 fine.
   (G)   A violation of §
72.03, illegally parking in a handicapped zone, is a $100 fine.
(G.S. § 14-4)
(Prior Code, § 70.99)
(Ord. passed 5-14-2007; Ord. 09-06, passed 1-12-2009; Res. passed 9-13-2010)
CHAPTER 73: ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
73.01   Administration
   
73.02   Definitions
   
73.03   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
73.04   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
73.05   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized
   
73.06   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing
notice requirement
   
73.07   Exceptions to prior notice requirement
   
73.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
73.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
73.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
73.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
73.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
73.13   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
73.14   Exceptions
   
73.15   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
§ 73.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Police Department and Manager and/or his or her designee of the
town shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public
streets and highways within the town, and on property owned by the town.
   (B)   The Town Manager and/or his or her designee shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance or junked
motor vehicles located on private property.
   (C)   The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck
operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned
vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this
chapter and applicable state laws.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal
authority or powers of officers of the Town Police Department and Fire
Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Prior Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Same as defined in G.S. § 160A-303(b1).
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department or
the Town Manager and/or his or her designee, respectively, designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self- propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in G.S. §§ 160A-303(b2) and 160A-303.2.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance and unlawful,
including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from
the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990; Ord. 2013-06, passed 7-8-
2013; Ord. 2013-07, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 73.03 ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the
term is defined in §
73.02.
   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(Prior Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.04 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the Town Manager and/or his or her designee may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.05 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as
defined herein, on the premises of public or private property. Single,
permitted junked motor vehicles must strictly comply with the location and
concealment requirements of this section.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession
of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with
the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of this section.
   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) of this section, upon
investigation, the Town Manager and/or his or her designee may order the
removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this chapter after finding in
writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the
burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a
balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding
gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area
appearance. The following among other relevant factors may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle:
      (1)   One junked motor vehicle.
         (a)   One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in the
rear yard as defined by the zoning code if the junked motor vehicle is entirely
concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting premises by
an acceptable covering.
         (b)   The Town Manager and/or his or her designee has the authority to
determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as required
by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must not be
allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible with the
objectives stated in the preamble of Ordinance 90-3.
      (2)   More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked motor vehicle
(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete
enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from a public
street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a
lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to
the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in
accordance with all zoning and building code regulations.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.06 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
73.07, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be
towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show
the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names
and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or
some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the
vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified dale (no sooner than seven
days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will
be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the
notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal
possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if
the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned,
a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic
benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be
made to the Town Council in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Town Council, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle
shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Prior Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.07 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings,
shall in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate
daily records.
   (B)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice
include:
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public
streets and highways, the Town Council hereby determines that immediate removal
of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in loading zones;
         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
under code sections.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property, other than the streets and
highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to
pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private
property.
(Prior Code, § 90.07) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.08 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by
the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services
for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official
shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such
notice to include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or
her agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed,
such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing
town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions (A)
(1) through (A)(5) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.09 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
   (A)   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled
to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for
removing the vehicle.
   (B)   A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the county
magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive such hearing
requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the
request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 90.09) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.10 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck vehicle. Upon regaining
possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the
vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.10) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990; Ord. passed 6-13-1994)
§ 73.11 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in
accordance with G.S. § 44A-1.
(Prior Code, § 90.11) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.12 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written request
of the owner, occupant of lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a
nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by
the Town Manager. The town may require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify
the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the
removal, storage or sale thereof.
(Prior Code, § 90.12) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.13 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.13) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.14 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:
   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD or junkyard as
defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. §§
136-141 et seq.;
   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;
   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the town.
(Prior Code, § 90.14) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
§ 73.15 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this code unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 90.15) (Ord. 90-3, passed 4-9-1990)
CHAPTER 74: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
74.01   Bicycles to be maintained in safe condition
   
74.02   Manner of operation
   
74.03   Restrictions as to bicycles and motorcycles
   
74.04   Impoundment of non-complying bicycles
   
74.05   Sale of impounded bicycles
BICYCLES
§ 74.01 BICYCLES TO BE MAINTAINED IN SAFE CONDITION.
   Each bicycle owner shall maintain the brakes, steering gear and other
working parts of his or her bicycle, and the lights and reflectors therein, in
good and safe condition so as to render the bicycle safe for use at all times
and not to constitute a danger to others.
(Prior Code, § 70.50) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.02 MANNER OF OPERATION.
   All bicycle riders shall operate their bicycles in a safe and careful
manner, with due regard for the safety of others, at all times.
(Prior Code, § 70.51) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 RESTRICTIONS AS TO BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not
carry any person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of his or her vehicle, nor
shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without
having his or her hands on the handlebars.
   (C)   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle upon any sidewalk within
the town.
(Prior Code, § 70.52) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 IMPOUNDMENT OF NON-COMPLYING BICYCLES.
   The Police Department may impound and retain possession of any bicycle which
is operated in violation of G.S. § 20-129(e) until the owner provides the
Police Department with complying lights and/or reflex mirror.
(Prior Code, § 98.01) (Ord. 97-2, passed 3-10-1997)
§ 74.05 SALE OF IMPOUNDED BICYCLES.
   Any bicycles impounded under this chapter that has been held for at least 30
days, after ten days’ notice by certified or registered mail to the owner or
violator of the statute, shall be sold in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. §§ 15-11 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 98.02) (Ord. 97-2, passed 3-10-1997)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck routes
      
II.   Stop signs
      
III.   Speed limits
      
IV.   One-way vehicular traffic
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted on streets
indicating a truck route through the town, drivers of trucks en route to
destinations beyond the town shall proceed only upon the route so indicated and
may deviate from such route only to receive or discharge cargo, to obtain motor
fuel or servicing, or in case of emergency.
   (B)   The following sections of streets and highways shall be designated as
the truck routes of the town:
 
Street or Highway   Length     Description              Ord. No. Date Passed
                               From the intersection of
                               Monroe Street and U.S.
Monroe Street                 Hwy. 64 to the           -        3-14-1983
                               intersection of Monroe
                               Street and Water Street
                               From the southern
                               corporate limit, a point
N.C. Hwy. 32        0.62 mile  approximately 0.32 mile  -        2-13-1983
                               south of SR 1114, north
                               to U.S. Hwy. 64
                               (Washington Street)
                               From the southern
                               corporate limit of the
                               town, approximately 0.1
                               mile south of SR 1114 -
N.C. Hwy. 45        0.23 mile  1113, north to the       -        2-13-1984
                               northern corporate limit
                               of the town,
                               approximately 0.13 mile
                               north of SR 1113-1114
                               From the southern
                               corporate limit, a point
                               approximately 0.12 mile
N.C. Hwy. 149       0.46 mile  north of SR 1336         -        2-13-1984
                               (Sandhill Road) north to
                               the northern corporate
                               limit, at the county
                               line
                               From N.C. Hwy. 32
                               (Washington Street),
U.S. Hwy. 64 - N.C. 1.53 miles east to the eastern      -        2-13-1984
Hwy. 32                        corporate limit of the
                               town at SR 1325 (Main
                               Street)
                               From the western
                               corporate limit of the
                               town, a point
U.S. Hwy. 64        0.87 mile  approximately 0.87 mile  -        2-13-1984
                               west of N.C. Hwy. 32
                               (Washington Street),
                               eastward to N.C. Hwy. 32
 
   (C)   The following street shall be closed to through truck traffic:
 
Street            Description                             Ord. No. Date Passed
                  From the intersection of Washington
                  Street and Adams Street to the
                  intersection of Washington Street and
Washington Street Third Street and from the intersection  -        5-9-1983
                  of Washington Street and Main Street to
                  the intersection of Washington Street
                  and Water Street
 
   (D)   All through trucks and other vehicles with gross weight in excess of
18,000 pounds shall be restricted to U.S. and North Carolina numbered routes
within the corporate limits of the town.
   (E)   Whenever official traffic-control signs are posted on streets
prohibiting or limiting the use of such streets to vehicles of specified types
or weights, (as, for example, “tractors prohibited”, “vehicles over 4000 pounds
prohibited” or “trucks prohibited except to receive or discharge cargo”),
drivers of vehicles to which such signs are applicable shall comply with the
prohibitions, restrictions and regulations indicated by such signs.
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. I) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate streets and highways, see G.S. § 160A-296
SCHEDULE II. STOP SIGNS.
 
Stop           Location          Side              Ord. No.         Date Passed
Madison Street Third Street and  Both directions   2013-05; 2013-08 - -;
               Madison Street    on Madison Street                  7-8-2013
Washington     Washington Street
Street         and East Water    East              86-9             8-11-1986
               Street
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. II)
SCHEDULE III. SPEED LIMITS.
Street Location Speed Limit (mph) Ord. No. Date Passed
Street             Location              Speed Limit (mph) Ord. No. Date Passed
Alden Court        Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Carolina Avenue    Within the            15                2022-01  3-14-2022
                   residential area
Cedar Court        Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Country Club Drive Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Darby Circle       Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Golf Road          Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Gurkin Lane        Within the            15                2022-01  3-14-2022
                   residential area
Linden Street      Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Maple Court        Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
                   The southern
                   corporate limit, a
                   point approximately
                   0.1 mile south of SR
N.C. 45            1114-1113, northward  55                1        8-8-1983
                   to the northern
                   corporate limit, a
                   point approximately
                   0.13 mile south north
                   of SR 1113-1114
Pine Court         Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
Poplar Court       Within the            20                -        8-13-2007
                   residential area
                   Between Washington
Third Street       Street and Monroe     25                2016-09  9-12-2016
                   Street
                   From Washington
                   Street (N.C. 32),
U.S. 64-N.C. 32    northeastward to the  45                6        8-8-1983
                   eastern corporate
                   limit, at East Main
                   Street (SR 1325)
Wilson Street (SR  From Pine Street to   35                -        8-14-2000
1335)              U.S. 64
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. III)
SCHEDULE IV. ONE-WAY VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
 
Street      Location                Direction              Ord. No. Date Passed
                                    South, entering onto
                                    West Avenue from U.S.
West Avenue Between U.S. Highway 64 Highway 64, Luverna    2015-05  4-13-2015
            and Roosevelt Avenue    Street and/or Monroe
                                    Street and exiting out
                                    onto Roosevelt Avenue
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. IV)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking areas
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Parking prohibited. All parking will be prohibited on the following
described areas. Signs giving notice of no parking areas shall be erected.
 
Location       Between         Side            Times     Ord. No. Date
                               Grassed areas
East Water     Martin Lane and on north and
Street         Adams Street    south side of   Any       97-5     7-29-1997
                               East Water
                               Street to river
Municipal
parking lot                    North side of
adjacent to                   East Water      Overnight 97-5     7-29-1997
public boat                    Street
launch
Madison Street Main Street and West side of    Any       -        7-14-2008
               Water Street    Madison Street
               Adams Street
               and the east
               side of the
               driveway, now   North side      All times
Third Street   or formerly     (across from    except on 2013-02  2-11-2013
               owned by the    library)        Sundays
               Washington
               County Human
               Services
 
   (B)   Penalty. A violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction
and shall be subject to a penalty of $50.
(Prior Code, Ch. 74, Sch. I)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
      
92.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
      
95.   NOISE
      
96.   PARADES, PICKET LINES AND GROUP DEMONSTRATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Town designated bird sanctuary
   
90.02   Keeping of beehives prohibited
   
90.03   Keeping or feeding certain animals in town prohibited
   
90.04   Trespassing fowl; impoundment and disposition
   
90.05   Structures for sale of livestock prohibited
Dogs
   
90.20   Collar, identification and rabies identification
   
90.21   License required; license tag
   
90.22   Running at large
   
90.23   Dogs creating nuisance
   
90.24   Investigation; notice and order to abate
   
90.25   Failure to abate; impoundment
   
90.26   Unclaimed dogs; diseased dogs
Impoundment
   
90.40   Impoundment; disposition
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 TOWN DESIGNATED BIRD SANCTUARY.
   The entire area of the town is hereby created and established as a bird
sanctuary as to all birds protected by the State Wildlife Resources Commission
or otherwise by state law. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap,
kill or otherwise take any protected bird within the town limits except
pursuant to a permit issued under G.S. § 113-274.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to establish bird sanctuary, see G.S. § 160A-188
§ 90.02 KEEPING OF BEEHIVES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep hives of bees in the
town or to keep or maintain any hive, box or other similar thing in the town
for the purpose of keeping bees.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 KEEPING OR FEEDING CERTAIN ANIMALS IN TOWN PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, breed or raise within the
town any horse, goat, mule, cattle, hog, sheep, pony, chicken, turkey or other
poultry or fowl.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or harbor within the
town any wild animal dangerous to person or property or offensive to the
senses. However, this division (B) shall not apply to any circus or menagerie
duly licensed by the town or by the state.
(Prior Code, § 91.03)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally feed any wild
animal within the confines of the town and will be penalized per §
10.99, with the exception of the following: Feeding of birds, provided that the
food is contained in a feeder which is reasonably designed to avoid access by
wild animals and placed in a manner to avoid access by wild animals.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 10-14-2024) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 TRESPASSING FOWL; IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Any person, including the town, upon whose premises chickens, ducks,
geese or other fowl are trespassing may impound the same and notify the owner
thereof, if known.
   (B)   If the owner is not known, notice shall be given to the Chief of
Police, and if such fowl are not claimed by their owner within two days they
may be sold at public sale after posting notice of sale at the Town Hall for a
period of three days, and if not then sold at public sale they may be sold at
private sale or otherwise disposed of in a lawful manner.
(Prior Code, § 91.04)
§ 90.05 STRUCTURES FOR SALE OF LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any stable, barn or
other structure for the sale, exchange or trade of horses, cows or other
livestock within the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) Penalty, §
90.99
DOGS
§ 90.20 COLLAR, IDENTIFICATION AND RABIES IDENTIFICATION.
   Every owner of a dog four months or more in age and kept in the town shall
have and keep the dog vaccinated against rabies in compliance with the state
law regulating rabies vaccination (G.S. §§ 130A-184 et seq.). Located on or
attached to this collar shall be a permanent identification tag and a current
state rabies vaccination tag. The identification tag shall contain the name and
address of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 91.10) (Res. 95-9, passed 10-9-1995) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Vaccination of dogs, see G.S. § 130A-185
§ 90.21 LICENSE REQUIRED; LICENSE TAG.
   (A)   Upon every dog six months or more of age which may be kept within the
town on July 1 of any year, or which may be brought into the town or acquired
at any other time to be kept therein, the license fee herein provided shall
become immediately due and payable to the town. Upon each dog, which shall
become six months of age, the license fee herein prescribed shall become due
and payable by the owner of the dog. The license fee so required to be paid
shall be $2 for any unspayed female dog and $1 for any male or spayed female
dog.
   (B)   (1)   The fee prescribed by division (A) of this section shall be paid
to the Town Tax Collector, each fee becoming due and payable on July 1 of any
year shall be paid on or before July 1 of such year. Each fee becoming due and
payable on some other date than July 1 of any year shall be paid within 30 days
after such fee becomes due.
      (2)   For each dog for which the proper license fee is paid, the Town Tax
Collector shall issue a suitable license tag, showing the serial number and
shall keep a proper record of the name of the owner. The owner shall cause this
tag to be worn at all times by the dog.
(Prior Code, § 91.11) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person owning or having the custody of any dog shall allow such dog
to run at large on the premises of another or in any of the streets or other
public places of the town. Dogs may be taken on the streets on leash only.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the animal control to take into custody any
dog found in violation of division (A) of this section and to impound such dog,
whereupon the provisions of §
90.40 shall become applicable and shall be complied with.
(Prior Code, § 91.12) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 DOGS CREATING NUISANCE.
   The running at large of dogs having dangerous or destructive propensities
indicated by the turning over of garbage receptacles; or the destruction of
shrubs, flowers, grass and other plant growth; or the destruction of other
property; or the killing of other animals; or the attacking of persons; or any
person keeping within the corporate limits of the town one or more dogs which
by prolonged and habitual barking, howling or whining cause serious annoyance
to neighboring residents and interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of
the premises occupied by such residents, shall be guilty of maintaining a
nuisance; or any other similar act is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
and shall be abated as provided in §
90.24.
(Prior Code, § 91.13)
§ 90.24 INVESTIGATION; NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE.
   (A)   Upon any written, detailed and signed complaint being made to the Town
Manager by any resident that any person is maintaining a public nuisance as
described in §
90.23, the Town Manager shall designate the Chief of Police to cause the owner
or keeper of the dog in question to be notified that a complaint has been
received and shall cause the situation complained of to be investigated. The
investigating officer shall report to the Chief of Police, in writing, a
summary of his or her investigation and his or her findings.
   (B)   If the written findings of the investigating officer indicate that the
complaint is justified, then the Chief of Police shall cause the owner or
keeper of the dog in question to be so notified in writing, and shall order him
or her to abate such nuisance within 48 hours by destruction or removal of such
dog, or by penning, fencing or otherwise restraining such dog from running at
large or committing such nuisance at any time. In the event the owner or keeper
of the dog is unknown and cannot be ascertained, such notice and order, along
with a general description of the dog, shall be posted for 48 hours at the Town
Hall.
(Prior Code, § 91.14)
§ 90.25 FAILURE TO ABATE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   (1)   If any person being the owner or keeper of a dog subject to §§
90.23 and
90.24, shall fail or refuse to abate such nuisance upon order of the Chief of
Police within the specified time, the Chief shall cause the dog in question to
be apprehended and impounded in a suitable place, and the owner or keeper shall
be notified in writing of such impoundment.
      (2)   If the owner or keeper shall so request, the dog shall be released
to him or her upon his or her execution of a written agreement to comply with
the abatement order and upon payment of the applicable fees and charges as
provided in division (B) of this section.
      (3)   If no such request and execution is made by the owner or keeper
within five days after written notice, the Chief of Police shall cause the dog
to be disposed of as provided in §
90.26.
   (B)   The owner of an animal impounded under this section may redeem such
animal upon written agreement to remedy the violation, payment of any civil
penalty and payment of fees and charge required by Washington County Animal
Control.
   (C)   In the event that the owner or keeper of a dog creating a nuisance is
unknown, the Chief of Police shall cause apprehension and impoundment to be
carried out, and if no one claims such dog within 48 hours after posting of the
notice, order and description, he or she shall cause a notice of impoundment,
along with a general description of the dog, to be posted for five days at the
Town Hall; and if no request for release of such dog and execution of agreement
to comply with the order of abatement respecting such dog has been made by the
owner or keeper of the dog, the dog shall be disposed of as provided in §
90.26.
(Prior Code, § 91.15) (Res. 95-9, passed 10-9-1995)
§ 90.26 UNCLAIMED DOGS; DISEASED DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the animal control to keep all dogs so
impounded for a period of not less than six days. If, at expiration of six days
from the date of notice to the owner or the posting of notice, such dog shall
not have been redeemed, such dog may be released to any responsible person who
will agree to keep the dog in such manner as not to constitute a nuisance; will
procure a dog license, if none is currently in effect; and will have the dog
immunized against rabies, if the dog is not currently immunized. Dogs not so
released shall be destroyed in a humane manner.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any
impounded dog which reasonably appears to be afflicted with rabies or other
dangerous disease shall be destroyed in a humane manner.
(Prior Code, § 91.16)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.40 IMPOUNDMENT; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   Any animal which is prohibited by §
90.03(A) to be kept, bred or raised within the town and which is found running
at large anywhere within the town, or any dog found running at large in
violation of §
90.22 shall be seized and impounded by the animal control.
   (B)   (1)   Any animal seized by the animal control pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall be impounded at a place designated for such purposes by
the Town Manager and shall be kept there for at least three days. Whenever
possible, its owner or other keeper shall be notified of such happening and
that the animal may be redeemed by the payment of an impoundment fee of $1 plus
the cost of care, feeding and shelter, such payment to be made within two days
from the date of such notice.
      (2)   Any animal not so redeemed may be sold at a public sale, following
advertisement thereof by notice posted on the Town Hall bulletin board for
three days, to recover the impoundment fee and costs. If no buyer is found, the
animal in question may be destroyed in a humane manner or given away to some
responsible person.
   (C)   The proceeds of any sale under division (B) of this section which are
in excess of the impoundment feet, cost of care, feeding and shelter, and the
cost of sale shall be turned over by the animal control to the Clerk and shall
be held by him or her until claimed by the owner of the animal in question
within three months of the sale; and if no claim is made within such time the
proceeds so held shall be credited to the General Fund of the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.25)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to the impoundment and associated fees of any dog found to
be running at large, any person found in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty to be collected by the town in the
amount of $20 for the first offense, $30 for the second offense and $50 for the
third offense. Such owner shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor, and should the
owner not remedy the violation of this section, the town can press for a
conviction thereof. This conviction shall be punished by a fine of $50.
   (C)   If any person, being the owner or keeper of a dog respecting which an
order of abatement in accordance with §
90.25 has been issued, shall fail or refuse to abate the nuisance as ordered,
he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a
fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.
S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 91.15) (Res. 95-9, passed 10-9-1995)
CHAPTER 91: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
General Rules and Regulations
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Scope, enforcement and amendment
   
91.03   General rules and regulations
   
91.04   Motor vehicle regulations
   
91.05   Aircraft operations regulations
   
91.06   Rules for aircraft fueling operations
   
91.07   Fire regulations
   
91.08   Regulations governing minimum requirements for all fixed base
operations
   
91.09   Procedures for receiving and processing applications for commercial
operations
   
91.10   Special airport uses
   
91.11   Categories of aircraft
   
91.12   Schedule of charges – aircraft
Height Regulations
   
91.25   Short title
   
91.26   Definitions
   
91.27   Airport zones
   
91.28   Airport zone height limitations
   
91.29   Use restrictions
   
91.30   Nonconforming uses
   
91.31   Permits
   
91.32   Enforcement
   
91.33   Board of Appeals
   
91.34   Appeals
   
91.35   Judicial review
   
91.36   Conflicting regulations
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. The PIymouth Municipal Airport and includes all property and
improvements within the boundary lines of any airport operated or controlled by
the town, including the Municipal Airport, except when otherwise noted.
   AIRPORT COMMITTEE. The Plymouth Municipal Airport Committee, including any
duly authorized representative thereof, whether acting directly within its
legal powers or as an agent empowered through the town.
   AIRPORT MANAGER. The officer or representative of the owner having immediate
charge of the airport, including any duly authorized representative thereof.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   OWNER. The Town of Plymouth, including any duly authorized representative or
designee thereof.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, group or
duly authorized representative thereof.
(Prior Code, § 80.01) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003)
§ 91.02 SCOPE, ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENT.
   (A)   All users of and persons on the airport shall be governed by these
regulations and the directions of the owner. These regulations are subject to
change by the owner at any time based upon experience, need and operating
conditions.
   (B)   The owner shall, at all times, have authority to take such reasonable
action as may be necessary to enforce these regulations and to efficiently
manage the airport and its operations. In any contingencies not specifically
covered by these rules and regulations, the owner shall be authorized to make
such reasonable rules, orders and decisions as may be necessary and proper.
      (1)   The owner may delay or restrict any flight or other operations at
the airport, refuse takeoff clearance to any aircraft, or prohibit use of all
or any part of the airport for any purpose by an individual or group for any
reason it believes is justifiable.
      (2)   In the event the owner believes the airport conditions are unsafe
for landing or takeoff, it shall be within its authority to issue a NOTAM
closing the airport or any part thereof.
   (C)   These regulations are not intended to amend, modify or supersede any
provision of federal, state or local law, or any specific contractual agreement
of the owner with which it may conflict; provided however, that these
regulations shall, insofar as possible, be interpreted so that no such conflict
shall exist.
   (D)   If any portion of these regulations shall be invalid or unenforceable,
all other portions shall remain in effect and be construed to achieve the
purposes hereof.
   (E)   (1)   Any proposed changes in these regulations shall be posted by the
airport committee in a public area at the airport for a period of not less than
30 days and not more than 60 days. During this period, comments on the proposed
changes may be submitted by the general public in writing to the airport
committee.
      (2)   The closing date for comments shall also be posted. After review of
comments by the airport committee, recommendations shall be made and forwarded
to the owner for approval. Copies of changes will be posted at the airport and
provided to all known holders of same.
(Prior Code, § 80.02) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003)
§ 91.03 GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Hours of operation. The airport terminal building will be open for
public use from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding town
holidays, unless otherwise designated by the owner.
      (1)   Passenger access and areas. It shall be the sole responsibility of
the fixed base operator(s) (if none, then the owner) to see that all gate,
chains, doors and other public safeguards are continually and conscientiously
used in a manner so as to protect all persons.
      (2)   Restricted areas. No person shall enter upon the field area,
utilities and service rooms or areas, or other areas as may be designated
restricted except:
         (a)   Persons assigned to duty therein;
         (b)   Persons authorized by the owner; or
         (c)   Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering the apron
for the purpose of embarkation or debarkation.
      (3)   Use of roads and walks.
         (a)   No person shall travel on the airport other than on the roads,
walks or places so provided for the particular class of traffic.
         (b)   No person shall occupy the roads or walks in such a manner as to
hinder or obstruct their proper use.
         (c)   No person shall walk in a picket line as a picket or take part
in any labor or other public demonstration on any part of the airport except
those places which may be specifically assigned for use by such picket or
public demonstrations by the owner.
   (B)   Owner. The owner has the right to and does hereby regulate all
commercial enterprises using the airport as a basis of operation, whether such
operation is aeronautical or non-aeronautical in nature. No commercial
operation of any kind or type shall be conducted on the airport unless
specifically authorized by the owner.
   (C)   Flying club. A flying club is recognized as a plan for the joint
ownership of aircraft and the fair distribution of the cost of maintaining and
operating such aircraft. Such operation is not considered to be commercial in
nature when so operated. Neither is flight instruction by club members for
other club members considered to be commercial in nature so long as there is no
profit or for-hire motive involved in the operation. In all cases, the owner
will determine if the operation of a flying club or other such organization is
commercial. If determined to be commercial, the club shall conform to the
requirements set forth herein for commercial fixed base operators.
   (D)   Liability. The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any
manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all
the regulations herein provided and adopted by owner. The privilege of using
the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full
responsibility and risk by the user thereof and he or she shall release, hold
harmless and indemnify the owner, its officers and employees from any liability
or loss resulting from such use, as well as claims of third persons using the
airport. The privilege of using the airport shall be upon the further condition
that any person desiring to use the same shall furnish a policy to indemnify
the owner against personal injury and property damage in a reasonable sum as
the owner shall require. The owner and the airport committee assumes no
responsibility for any loss, injury or damage to persons or property by any
reason, including but not limited to fire, theft, vandalism, wind, earthquake,
collision, strikes, acts of God, or of the public enemy, nor does the owner or
airport committee assume any liability for injury to persons or property while
on the airport or while using any of the airport facilities.
   (E)   Accident and damage reports. All persons involved in any accident or
any occurrence resulting in any damage whatsoever shall make a full report of
same to the owner as soon as practicable and, in any event, within 24 hours of
any such occurrence. Such reports can be initiated by calling 793-9801.
   (F)   Solicitation of funds. No person shall solicit funds for any purpose
and no signs or advertisements may be posted at the airport without permission
of the owner.
   (G)   Storage and disposal.
      (1)   No hazardous cargo shall be allowed long-term storage or storage at
the airport.
      (2)   Gasoline, oil, solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored on
apron or ramp areas in
excess of amounts actually needed as current stock. Any material of this type
that is kept in subject areas will be enclosed and covered in housing of a
design and type that meets the approval of the owner.
      (3)   No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be disposed
of or dumped in drains, ditches or elsewhere on the airport.
      (4)   (a)   Garbage, refuse and other waste material from the public in
general shall be placed in receptacles provided for such purpose.
         (b)   Other persons using the airport shall provide suitable metal
receptacles with self closing covers for the storage of waste, rags and other
rubbish. All used waste, rags and rubbish shall be removed at least once per
week.
         (c)   Persons may contract with other agencies or persons for removal
of this material, subject to the approval of the owner. If any area is not
cleaned after warning from the owner, cleaning will be done by the owner, the
expense for which will be billed to the responsible person.
      (5)   No person shall abandon any personal property on the airport.
   (H)   Preservation of property. No person, without the consent of the owner,
shall destroy, injure, deface, remove or disturb in any way any building, sign,
equipment, marker, other structure, tree, flower, lawn or other property on the
airport. No person shall alter, make additions to, erect any building or sign,
or make any excavation on the airport.
   (I)   Lost articles. All lost articles shall be turned into the owner by the
finders thereof. Any such articles not claimed in 60 days shall be disposed of
as determined by the owner.
   (J)   Radio equipment. The installation and operation of two-way radios is
not permitted on the airport without prior permission from the owner. No person
shall operate any radio equipment in any aircraft when such aircraft is in a
hangar except when radio maintenance is being performed on the aircraft.
   (K)   Interfering or tampering with aircraft. No persons shall interfere or
tamper with any aircraft or put in motion the engine of such aircraft, or use
any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools, without permission of the
owner thereof or by specific direction of the owner.
   (L)   Loitering and refusal to comply. No person shall loiter on any part of
the airport or in any building on the airport. Any person who shall refuse to
comply with these applicable rules and regulations after proper request by the
owner, shall be regarded as a trespasser(s).
   (M)   Disorderly conduct. No person shall be or become intoxicated or drunk;
commit any disorderly, obscene or indecent act; commit any act of nuisance; or
engage in any form of gambling on the airport.
   (N)   Weapons, explosives and inflammable materials. No person except law
enforcement officers, duly authorized postal inspectors, airport and air
carrier employees or members of the Armed Forces of the United States on
official duty shall carry any weapons, explosives or inflammable material on
the airport, except cased sporting guns for transshipment. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the owner may, from time to time, authorize a person or persons to
control wildlife by virtue of a state permit and to possess and utilize the
necessary weapon(s) therefor.
   (O)   Animals. No person shall enter the terminal building or the airport
with a dog or other animal except seeing eye dogs, or dogs or other animals
which are to be transported by air and are restrained by leash and properly
confined.
   (P)   Use of other law enforcement agencies. In the event that occasions
arise that are beyond the capability of the owner to deal with in any manner,
the Police Department, the Highway Patrol, the Fire Department and/or the
County Sheriff shall be called upon by the owner for assistance and action as
may be necessary.
   (Q)   Emergency. In the event of any emergency on the airport, notification
should be given to the owner, if practical, and to the Police Department, the
Highway Patrol, the Fire Department and/or the County Sheriff. The same agency
or agencies shall be called upon, as appropriate, in the event that emergency
medical assistance is required.
   (R)   Payment of charges.
      (1)   Payable upon presentation. All bills are payable upon presentation
unless otherwise noted thereon. All percentages or income charges are payable
within ten days of the end of the period in which the income was received
unless otherwise agreed in writing.
      (2)   Default of obligations. When any obligee is formally notified of
their default on any written or implied obligation to the owner, whether it be
for breach of performance or service covenants or other non-payment, the
obligee shall thereafter be billed for all losses of revenue, expenses incurred
to re-establish performance or service, and other costs, including costs of
collection, unless the obligee files with the owner within ten days of receipt
of the formal notification a statement that corrective or preventative measures
have been initiated and will diligently be carried to completion. If the
promises contained in the statement are not fulfilled, the obligee will be
considered in absolute default and appropriate, lawful steps will be taken by
the owner.
(Prior Code, § 80.03) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall operate motorized equipment of any kind on the airport
unless possessed of a valid operator’s license for such equipment.
   (B)   Unless authorized by the owner, no highway or automotive vehicle shall
be operated on the airport except on roadways, parking areas and the like that
are specifically designated for such vehicles.
   (C)   Parking: no person shall park a motor vehicle for loading, unloading
or any other purpose on the airport other than in the areas specifically
established for parking and in the manner prescribed by signs, lines or other
means.
      (1)   No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on the airport.
      (2)   No person shall park a motor vehicle in the area requiring payment
for parking thereon without payment therefor, in a manner so as to obstruct
roadways, in aircraft parking areas, or on grass areas.
      (3)   The owner shall have the authority to tow or otherwise move motor
vehicles which are parked by their owners or operators on the airport in
violation of these regulations, at the owner or operator’s expense and without
liability for any damage which may result in the course of such removal or
subsequent storage.
   (D)   No surface vehicle shall be driven between the loading gate or fence
and an aircraft parked and in the process of loading or unloading.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle on the airport in a
careless, reckless or negligent manner; in disregard for the safety of others;
or in excess of the speed limits prescribed or posted by the owner and in no
event in excess of ten mph in the ramp, apron, aircraft parking and hangar
areas.
      (2)   No persons operating a motor vehicle on the airport shall fail to
give proper signals or fail to observe the direction of posted traffic signs.
   (F)   All pedestrians and aircraft shall at all times have right-of-way over
all surface vehicles. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft.
   (G)   No persons under the influence of alcohol or narcotic drugs shall
operate a motor vehicle or aircraft on the airport.
   (H)   No persons shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport overloaded
or carrying more passengers than that for which the vehicles were designed. No
vehicles shall be operated on the airport if it is constructed, equipped or
loaded so as to endanger persons or property. No person shall ride on the
running board, stand up in the body of moving vehicles or ride on the outside
of the body of a vehicle or with arms or legs protruding from the body of motor
vehicles.
   (I)   No person shall operate any type of motor vehicle without exhausts
protected by screens or baffles to prevent the escape of sparks or the
propagation of flame. Gasoline tenders will at no time be blocked or so
positioned as to prevent a rapid removal of such tender.
   (J)   All vehicles operating within the landing area shall be painted a
bright yellow or international orange, or display an international orange and
white checkered flag of not less than three feet square, with one-foot squares.
   (K)   Repair of motor vehicles: no persons shall clean or make any repairs
to motor vehicles anywhere on the airport other than in designated shop areas,
except those minor repairs necessary to remove such motor vehicles from the
airport. No person shall move, interfere or tamper with any motor vehicle; put
in motion the engine; or take or use any motor vehicle part, instrument or tool
thereof without the permission of the owner of such vehicle or satisfactory
evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the owner.
(Prior Code, § 80.04) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The FAA air traffic rules and regulations governing the operation of
aircraft in effect as of this date, as well as all additions or amendments
thereto, are made a part of these airport rules and regulations as fully as if
set forth herein. All aeronautical activities at this airport and all flying of
aircraft departing from or arriving in the air space above this airport shall
be conducted in conformity with the current, pertinent regulations and
directives of the FAA and Civil Aeronautics Board and, to the extent
applicable, the orders and directives issued by the owner.
   (B)   No fixed wing or rotary wing aircraft shall be allowed to operate at
the airport unless said aircraft has a current FAA airworthiness certificate
and is operated by a licensed pilot or student pilot holding a valid medical
certificate.
   (C)   The owners of all aircraft based on the airport will register their
aircraft with the owner. Any change in ownership will require a change in
registration.
   (D)   Any payment required for the use of airport facilities, storage,
repairs, supplies or other services rendered at the airport shall be made
before flight clearance is granted unless satisfactory credit arrangements have
been made with the owner. The owner shall have the authority to detain any
aircraft for nonpayment of any charges due.
   (E)   Aircraft shall perform run-up or prolonged engine test operations only
in the places designated for such purposes and, in no event, shall such
operations be performed in an area that would result in a hazard or nuisance to
other aircraft, persons or property. At no time shall engines be run up when
hangars, shops, airplanes or any buildings or persons are in the path of the
propeller stream and/or jet exhaust.
   (F)   No person shall park or store aircraft in any area on the airport
other than that area specifically designated for such use. At the direction of
the owner, the operator, owner or pilot of any illegally parked aircraft on the
airport shall move the aircraft to a legally designated parking area on the
airport. If the operator refuses to comply with the directions, the owner may
tow the aircraft to such place, at the operator’s expense and without liability
for damage that may result from such moving or subsequent storage.
   (G)   The performance of aircraft and engine repair and maintenance is
considered an aeronautical service regulated by the owner except where such
services or repairs are performed by the aircraft owner or his or her
employees. The owner reserves the right to designate reasonable areas where
such aircraft owners may perform services on their own aircraft. If such areas
are designated, the owner may prohibit the performance of such services in tie-
down areas and prescribe rules for the use of such owner type aircraft
maintenance areas.
   (H)   The pilot of any aircraft and the persons involved in any aircraft
accident on or near the airport causing personal injury or property damage,
shall make a full report to the owner as soon as practicable, which report
shall include each individual’s name and address. In the event the pilot
involved in any such accident is unable to make said report, the owner of the
aircraft involved or his or her agent shall make said report. In addition, all
aircraft accidents shall be reported to the FAA General Aviation District
Office by telephone. When a written report of an accident is required by
federal air regulations, a copy of such report shall be submitted to the owner.
      (1)   In the event of an accident, the owner may, in compliance with FAA
and other governmental regulations, move damaged aircraft from the landing
areas, ramps, aprons or other areas at the expense of the aircraft owner and
without liability for damage resulting from such moving or subsequent storage.
      (2)   Airport property damaged or destroyed by an accident or otherwise
shall be paid for by the parties responsible. Any person damaging any light or
fixture by operation of an aircraft or otherwise shall report such damage to
the owner immediately and shall be responsible for any costs required to repair
or replace the damage caused.
   (I)   Starting, running, taxiing, takeoff and landing.
      (1)   No person shall start or run any aircraft engine unless a competent
person is in the aircraft attending the engine controls.
      (2)   Blocks shall always be placed in front of the wheels before
starting the engine or engines unless the aircraft is provided with adequate
parking brakes.
      (3)   No person shall taxi an aircraft until he or she has ascertained by
visual inspection of the area that there will be no danger of collision with
any person or object in the immediate area. Aircraft not equipped with brakes
shall have an attendant at a wing when the aircraft is taxied near buildings or
other aircraft. Aircraft shall be taxied at a safe and reasonable speed with
due respect for other aircraft, persons or property. Aircraft taxiing shall
conform to the designated taxi patterns. Taxiing aircraft, when instructed to
hold clear of the active runway, will hold clear at the taxiway hold line.
      (4)   All takeoffs and landings shall be confined to the runways and all
movement of aircraft shall be confined to the hard surface areas. No landing or
takeoff will be permitted on the taxiways. Aircraft awaiting takeoff shall stop
at the taxiway hold lines for the runway in use and in a position so as to have
a direct view of aircraft approaching and landing. Engine checks and run-ups
prior to takeoff will be performed behind taxiway hold lines.
      (5)   Prior authorization is required before air ships, dirigibles,
motor-less aircraft or aircraft with total gross weight in excess of 25,000
pounds single wheel or 40,000 pounds dual wheels land or takeoff at the
airport.
      (6)   Landing and takeoff should be made on the runway subject to the
wind direction. No landing or takeoff shall be made except at a safe distance
from other aircraft. All aircraft should use a recommended traffic pattern
altitude.
   (J)   No experimental flight or ground demonstrations shall be conducted on
the airport without the express approval of the owner.
   (K)   No person, except airmen, duly authorized personnel, passengers going
to or from aircraft, or persons being personally conducted by airport
attendants, shall be permitted to enter the landing area proper, taxi space or
aprons. However, this does not give any person or persons so excepted the
privilege of unrestricted use of the airport. These privileges are confined to
the necessary use of these spaces in connection with flights, inspections and
routine duties.
   (L)   All non-airworthy and/or otherwise disabled aircraft and parts thereof
on the airport shall be removed promptly from the airport operations areas by
the owners. If any person refuses to move said aircraft or parts thereof as
directed by the owner, said aircraft or parts thereof may be removed by the
owner at the aircraft owner or operator’s expense and without any liability for
damage which may result in the course of such moving or subsequent storage.
   (M)   Aircraft carrying or suspected of carrying explosives.
      (1)   Landing or taxiing aircraft.
         (a)   Persons having knowledge of an aircraft carrying or suspected of
carrying explosive materials will immediately so advise the owner.
         (b)   Aircraft having passengers aboard will unload passengers on the
outer extremities of the airport terminal ramp and then immediately be moved to
the taxiway hold line. Only engines affecting unloading of passengers should be
shut off to enable subsequent moving of aircraft with a minimum of delay.
      (2)   Inspection of the aircraft. Inspection of the aircraft and
subsequent declaration of safety or contamination shall be the responsibility
of the aircraft owner or his or her authorized agent and shall be accomplished
immediately after parking and evacuation.
(Prior Code, § 80.05) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 RULES FOR AIRCRAFT FUELING OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No fuel storage or dispensing equipment shall be installed or used at
the airport without the prior written approval of the owner. All such
equipment, including fueling hoses, shall be of a modern design, kept in a safe
and non-leaking condition, equipped with a grounding device to prevent ignition
of volatile liquids and approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters in
all respects and parts. The use of skid tanks and other such devices is
prohibited.
   (B)   No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while the aircraft engine is
running or being warmed by applications of exterior heat or while the aircraft
is in a hangar or an enclosed space. No aircraft shall be fueled or drained
while passengers are on board the aircraft, the aircraft door is in open
position, and a cabin attendant is present at or near the cabin door.
   (C)   During all fuel operations, the aircraft and fuel dispensing apparatus
shall be grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential. No person
shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver, or switch electrical
appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or draining of aircraft. No
person shall use any material during fueling or draining of aircraft that is
likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition.
   (D)   Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all persons
engaged in fueling or draining aircraft.
   (E)   Smoking or lighting of an open flame shall be prohibited within 100
feet of any fueling operation.
   (F)   Fueling operations shall be conducted and fuel trucks shall be parked
at least 50 feet from any hangar, another aircraft or building.
   (G)   When filling a tender from storage, two persons shall be in active
attendance, except that only one person shall be required if a non-locking
valve is in use on the fill pipe and control for said valve must be
continuously in the attendant’s hand in order to maintain fuel flow.
   (H)   Persons engaged in the fueling and draining of aircraft shall exercise
care to prevent overflow of fuel. Persons responsible will take proper measures
to remove any volatile liquid when spilled.
(Prior Code, § 80.06) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 FIRE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Smoking or lighting of an open flame is prohibited at places with
posted signs, within 100 feet of any aircraft and within 100 feet of hangars,
fuel trucks or fuel loading stations, and tank farms.
   (B)   No person shall start an open fire any place on the airport without
permission of the owner.
   (C)   No person shall use flammable volatile liquids having a flash point of
less than 1,100°F in the cleaning of aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers,
appliances, or for any other purpose, unless such operations are conducted in
open air, or in a room specifically set aside for that purpose, which room must
be properly fire-proofed and equipped with adequate and readily accessible fire
extinguishing apparatus.
   (D)   No person shall store material or equipment, use inflammable liquids
or gases, or allow their premises to become in such condition so as to violate,
in any manner, the fire code in force in the area of the airport; provided
however, that such materials may be kept in an aircraft in the proper
receptacles installed in the aircraft for such purpose, or in rooms or areas
specifically approved for such storage by the owner, or in the underwriter’s
approved safety cans. The storage of paint thinners, fuels or other such
volatile materials in hangars is prohibited.
   (E)   Tenants of all hangars and buildings shall provide suitable fire
extinguishers and equipment, and they shall be kept in good condition as
recommended by the Fire Chief and inspected at least every 12 months by trained
personnel.
   (F)   (1)   Tenants and persons are required to keep their premises clean
and clear of all rubbish, junk, debris, old aircraft and vehicles, and
unsightly objects.
      (2)   If, after warning by the owner, the area is not cleaned, cleaning
will be done by the owner and billed to the tenant or person.
(Prior Code, § 80.07) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 REGULATIONS GOVERNING MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FIXED BASE
OPERATIONS.
   (A)   All fixed base operations at the airport shall be full-time,
progressive business enterprises, with manned office facilities at the airport
during all business hours. No fixed base operator shall be allowed to operate
on the airport without a fully executed lease agreement with the owner.
   (B)   Fixed base operators may only sell aviation petroleum products if
authorized by the owner and shall also be required to meet the minimum
standards and offer the services that are associated with said operations as
more particularly prescribed herein. Such operators may, at their option,
engage in other aeronautical activities by qualifying to meet the associated
minimum standards for the aeronautical services involved.
   (C)   No persons or fixed base operators other than the operators qualifying
under division (B) of this section will be permitted to sell aviation petroleum
products and only if specifically authorized by owner. All other fixed base
operators may engage in such other aeronautical services as they may qualify
themselves for in accordance with these regulations and their lease agreements.
   (D)   The owner shall determine substantial conformance to the standards for
fixed base operators.
   (E)   Fixed base operators must show financial solvency and business ability
to the satisfaction of the owner.
   (F)   The minimum liability insurance which a fixed base operator shall
carry is:
 
                          $5,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
Premises liability        bodily injury and property damage, including products
                          hazard
                          $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
Aircraft public liability bodily injury and property damage, including $100,000
                          per passenger bodily injury
 
   (G)   Fixed base operators will be required to furnish the owner a
performance bond commensurate with the construction required under the minimum
standards of service to be performed.
   (H)   All construction required herein shall be in accordance with design
and construction standards established by the owner for the facility involved.
   (I)   Land available for commercial aeronautical activities is a valuable
and limited commodity. It is the policy of the owner that no land areas or
building space in excess of present and foreseeable requirements will be leased
to any fixed base operator. Additional areas will be made available to
operators on the basis of need and availability.
   (J)   Fuel and oil sales: persons conducting aviation fuel and oil sales on
the airport shall be required to provide:
      (1)   Hard surface ramp space accessible by taxiway with electric pumps
and tank storage having a capacity equal to the minimum tank truck load
deliverable for 80/87 and 100/130 grade aviation fuel and, if public demand
requires, also provide standard jet fuel;
      (2)   Properly trained line personnel on duty at least eight hours of
every calendar day, seven days a week, and on call by readily accessible
telephone at other hours during the day or night;
      (3)   Proper equipment for repairing and inflating aircraft tires,
servicing oleo struts, changing engine oil, washing aircraft and aircraft
windows and windshields, and for recharging or energizing discharged aircraft
batteries and starters;
      (4)   Conveniently located (air conditioned) lounge or waiting rooms for
passengers, and airplane crews of itinerant aircraft, together with sanitary
restrooms and public telephones;
      (5)   Adequate towing equipment and parking and tie-down area to safely
and efficiently move aircraft and store them in all reasonably expected weather
conditions; and
      (6)   Adequate inventory of at least two brands of generally accepted
grades of aviation engine oil and lubricants.
   (K)   In conducting refueling operations, every operator shall install and
use adequate grounding facilities at fueling locations to eliminate the hazards
of static electricity and shall provide approved types of fire extinguishers or
other equipment commensurate with the hazard involved in refueling and
servicing aircraft.
   (L)   Aircraft maintenance and repair: all persons operating aircraft engine
and accessory maintenance facilities shall provide:
      (1)   Sufficient hangar space to house any aircraft upon which such
service is being performed;
      (2)   Suitable storage space for aircraft awaiting maintenance or
delivery after repair and maintenance have been completed;
      (3)   Adequate shop space to house the equipment and adequate equipment
and machine tools, jacks, lifts and testing equipment to perform top overhauls
as required for FAA certification and repair of parts not needing replacement
on all single engine land and light multi-engine land general aviation
aircraft;
      (4)   At least one FAA certified air frame and engine mechanic available
during eight hours of the day, five days per week;
      (5)   Facilities for washing and cleaning aircraft;
      (6)   Non-airworthy aircraft shall be screened from public view; and
      (7)   Separately partitionable space with adequate exhaust fans and fire
protection for spray painting if this work is performed.
   (M)   Flight training: all persons conducting flight training activities
shall provide:
      (1)   At least one full-time (eight hours per day, six days per week)
properly certificated flight instructor for single engine land airplanes;
      (2)   At least one dual equipped single engine land aircraft properly
equipped and maintained for flight instruction and such additional types of
aircraft as may be required to give flight instruction of the kind advertised;
      (3)   Adequate classroom space for students with proper restroom and
seating facilities; a part of the required facilities may be located off
airport property with the consent of the owner;
      (4)   Adequate mock-ups, pictures, slides, film strips or other visual
aids necessary to provide proper ground school instruction;
      (5)   Properly certificated ground school instructor providing regularly
scheduled ground school instructions sufficient to enable students to pass the
FAA written examinations for private pilot and commercial ratings;
      (6)   Continuing ability to meet certification requirements of the FAA
for the flight training proposed; and
      (7)   Adequate public liability and property damage insurance sufficient
to protect the operator, the operator’s guests, licensees, invitees, suppliers,
customers and employees, and owner from any legal liabilities involved.
   (N)   Aircraft charter and taxi service: no carrier for hire shall load or
unload passengers at the airport at any place other than that designated by the
owner, nor shall such carrier accept business originating at the airport
without express approval of the owner. Persons operating aircraft charter and
taxi service shall provide:
      (1)   Passenger lounge, rest room and telephone facilities as required of
an operator for fuel and oil sales;
      (2)   Adequate table, desk or counter for checking in passengers,
handling ticketing or fare collection, and handling of luggage;
      (3)   Properly certificated suitable aircraft with properly certificated
and qualified operating crew available for services when not otherwise engaged
in such service; such crew and aircraft shall be available upon call within one
hour’s notice; and
      (4)   Minimum liability insurance as follows:
 
                          $5,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
Premises liability        bodily injury and property damage, including products
                          hazard
                          $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
Aircraft public liability bodily injury and property damage, including $100,000
                          per passenger bodily injury
 
   (O)   Aircraft rental and sales: persons conducting aircraft rental and
sales activity shall provide:
      (1)   Suitable office space for consummating sales and/or rentals and the
keeping of the proper records in connection thereof;
      (2)   Hangar storage space for at least one aircraft to be used for sales
or rentals;
      (3)   For rental, at least one airworthy aircraft suitably maintained and
certificated;
      (4)   Adequate facilities for servicing and repairing the aircraft or
satisfactory arrangements with other operators on the airport for such service
and repair;
      (5)   Available, at least during eight hours of the working day, a
properly certificated pilot capable of demonstrating new aircraft for sale or
for checking out rental aircraft;
      (6)   The minimum stock of readily expendable spare parts, or adequate
arrangements for securing spare parts required for the type of aircraft and
models sold;
      (7)   Current up-to-date specifications and price lists for types and
models of new aircraft sold;
      (8)   Proper check lists and operating manuals on all aircraft rented and
adequate parts catalogue and service manual on new aircraft sold; and
      (9)   Minimum liability insurance as follows:
 
                          $5,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
Premises liability        bodily injury and property damage, including products
                          hazard
                          $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for
Aircraft public liability bodily injury and property damage, including $100,000
                          per passenger bodily injury
 
   (P)   Crop dusting and spraying: persons seeking to conduct crop dusting or
spraying of agricultural chemicals will be assigned adequate operational space
by owner and shall be required to satisfy the owner that:
      (1)   Suitable arrangements have been provided for the safe storage and
containment of noxious chemical materials; no poisonous or inflammable
materials shall be kept or stored in close proximity to other facility
installations at the airport;
      (2)   The operator shall have available properly certificated aircraft
suitably equipped for the agricultural operation undertaken;
      (3)   No crop dusting operation shall be conducted on the principal
public use apron or ramp of the airport; and
      (4)   They carry appropriate insurance of a type and amount as required
by the owner, in the owner’s sole discretion.
   (Q)   Miscellaneous operations such as radio and instrument repairs, aerial
advertising, aircraft tie- down and other aeronautical activities not
hereinbefore provided for may be conducted by any person upon application to
and approval of the owner. Reasonable terms and conditions for the privilege of
engaging in these various services will be established by the owner
commensurate with the nature and scope of the activities involved.
   (R)   Hangar space, office and lounge space, aircraft parking area and other
such required facilities will be coterminous or concurrent requirements where
an operator offers multiple services to the extent that such facility
requirements will be reasonable.
   (S)   Minimum standards for hangars, shops or other buildings to be
constructed on the airport.
      (1)   Stand alone hangars shall contain a minimum of 1,600 square feet of
floor space. Maintenance shops shall contain a minimum of 3,600 square feet of
floor space. These buildings shall be fireproofed and of metal or masonry
construction, properly designed doors at both ends, stressed in accordance with
the National Building Code, floor of properly constructed concrete or asphalt
or sufficient designed load strength to sustain all types of aircraft using the
facility.
      (2)   An area of 500 square feet of office space, rest rooms and lounge
which may be an adjunct to other buildings, must also be fireproofed and of
steel or masonry construction.
   (T)   Aircraft parking aprons shall be constructed according to plans and
specifications approved by the owner. Areas of aircraft parking apron may be
required for operators selling aviation petroleum products, ramp services and
aircraft repair.
   (U)   All service shall be provided on a fair, equal and not unjustly
discriminatory basis to all users of the airport. The prices charged for each
unit of service shall be fair, reasonable and not unjustly discriminatory;
provided, that the operator may be allowed to make reasonable and
nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar type price reductions to
volume purchasers.
   (V)   The operator shall provide his or her services in accordance with the
provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, being Pub. Law No. 88-
352. Accordingly, no person shall be denied equal services on the ground of
race, color or national origin.
   (W)   All persons engaged in the sale of fuel at the airport or who
otherwise stores fuel for their own use, shall be subject to the same fuel
flowage fee, which shall be established and changed from time to time by the
owner.
(Prior Code, § 80.08) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.09 PROCEDURES FOR RECEIVING AND PROCESSING APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL
OPERATIONS.
   (A)   Any applicant wishing to establish an aeronautical activity on the
airport shall be furnished a copy of these minimum standards, as amended, and
shall make application in writing to the owner, setting forth in detail the
following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The proposed land use, facility and/or activity sought;
      (3)   The names and the qualifications of the personnel to be involved in
conducting such activity;
      (4)   The financial responsibility and technical ability of the applicant
and operator to carry out the activity sought;
      (5)   The tools, equipment, services and inventory, if any, proposed to
be furnished in connection with such activity;
      (6)   The requested or proposed date for commencement of the activity and
the term of conducting the same; and
      (7)   The estimated cost of any structure or facility to be furnished,
the proposed specifications for same, and the means or method of financing such
construction or acquisition of facilities.
   (B)   Upon the filing of such an application with the owner, it shall be
immediately referred to the appropriate committee and considered at the next
scheduled meeting. If no meeting is scheduled within 30 days from the filing of
such application, a meeting shall be called for considering same and notice
thereof given to the applicant.
   (C)   Upon consideration of the application, the owner shall determine
whether or not the applicant meets the standards and qualifications as herein
established and whether or not such application should be granted in whole or
in part.
   (D)   Upon approval of any such application in principle, the owner shall
cause to be prepared a suitable lease or contract agreement setting forth the
terms and conditions under which the fixed base operation shall be conducted.
   (E)   Any rejected application shall be returned to the applicant within ten
days of the rejection with a written explanation of the reasons for rejection.
(Prior Code, § 80.09) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003)
§ 91.10 SPECIAL AIRPORT USES.
   (A)   The owner obligates itself to operate the airport for the use and
benefit of the public and to keep the airport open to the various types, kinds
and classes of aeronautical use for which the airport facility is designed and
intended to serve.
   (B)   The owner has established these rules to be met by all users so as to
provide for the safe and efficient use of the airport and to otherwise protect
the safety of persons and property both on the ground and in the air.
   (C)   It is understood that the landing area facilities constructed are
primarily intended for the use of powered aircraft whose weights are not in
excess of the published strengths of the paved surfaces concerned. Operations
on these surfaces by aircraft slightly in excess of the published pavement
strengths may be permitted on an infrequent basis with the permission of the
owner.
   (D)   No operations involving non-powered aircraft, including gliders,
balloons, parachuting and other unusual and special classes of aeronautical
activities, will be permitted on the airport without the prior written approval
of the owner. No operations involving ultra light aircraft will permitted
without the approval of the owner.
   (E)   Considering the owner’s obligation to keep the airport open to the
public for aeronautical purposes, the airport facilities will not be used for
non-aviation events which would conflict with its aeronautical use.
(Prior Code, § 80.10) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 CATEGORIES OF AIRCRAFT.
   (A)   Final determination as to the proper category of any aircraft shall
rest with the owner.
   (B)   Charges as shown in §
91.12 shall be determined according to the following classifications:
      (1)   Private.
         (a)   Privately owned aircraft operated non-commercially by owner or
owners;
         (b)   Private aircraft may be used by persons other than the owner
provided that it is not rented or leased by the owner for a profit;
         (c)   Company and corporation-owned aircraft that are operated for the
free transportation of their and other personnel and/or products, subject to
the restrictions as listed under division (B)(1)(b) of this section; and
         (d)   Club aircraft owned and operated by a non-profit partnership or
non-profit North Carolina corporation, with each club member being a bona fide
owner of a part of the aircraft or a share in the corporation. The club may not
derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than the amount necessary
for the operations, maintenance and replacement of its aircraft and will file
and keep up to date with the owner a list of membership. If, at any time, the
owner has a reason to believe the club or club aircraft is being operated so
that it falls under the “commercial” classification hereunder, it shall so
notify such club, and, if they fail to remedy the conditions complained of, the
owner shall reclassify the aircraft or order specific conditions remedied. The
owner shall have the authority to deny the use of a club classification to any
group.
      (2)   Commercial.
         (a)   Aircraft used for rental, hire or charter;
         (b)   Aircraft used for student instruction and its kindred
occupations; and
         (c)   Aircraft used for a commercial purpose and not otherwise covered
in these regulations.
      (3)   Certified air carriers.
         (a)   Contract. All federally certified air carriers holding a
contract with the owner for airport usage; and
         (b)   No contract. All federally certified air carriers not covered in
division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 80.11) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003)
§ 91.12 SCHEDULE OF CHARGES – AIRCRAFT.
   (A)   Commercial activity.
      (1)   No aircraft or aviation organization shall engage in any commercial
activity of any type at the airport unless prior permission is obtained from,
and assessed fees are paid to, the town. Such permission and fees, in lieu of a
contract as provided for in division (A)(2) of this section, shall be
applicable for each and every such activity, with the fee being as determined
by the town and in addition to the landing fees then in effect under division
(A)(3) of this section.
      (2)   The town, at its discretion, may enter into separate contracts with
any certificated air carrier or commercial operation.
      (3)   By resolution, the town may, from time to time, adopt a fee
schedule to be applied for landings by certificated air carriers or commercial
operations not having a contract with the town as provided above, which fee
schedule shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the airport terminal
building and also at the office of the owner. Certificated air carriers or
commercial operators shall pay a fee for each landing at the airport in
accordance with any such fee schedule then in effect.
      (4)   The owner shall have the authority to detain any aircraft for non-
payment of any charges due.
   (B)   Government (public aircraft). The following types of aircraft are
granted the following exemptions: aircraft owned by federal, state or municipal
government are exempt from both landing and parking fees. This shall not,
however, obviate the payment of field use charges by the military, if in
effect.
(Prior Code, § 80.12) (Ord. passed 8-11-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
HEIGHT REGULATIONS
§ 91.25 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Plymouth Municipal
Airport Height Subchapter”.
(Prior Code, § 81.01) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.26 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. The Plymouth Municipal Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of the airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet from sea level. The Plymouth Municipal Airport elevation
equals 39 feet MSL.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
91.28. In plan, the perimeter of the APPROACH SURFACE coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, CONICAL AND AIRPORT PROTECTION ZONES.
These zones are set forth in §
91.27.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The town Board of Adjustment will serve as the BOARD OF
APPEALS for the Municipal Airport and may hereafter be referred to as the Board
of Adjustment.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this subchapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   MSL. Mean sea level.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or
use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or an
amendment thereto.
   NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
91.28.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity; including a trustee, a
receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. The PRIMARY
SURFACE extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. The elevation of any
point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point
on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface is 500 feet.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on the airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
humans, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to
the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven
feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the precision approach surfaces,
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway intended for the operation of aircraft using visual
approach procedures.
(Prior Code, § 81.02) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.27 AIRPORT ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there
are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land
lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces
and conical surfaces as they apply to the Municipal Airport.
      (2)   Such zones are shown on the Plymouth Municipal Airport Height
Ordinance zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by THE LPA GROUP of
North Carolina, p.a., and dated June of 2003, which is attached to the
Ordinance passed 9-8-2003 and made a part hereof.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure shall be
erected, altered or maintained, and no trees shall be allowed to grow in any
zone created by this section to a height in excess of the applicable height
limitations herein established for each zone in question. An area located in
more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with
the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows.
      (1)   Approach Zone — AHD-A.
         (a)   Runway 3. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with
the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone
expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
         (b)   Runway 21. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with
the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone
expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
      (2)   Transitional Zone — AHD-T. The transitional zones are the areas
beneath the transitional surfaces.
      (3)   Horizontal Zone — AHD-H. The horizontal zone is established by
swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines
tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.
      (4)   Conical Zone — AHD-C. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the
airport elevation and extending to an elevation of 389 feet above mean sea
level. There are four conical zones (AHD-C-A, AHD-C-B, AHD-C-C and AHD-C-D),
1,000 feet horizontally each and rise 50 feet in elevation. The maximum height
of any structure within the conical zones are as follows:
 
AHD-C-A 189 feet MSL
AHD-C-B 239 feet MSL
AHD-C-C 289 feet MSL
AHD-C-D 339 feet MSL
 
      (5)   Airport Protection Zone — AHD-P. Established at an elevation of 389
feet above mean sea level.
(Prior Code, § 81.03) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.28 AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no structure shall be
erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any
zone created by this subchapter to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows.
   (A)   Approach Zone (AHD-A).
      (1)   Runway 3. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; and
      (2)   Runway 21. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
   (B)   Transitional Zone (AHD-T). Slope seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above
the airport elevation which is 189 feet above mean sea level. In addition to
the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface.
   (C)   Horizontal Zone (AHD-H). Established at 150 feet above the airport
elevation or at a height of 189 feet above mean sea level.
   (D)   Conical Zone (AHD-C). Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the
airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport
elevation.
   (E)   Airport Protection Zone (AHD-P). Established at an elevation of 350
feet above the airport elevation and extends outside the conical zone
throughout the county.
   (F)   Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or
growth of any tree to a height up to 100 feet above the surface of the land.
(Prior Code, § 81.04) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.29 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no use may be made
of land or water within any zone established by this subchapter in such a
manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with
the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Prior Code, § 81.05) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.30 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive.
      (1)   The regulations prescribed by this subchapter shall not be
construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any
structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of
this subchapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use.
      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this subchapter,
and is diligently prosecuted.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the town to indicate to the
operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such
airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the Municipal Airport.
(Prior Code, § 81.06) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses. Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)
(2) and (A)(3) of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of
land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall
be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been
applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the
purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to
permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with
the provisions of this subchapter shall be granted unless a variance has been
approved in accordance with division (D) of this section.
      (1)   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain,
land contour or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above
the height limits prescribed for such zones.
      (2)   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no
permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would
extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones.
      (3)   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when
such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition
zones.
      (4)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration
of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this subchapter except as set forth in §
91.28(F).
   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation that it was on
the effective date of this subchapter or any amendments thereto or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Administrator determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the
applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this subchapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a variance from such regulations.
      (1)   The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the
proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient
use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result
in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, but will do
substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this subchapter.
      (2)   Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of
this subchapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of
the application has been furnished to the town for advice as to the
aeronautical effects of the variance. If the town does not respond to the
application within 15 days after receipt, the Board of Adjustment may act on
its own to grant or deny said application.
   (E)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter
and is reasonable under the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at
the owner’s expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the Board of Adjustment, this condition may be modified to require
the owner to permit the Municipal Airport, at its own expense, to install,
operate and maintain the necessary markings and lights.
(Prior Code, § 81.07) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the Zoning Administrator upon a form published for that purpose.
Applications required by this subchapter to be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application
for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted to the
Zoning Administrator for review by the Board of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 81.08) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.33 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Establishment. The Town Board of Adjustment shall ex officio
constitute the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Proceedings. Unless modified herein, the proceedings of the Board of
Appeals shall be the same as the proceedings for the Board of Adjustment as set
forth in §§
154.220 through
154.227.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall have and exercise the
following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this
subchapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
subchapter upon which such Board of Appeals under such regulations may be
required to pass; and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (D)   Findings of fact. The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings
of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its
legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any
order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   Majority vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
subchapter, or to effect variation to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 81.09) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.34 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Zoning Administrator made in the administration of this subchapter, may appeal
to the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the Zoning
Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken,
including the notice of appeal.
   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order of the Board of
Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the Zoning
Administrator and on due cause shown.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have all powers of the Zoning Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 81.10) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.35 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment, may appeal to the County Superior Court as provided in G.S. §
63-34.
(Prior Code, § 81.11) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.36 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this subchapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Prior Code, § 81.12) (Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the airport rules and regulations, as
listed in §
91.03, may be punished as provided by law, as provided by ordinance or in the
discretion of the owner and may be deprived of the use of the airport
facilities for such period of time as may be necessary to be effective. The
owner may remove or eject from the airport any person who knowingly and
willfully violates any of these regulations; may deny any such person the use
of the airport; and may take such other measures as may be permitted by law to
enforce airport rules and regulations as well as maintain control of the
airport.
(Prior Code, § 80.03)
   (C)   Each violation of §§
91.25 through
91.36 or any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder, shall
constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor, and each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the above, the town may
enforce §§
91.25 through
91.36 in any manner under which a town is authorized to enforce ordinances
under G.S. Chapter 160A, including but not limited to G.S. §§ 160A-365 and
160A-175, and G.S. Chapter 63, including, but not limited to, G.S. § 63-35.
(Prior Code, § 81.99)
(Ord. passed 8-11-2003; Ord. passed 9-8-2003)
CHAPTER 92: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
92.01   When state of emergency deemed to exist
   
92.02   Proclamation by Mayor
   
92.03   Restrictions during emergency
   
92.04   Violations prohibited
   
92.05   Requests for state police and military forces; proclamation of state of
martial law
   
92.06   Agreements for reciprocal law enforcement assistance
   
92.07   Proclamation of end of state of emergency
§ 92.01 WHEN STATE OF EMERGENCY DEEMED TO EXIST.
   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, the public safety authorities of the town are unable
to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.
(Prior Code, § 92.01)
§ 92.02 PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.
   (A)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the town
or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of a state of emergency and, in order to more effectively
protect the lives and property of people within the town, to place in effect
any of the restrictions authorized in §
92.03.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of such restrictions to any area specifically
designated or described within the corporate limits and to specific hours of
the day or night; and to exempt from those restrictions law enforcement
officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors, nurses, employees
of hospitals and other medical facilities, on-duty military personnel, whether
state or federal, on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation
companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and television
broadcasting corporations operated for profit, and such other classes of
persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately
necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within
the town.
(Prior Code, § 92.02)
§ 92.03 RESTRICTIONS DURING EMERGENCY.
   (A)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any of the following restrictions:
      (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one’s own premises of
explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind and prohibit
the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;
      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or
intoxicating beverages of any kind and their possession or consumption off
one’s own premises;
      (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any
public property;
      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any
other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;
      (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or
roadway, or upon any other public property, except by those in search of
medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the
well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;
      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any
business activity and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment and any other places of public assembly; and
      (7)   Prohibit or regulate, by what is commonly called a curfew, persons
being upon any or all streets, sidewalks, public places and vacant lots within
the town during such periods of the day or night, or both day and night, as he
or she may specify.
   (B)   Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any
particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency
by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.
(Prior Code, § 92.03)
§ 92.04 VIOLATIONS PROHIBITED.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by
any proclamation authorized by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 REQUESTS FOR STATE POLICE AND MILITARY FORCES; PROCLAMATION OF STATE OF
MARTIAL LAW.
   (A)   If in the sound discretion of the Mayor it shall appear that the
emergency is, or that the threatened emergency is likely to be, of such
proportions that the means available to the town to maintain law and order are
insufficient for such purpose, the Mayor shall, promptly and by the most
expeditious means of communication, inform the Governor of the situation and
request that such necessary police or military forces of the state be provided
promptly.
   (B)   If, during an actual state of emergency, the Mayor shall find that the
civil courts having jurisdiction within the town are unable to perform their
lawful duties and that, by reason of widespread lawlessness, writs and other
process cannot be served or executed in the town, the Mayor shall inform the
Governor of his or her findings and may recommend to him or her that a state of
martial law be proclaimed to exist within the town.
(Prior Code, § 92.05)
§ 92.06 AGREEMENTS FOR RECIPROCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to execute contracts or agreements with such
other political subdivisions of the state as to him or her may seem advisable,
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-288, whereby the political subdivisions agree to render
mutual aid and assistance by the loan of law enforcement officers or equipment
in time of emergency. These contracts or agreements shall provide that they
shall take effect upon ratification by the governing bodies of each political
subdivision thereto and recordation in the minutes thereof.
   (B)   Certain contracts or agreements executed by duly authorized
representatives of other political subdivisions, pursuant to authority vested
in them by their respective governing boards, whereby the political
subdivisions agreed to render mutual aid and assistance by the loan of law
enforcement officers and equipment in time of emergency, are ratified and
confirmed in all respects and are adopted as the acts of the Town Council. The
counties included are Gates, Perquimans, Currituck, Tyrell, Chowan and Camden
Counties. The towns included are Hertford, Nags Head and Columbia.
(Prior Code, § 92.06) (Ord. passed 11-12-1973)
§ 92.07 PROCLAMATION OF END OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of a state of emergency or all or any part
of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed
to do so by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 92.07)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Fire limits
   
93.03   Fire Chief to investigate cause of fire
   
93.04   Record of fires to be kept
   
93.05   Authority of department members at scene of fire
   
93.06   Interfering with firefighters
   
93.07   Riding on fire apparatus
   
93.08   Persons near scene of fire
Fire Hazards
   
93.20   Inspections; order to abate fire hazard
   
93.21   Burning articles outdoors
   
93.22   Storage of ashes
   
93.23   Utility companies to remove dead wires, charred poles
   
93.24   Storage, accumulation of certain combustible materials
   
93.25   Flammable decorative materials
   
93.26   Chimneys, flues, heat-producing devices and exhaust systems
   
93.27   Open flames or lights restricted
   
93.28   Matches
   
93.29   Smoking prohibited where signs posted
   
93.30   Exit signs in theaters
   
93.31   Passageways to be kept open
   
93.32   Encumbrances on fire escapes
   
93.33   Fire extinguishers required in business establishments
   
93.34   Shaftways to be marked
   
93.35   Trapdoors to be closed
Fire Prevention Code
   
93.50   Adoption; updating procedure
   
93.51   Short title
   
93.52   Enforcement
   
93.53   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of certain
flammables or explosives is restricted
   
93.54   Establishment of routes for vehicles transporting explosives, hazardous
chemicals
   
93.55   Permits; duration; fees therefor
   
93.56   Modifications
   
93.57   Appeals
   
93.58   Conflicts of law
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION. The office of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION. The Chief of the Fire Department.
   CORPORATION COUNSEL. The Town Attorney.
   MUNICIPALITY. This town.
   SMOKING. The carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, tobacco or
vegetation in any form.
(Prior Code, § 93.01)
§ 93.02 FIRE LIMITS.
   The fire limits of the town shall constitute the area bounded as follows:
Beginning at a point on the Roanoke River at the foot of Madison Street and
running south to the center of the intersection of the centerlines of Madison
Street and East Water Street; thence running west to the centerlines of the
intersection of East Water Street and Adams Street; thence running south down
the centerline of Adams Street 240 feet; thence running west 331 feet on a line
parallel to and 240 feet from the centerline of East Water Street. From said
point, then run south 44 feet parallel to and 144 feet from the centerline of
Washington Street. From this point then run west to the centerline of
Washington Street; thence south down the centerline of said street 51 feet;
thence west 107 feet; thence north 168 feet; thence west 201 feet; thence north
68 feet; thence west 125 feet to the centerline of Jefferson Street; thence
running south to the centerline of West Main Street; thence along said
centerline westwardly to the centerline of Monroe Street; thence northwardly to
the centerline of Monroe Street where the same intersects the centerline of
West Water Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Water Street
Extended 140 feet; thence northwardly to the Roanoke River; thence eastwardly
along the edge of said river and the meanders thereof to the beginning.
(Prior Code, § 93.02)
§ 93.03 FIRE CHIEF TO INVESTIGATE CAUSE OF FIRE.
   Immediately after the occurrence of any fire, the Chief of the Fire
Department shall investigate, or shall cause to be investigated, the cause,
origin and circumstances thereof, and, as far as possible, shall determine
whether the fire is the result of accident, carelessness or design. If he or
she has reason to believe that the fire is of suspicious origin, he or she
shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the
investigation of the matter and shall further cooperate with the authorities in
the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case when properly
instituted.
(Prior Code, § 93.03)
§ 93.04 RECORD OF FIRES TO BE KEPT.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep, or shall cause to be kept, an
accurate record of all fires occurring in the town. For each fire the following
information shall be secured and kept:
   (A)   Location of premises;
   (B)   Owner;
   (C)   Brief description of premises, whether of brick, stone, concrete, iron
or wood;
   (D)   How occupied, whether as dwelling, storehouse, factory, workshop or
otherwise;
   (E)   Amount and nature of damage as to both real and personal property;
   (F)   Amount of insurance;
   (G)   Cause of fire; and
   (H)   Date.
(Prior Code, § 93.04)
§ 93.05 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT MEMBERS AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   During the continuance of any fire, the Chief of the Fire Department, the
Assistant Chief and each of the Captains of the Fire Department shall have the
power to call on any and all persons to assist in extinguishing the fire or in
removing any goods, wares, merchandise, or furniture from any building on fire,
or in danger of fire, to some place of safety. No person shall fail to obey any
such order given for this purpose. Members of the Fire Department shall be
vested with police authority while on active duty extinguishing a fire and may
make arrests for any violation of fire or traffic ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 93.05)
§ 93.06 INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS.
   No unauthorized person shall enter in or on any buildings or grounds
occupied by the Fire Department, nor shall any person interfere with a
firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty or hinder him or her in the
performance of his or her duty; nor shall any person, other than members of the
Fire Department, loiter about any fire station, or change, handle or meddle in
any manner with any fire engine or any other fire apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 93.06) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 RIDING ON FIRE APPARATUS.
   No person other than a bona fide member of the Fire or Police Department
shall mount any fire engine, wagon or apparatus before it leaves the station or
while on its way to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission
of the driver or officer in command of the engine, wagon or other apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 93.07) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 PERSONS NEAR SCENE OF FIRE.
   No person shall stand or be in any street, sidewalk or square where or near
a fire which is in progress in such a way as to interfere with the duties of
the Fire Department. Members of the Fire Department may place a rope across
streets as they deem necessary, and no unauthorized person shall enter such
roped-off enclosure.
(Prior Code, § 93.08) Penalty, see §
93.99
FIRE HAZARDS
§ 93.20 INSPECTIONS; ORDER TO ABATE FIRE HAZARD.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect or
to cause to be inspected as often as may be necessary, but not less than four
times a year, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storages or
installations of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and
flammable materials, all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler systems,
and such other hazards or appliances as may be necessary for the enforcement of
the law and ordinances governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and
property from fire. It shall also be the duty of the Chief of the Fire
Department to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as may be necessary,
but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four times a year in
the closely-built portions of the town, all buildings and premises, except the
interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to
be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violation of the
provisions or intent of any ordinance affecting the fire hazard.
   (B)   Whenever any responsible person shall make written complaint to the
Chief of the Fire Department that any business or premises constitutes a fire
hazard, it shall be the duty of the Chief to have the same inspected
immediately.
   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department, and any member of the Fire
Department when so directed by the Chief, shall have the right to enter any
building or premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making any
inspection provided for by divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall find that any building
or any premises constitutes a fire hazard for any reason, he or she shall serve
or cause to be served upon the owner and the occupant of the building a written
notice specifying the condition complained of, ordering such condition be
remedied promptly, and indicating what is considered a reasonable time for
compliance with the order.
      (1)   The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the
premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy thereof to and
leaving it with any person in charge of the premises or, if no such person is
found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on
the door to the entrance of the premises, or in any other manner authorized by
law. If the owner of the premises is some person other than the occupant
thereof, service of such notice may be made by delivering a copy to the owner
personally or by mailing a copy to his or her last known address. If the
occupant or owner is a partnership, service may be upon any officer or any
local agent thereof.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any occupant or any owner of any building
or premises to fail to comply within a reasonable time after the service of
such order with the requirements thereof.
   (E)   The provisions of this section are supplemental to, and not in lieu of
similar provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted in §
93.50.
(Prior Code, § 93.20) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.21 BURNING ARTICLES OUTDOORS.
   (A)   All persons shall comply with the North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources (NC DENR) Division of Air Quality
regulations, including but not limited to those found in Rule 15A NCAC 02D.1900
et seq.
   (B)   A person shall not cause, allow or permit open burning of combustible
materials except as allowed by Rule 1903 and Rule 1904 of the aforementioned NC
DENR Division of Air Quality regulation sections.
   (C)   Open burning of leaves, tree branches and/or yard trimmings, excluding
logs and stumps, is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 93.21) (Ord. 04-03, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. passed 4-9-2007; Ord.
passed 8-8-2011) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.22 STORAGE OF ASHES.
   (A)   No person shall deposit ashes, smoldering coals or embers, greasy or
oily substances, or other matter liable to spontaneous ignition within 15 feet
of any wooden or plastered wall, partition, fence, floor, sidewalk, lumber,
hay, shavings, rubbish or other combustible materials except in metallic or
other noncombustible receptacles. Such receptacles, unless resting on the
ground outside the building, shall be placed on noncombustible stands and in
every case shall be kept at least two feet from any wall or partition.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the deposit of cold or wet ashes
and cinders for the improvement of any unpaved alley or walkway.
(Prior Code, § 93.22) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.23 UTILITY COMPANIES TO REMOVE DEAD WIRES, CHARRED POLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any electric light, telegraph or telephone
company or any other public utility company to permit any of its disconnected,
dead or unused wires to hang or remain on any pole, tree or structure where
they have been formerly connected and in use, and all such wires shall be taken
down and removed immediately upon notice by the Chief of Police or the Chief of
the Fire Department.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any telephone, telegraph or electric light
company or any other public utility company to allow, or cause to be allowed,
any pole belonging to it which has been charred by fire to remain in such
condition longer than ten days from the time of the fire. All such poles shall
be scraped or removed.
(Prior Code, § 93.23) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.24 STORAGE, ACCUMULATION OF CERTAIN COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall store in any building or upon any premises in excess
of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes,
barrels or similar containers, or rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork or
other similarly combustible material without a permit.
   (B)   Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of
the ceiling, shall be separated from heaters or heating devices by distance or
shielding so that ignition cannot occur, and shall not be so located as to
endanger exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20
feet in height, shall be so located with respect to adjacent buildings as not
to constitute a hazard, and shall be compact and orderly.
   (C)   No combustible goods, merchandise or decorations shall be displayed or
stored in a roofed-over mall unless approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
   (D)   No person shall permit any accumulation of wastepaper, weeds, litter
or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind to remain upon any
roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or other open space. Every owner or
occupant of property shall cut down and remove therefrom all weeds, grass,
vines and other growth which endangers the same or any other property, or which
is likely to be fired.
   (E)   No person, making, using, storing or having charge or control of any
shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter or combustible trash or waste
shall fail, neglect or refuse at the close of each day to cause all such
material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be
removed from the premises or stored in noncombustible containers. This division
(E) shall not apply to sawmills, planing mills or similar business
establishments where the usual litter or refuse is reasonably cared for and
disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 93.24) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.25 FLAMMABLE DECORATIVE MATERIALS.
   Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves,
trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery, and foam plastic materials shall not be
used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of mercantile and
institutional establishments unless first rendered flameproof.
(Prior Code, § 93.25) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.26 CHIMNEYS, FLUES, HEAT-PRODUCING DEVICES AND EXHAUST SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Chimneys, flues or other similar devices for conveying products of
combustion or hot gases to the exterior of a building shall be maintained in a
manner as not to create a hazardous condition.
      (1)   Existing masonry chimneys which upon inspection are found to be
without flue liner and with open mortar joints which will permit smoke or gases
to be discharged into the building or which are cracked as to be dangerous
shall be made safe by means of a fire clay liner, fire brick, a corrosion-
resistant metal pipe, and otherwise repaired if necessary, or the chimney shall
be removed. Metal pipe liners shall be one inch less in diameter than the least
dimension of the flue and the entire space between the metal liner and the
walls of the chimney shall be filled with cement mortar.
      (2)   Existing chimneys and vents of metal which are corroded or
improperly supported shall be replaced unless suitable repairs are made.
      (3)   Existing chimney and vent connectors of metal which are corroded or
improperly supported shall be replaced.
   (B)   All heat-producing appliances, including boilers, furnaces,
incinerators, ovens and restaurant-type cooking appliances, shall be installed
and maintained so as to be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence
that heat-producing appliances are installed in accordance with the applicable
standard specified for this division (B) shall be evidence that such heat-
producing appliances are installed so as to be reasonably safe to persons and
property.
   (C)   Exhaust systems provided for restaurant cooking equipment shall be
maintained in a manner such as not to create a hazardous condition.
      (1)   Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts and other devices shall
be inspected periodically and cleaned as needed to remove grease and deposits
of residues.
      (2)   Fire extinguishing systems shall be inspected periodically and
checked for proper operation. These inspections shall include a check that the
supply of extinguishing agent in the system is adequate and that all actuation
components are operating satisfactorily. Fusible links, if employed, shall be
replaced or properly cleaned. Instructions for manually operating the system
shall be posted conspicuously in the kitchen and employees shall be checked for
their knowledge of fire extinguishing procedures.
      (3)   Any fire dampers shall be tested periodically to ensure proper
functioning of all parts.
   (D)   Commercial, industrial and flue-fed incinerators shall be provided
with approved spark arrestors or other effective means for arresting sparks and
fly ash.
(Prior Code, § 93.26) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.27 OPEN FLAMES OR LIGHTS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person shall take an open flame or light into any building, barn,
vessel, boat or any other place where highly flammable, combustible or
explosive material is kept unless such light or flame shall be well secured in
a glass globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device.
   (B)   No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting
flammable material of the type stored or handled shall be used in the storage
area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair or other highly flammable
or combustible material; nor in the work area of any shop or factory used for
the manufacture, repair or renovation of mattresses or bedding; nor in the work
areas of any establishment used for the upholstering of furniture.
   (C)   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for removing
paint from any building or structure shall provide one fire extinguisher of a
type approved by the Chief of the Fire Department or a water hose connected to
a water supply in the area where such burning is done. In all cases, a fire
watcher shall remain on the premises for one hour after the torch or flame-
producing device has been used.
   (D)   Any person using a torch or other flame-producing device for sweating
pipe joints in any building or structure shall have available in the immediate
vicinity where the sweating is done one approved fire extinguisher or water
hose connected to a water supply. Combustible material in the close proximity
of flame shall be protected against ignition by shielding, wetting or other
approved means. In all cases, a fire watcher shall remain in the vicinity of
the sweating operation for one-half hour after the torch or flame-producing
device has been used.
   (E)   Electric light bulbs in mercantile and institutional establishments
shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials unless the
materials have first been rendered flameproof.
(Prior Code, § 93.27) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.28 MATCHES.
   (A)   No person shall manufacture matches without a town permit to do so. No
person shall store over 25 cases of matches without a permit.
   (B)   At wholesale establishments and wherever matches exceeding 25 cases
are stored, shipping containers containing matches shall be arranged in piles
not exceeding 18 feet in height nor 25,000 cubic feet in volume. Such pile
units shall be separated from each other and from other combustible material by
a clear space of not less than four feet. In storage rooms where shipping
containers containing matches are open, the broken containers and contents
shall be neatly piled with other match stock in a portion devoted to match
storage exclusively.
(Prior Code, § 93.28) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.29 SMOKING PROHIBITED WHERE SIGNS POSTED.
   (A)   Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of
piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places of
assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled,
the Chief of the Fire Department is empowered and authorized to order the owner
or occupant in writing to post “No Smoking” signs in each building, structure,
room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any
building, structure or place in which smoking may be permitted.
   (B)   “No Smoking” signs of approved-sized lettering and location required
in accordance with division (A) of this section shall read “By Order of the
Fire Chief”.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally required “No
Smoking” sign or to smoke in any place where such signs are posted.
(Prior Code, § 93.29) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.30 EXIT SIGNS IN THEATERS.
   Every exit in any theater or motion picture house shall be plainly indicated
by a sign bearing the word “EXIT”, which sign shall be kept lighted throughout
each performance.
(Prior Code, § 93.30)
§ 93.31 PASSAGEWAYS TO BE KEPT OPEN.
   (A)   All doors, aisles and passageways within and leading into or out of
theaters, churches and all other places of public assemblages shall during the
entire time which any show, performance, service, exhibition, lecture, concert,
hall or other assemblage may be held therein be kept adequately lighted and
free from easels, signs, standards, campstools, chairs, sofas, benches and any
other article that might obstruct or delay the exit of the audience,
congregation or assemblage. The doors of such buildings while occupied shall
not be fastened so that they cannot easily be opened by anyone from within.
   (B)   No person shall sit or stand or remain seated or standing; nor shall
the owner or operator of a place of public assemblage allow any person to
remain in any aisle under any circumstances or in any exit or passage required
for the safe exit of the assemblage. Clear passage from all exits and on
sidewalks outside of all theaters and other places of public assemblage shall
be maintained at all times.
   (C)   No aisle, passageway or stairway in any store shall be obstructed with
tables, showcases or other obstructions during the hours the store is open to
the public.
   (D)   No dangerous obstruction shall be permitted in hallways of tenement
houses or apartment houses.
(Prior Code, § 93.31) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.32 ENCUMBRANCES ON FIRE ESCAPES.
   (A)   No person shall at any time place any obstruction of any kind
whatsoever before or upon any fire escape, balcony or ladder intended as a
means of escape from fire.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police and Fire Department
who shall discover any fire escape obstructed in any manner to forthwith report
the same through his or her department channels to the Chief of the Fire
Department, who shall immediately notify the owner, his or her agent, or tenant
to remove such obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or
fail to comply with any such order of the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 93.32) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.33 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED IN BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Hand or other portable fire extinguishers shall be installed in every store,
factory, garage or other building where readily flammable material is stored,
handled, kept or sold.
(Prior Code, § 93.33) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.34 SHAFTWAYS TO BE MARKED.
   (A)   Every outside window in a building used for manufacturing purposes or
for storage which opens directly on any hoistway or other vertical means of
communication between two or more floors in such building shall be plainly
marked with the word “SHAFTWAY” in red letters at least six inches high on a
white background; such warning sign shall be so placed as to be easily
discernible from the outside of the building.
   (B)   Every door or window opening on such shaftway from the interior of the
building, unless the construction of the partition surrounding the shaftway is
of such distinctive nature as to make its purpose evident at a glance, shall be
similarly marked with the warning word “SHAFTWAY” so placed as to be easily
visible to anyone approaching the shaftway from the interior of the building.
(Prior Code, § 93.34) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.35 TRAPDOORS TO BE CLOSED.
   All trapdoors, except those which operate automatically, in any factory
building or building used for storage shall be closed at the completion of
business each day.
(Prior Code, § 93.35) Penalty, see §
93.99
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 93.50 ADOPTION; UPDATING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American
Insurance Association, being particularly the 1970 edition thereof and the
whole thereof, save and except Article 13 relating to fireworks, the subject of
which is covered by G.S. §§ 14-410 through 14-415, and Article 28, of which
code not less than one copy is and shall remain on file in the office of the
Clerk; and such code is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section
as fully as though it were set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the town.
   (B)   Whenever a new or revised edition of the Fire Prevention Code is
recommended by the American Insurance Association or its successor, the Chief
of the Fire Department shall file at least one copy thereof in the office of
the Clerk together with his or her recommendations, if any, as to amendments
thereof and he or she shall concurrently notify the Town Manager and each
member of the Town Council of his or her action. Following such actions by the
Chief of the Fire Department, such new or revised edition together with such
recommendations, if any, of the Chief of the Fire Department shall at the
conclusion of the second regular meeting of the Town Council following the date
of such filing and notification become the fire prevention code of the town,
replacing the then current code; provided, that no action shall have been taken
thereon by the Town Council prior to the conclusion of such second regular
meeting.
(Prior Code, § 93.50)
§ 93.51 SHORT TITLE.
   The code adopted by §
93.50 shall be known and may be cited as the “Fire Prevention Code of the Town
of Plymouth, North Carolina”, or simply as the “Fire Prevention Code”.
(Prior Code, § 93.51)
§ 93.52 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Prevention Code adopted by §
93.50 shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 93.52)
§ 93.53 ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF CERTAIN
FLAMMABLES OR EXPLOSIVES IS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   The limits referred to in § 12.5b of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby
established to coincide with the corporate limits of the town, except as may be
provided otherwise in the zoning code.
   (B)   The limits referred to in § 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited,
are hereby established to coincide with the corporate limits of the town,
except as may be provided otherwise in the zoning code.
   (C)   The limits referred to in § 16.61 of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are
hereby established to coincide with the corporate limits of the town, except as
may be provided otherwise in the zoning code.
   (D)   The limits referred to in § 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby
established to coincide with the corporate limits of the town, except as may be
provided otherwise in the zoning code.
(Prior Code, § 93.53)
§ 93.54 ESTABLISHMENT OF ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES, HAZARDOUS
CHEMICALS.
   (A)   The routes referred to in § 12.7m of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents shall be as posted by
official traffic-control signs or, in the absence of such signs, as specified
by the Chief of the Fire Department in permits issued pursuant to § 12.3 of the
Fire Prevention Code.
   (B)   The routes referred to in § 20.14 of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles shall be
posted by official traffic-control signs or, in the absence of such signs, as
specified by the Chief of the Fire Department in permits issued for intrastate
transportation or by notice given at the time of registration for interstate
transportation pursuant to § 20.14 of the Fire Prevention Code.
(Prior Code, § 93.54)
§ 93.55 PERMITS; DURATION; FEES THEREFOR.
   Permits required by the Fire Prevention Code are for the purpose of giving
the Town Council, through the Chief of the Fire Department, more effective
control over hazardous conditions regulated by the code. Each permit shall
cover not more than one year, subject to renewal thereof; provided, that where
a town license is required periodically in addition to a permit, the permit may
cover an indefinite period. The Town Council may, by resolution, adopt a
schedule of fees for permits and inspections required by the Fire Prevention
Code, and when such resolution has been placed on file in the office of the
Clerk no such permit shall be issued and no such inspection shall be made until
the fee therefor, as provided in the schedule, has been paid to the Town Tax
Collector.
(Prior Code, § 93.55)
§ 93.56 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee of the property affected thereby, or his or her duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Chief of
the Fire Department thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the
Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 93.56)
§ 93.57 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of
the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Town Council
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 93.57)
§ 93.58 CONFLICTS OF LAW.
   In the event of conflict between any provision of the Fire Prevention Code
and any provision of state law (including the North Carolina State Building
Code) or any rule or regulation made pursuant to state law, the state law or
rule or regulation made pursuant thereto shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 93.58)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Town Council or by a
court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally
for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, in the discretion of the court. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified,
each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the penalty in division (A) of this section shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 93.99)
   (C)   Any person in violation of any provision of §
93.21 shall be issued a criminal citation or summons may be issued against the
violator of the section and, if convicted, the violator shall be punished as
provided by G.S. § 14-4(a).
(Prior Code, § 93.21) (Ord. 04-03, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. passed 4-9-2007; Ord.
passed 8-8-2011)
CHAPTER 94: GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WEEDS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Rules and regulations authorized
   
94.03   Removal of waste required; prohibited waste disposal
   
94.04   Grass required to be mowed
   
94.05   Litter
   
94.06   Notice of violation; failure to comply with notice
   
94.07   Nuisances
Collection and Disposal
   
94.20   Noncollectible refuse
   
94.21   Residential collections
   
94.22   Business collections
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue of burning wood, coal or other solid fuel.
   BULK REFUSE. Discarded household furniture. Cardboard, magazines and other
nonrecyclable products in large quantity.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable refuse and resulting from the handling,
preparation and consumption of food; including any liquids that may result.
   HAZARDOUS REFUSE. Any material such as poisons, acids, caustics, explosives
or any infected materials or any substance determined to be hazardous by EPA
under the Toxic Substance Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.
   HOUSEHOLD REFUSE. Refuse generated in the normal course of maintaining a
household or residence.
   INCIDENTAL REFUSE. Refuse generated by tourists, pedestrians and citizens
engaged in the intended recreational and leisure uses of sidewalks, boardwalks,
piers and parks.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste from factories, processing plants and other
manufacturing enterprises.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE. Any solid waste capable of producing an infectious
disease. Types of waste designated as infectious are micro-biological waste,
pathological waste, blood products and sharps.
   RECEPTACLE. Any containers approved by the town for the deposit of garbage,
ashes or miscellaneous refuse.
   REFUSE. Solid waste including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish and
ashes.
   RUBBISH. Refuse (exclusive of garbage and ashes) including, but not limited
to, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree, bush
and hedge branches, cuttings and trimmings, yard trimmings, grass, leaves, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dirt, earth and dust.
   STREET. The entire width between property lines of every way or place,
whatever nature, when any part thereof is dedicated or on to the use of the
public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   WASTE. Useless, unused, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
natural community activities, including solids, liquids and gases.
   YARD WASTE. Grass, shrub clippings, bush and hedge branches, sticks and tree
limbs.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995)
§ 94.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED.
   The Town Manager may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with
this chapter as deemed necessary and advisable to safeguard the health and
welfare of the citizens of the town in the disposal of garbage, ashes and other
refuse.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995)
§ 94.03 REMOVAL OF WASTE REQUIRED; PROHIBITED WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   No owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises within the town
shall suffer or permit any substance or liquid offal or any animal, fowl, fish
or vegetable matter, or any trash, refuse or waste matter of any kind, or any
matter putrid or offensive to persons, or any other substance or liquid which
constitutes a fire hazard or other hazard to the health or safely of persons,
or which constitutes a nuisance, to remain upon or within such premises. It
shall be the duty of each owner, occupant and person in charge of any premises
to remove therefrom all such substances and liquids and dispose thereof in a
lawful and sanitary manner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any animal, fowl,
fish or vegetable matter, or any trash, refuse or waste matter of any kind, or
any matter putrid or offensive to persons, or any other substance or liquid, in
or upon any street, sidewalk, curb, gutter or public place, or in any well,
cistern, creek, spring, reservoir or watercourse, or upon the property of
another without the consent of the owner of such property. This section shall
not apply to any lawful disposition of permitted refuse at any site that may be
designated by the town as a refuse disposal site, nor shall it apply to the
lawful setting out of refuse to be collected as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   No owner, occupant or person in charge of any premises within the town
shall bury or suffer to be buried therein any animal or vegetable matter at
such a location or at such a depth or in such a manner that upon decaying, it
may contaminate any source of food or water or may otherwise become prejudicial
to the public health or become a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 GRASS REQUIRED TO BE MOWED.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each owner, occupant and person in charge of
any premises within the town, except premises devoted to agricultural uses, to
cut down the grass thereon to within four inches of the ground at least four
times per year, the first time between April 1 and April 15, the second time
between May 15 and May 30, the third time between August 1 and August 15, and
the fourth time between September 15 and September 30; and to keep the premises
free of noxious weeds and of vegetation that affords harbor or breeding places
for insects, rodents or reptiles.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of owners, occupants and persons in charge of
yards and lots within the town to cut down the grass thereon. One may apply to
the Town Manager to have the grass cut by the town at the expense of the
applicant. The Town Manager may grant any such request provided that:
      (1)   The equipment and personnel necessary to do the work are available
either as a contracted service or as town forces;
      (2)   The work is done at a time convenient to the town;
      (3)   The applicant shall pay the town for this service at the rate of
$100 per hour with a minimum charge of $100; and
      (4)   Payment is to be made within 24 hours of the applicant receiving
notification that the work is completed. Payments are to be made at the Town
Hall.
   (C)   (1)   Any owner, occupant and person in charge of any premises within
the town not devoted to agricultural uses who shall fail to cut down the grass
thereon to within four inches of the ground during the required periods shall
be liable for a fine of $10 for each occurrence.
      (2)   The owner or occupant shall also be liable for any costs as
provided in §
94.06.
(Prior Code, § 94.04) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995; Ord. 97-4, passed 4-14-
1997; Ord. passed 7-10-2000)
§ 94.05 LITTER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to throw, place or deposit any refuse in any
street, public place or on any private property within the town limits, except
in garbage cans or garbage receptacles as provided by this chapter or as
approved by the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place household refuse in town owned
receptacles located on sidewalks, boardwalks, piers or parks, that are intended
for incidental refuse generated by pedestrians and citizens engaged in the
intended recreational uses of the areas.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to place stumps or any other organic matter on
any property, public or private, except in areas that may be specifically
designated by the town.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit on any
property, public or private, any hazardous refuse or liquid or any material
that has the propensity of producing an offensive odor.
   (E)   No garbage or any other waste or offensive or disease-producing
material shall be dumped in any lot or space within the town for the purpose of
filling, or for any other purpose, without the consent of the Town Manager and
the Washington County Environmental Health Division.
(Prior Code, § 94.05) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995)
Statutory reference:
   State law authorization, see G.S. §§ 14-399 et seq.
§ 94.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   (A)   (1)   When any premises is found to be in violation of either §§
94.03,
94.04,
94.05 or
94.07, written notice shall be given to the party deemed to be responsible for
the premises, be it the owner or occupant, which may be served in any manner
authorized by law.
      (2)   This notice shall state the condition(s) causing the violation and
direct the addressee/responsible party to abate and/or cure the violation
within 24 hours from the time of service of the notice. It shall be unlawful
for the addressee/responsible party to fail to comply with such notice. As it
relates specifically to the grass cutting ordinance §
94.04, any notice provided to said addressee/responsible party for said
premises shall be deemed to be continuing in nature for the entire calendar
year given. Only one notice needs to be given for any one of the four times
described in §
94.04(A) and said notice shall be effective for the balance of said calendar
year.
   (B)   Upon the failure of the responsible party, be it owner, occupant or
person in charge, to abate the violation within 24 hours as provided in
division (A) of this section, the Town Manager shall direct the Code
Enforcement Officer or other appropriate persons to cause the violation to be
abated and the costs and expenses thereby incurred by the town shall constitute
a debt due the town, which shall be collected in any manner authorized by law
and shall constitute a lien in favor of the town upon the premises upon which
the violation occurred until paid in full, notwithstanding any fine or other
penalty which may be imposed for such a violation.
(Prior Code, § 94.06) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995; Ord. passed 4-9-2007)
§ 94.07 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Weeding and tidying of premises, cutting of right-of-way; required.
Any person owning real property within the town is hereby required to cut and
remove therefrom all weeds and grass from both the property and adjoining
right-of-way before it reaches a height of 12 inches, to keep such property and
right-of-way free from trash and refuse matter at all times, and to keep such
property and right-of-way free from the conditions enumerated in division (C)
of this section.
   (B)   Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official
of the town shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
section. The Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official of the town
are authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out the
intent and provisions of this section.
   (C)   Nuisances prohibited; enumeration. The following enumerated and
described conditions are hereby found, deemed and declared to constitute a
detriment, danger and hazard to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the
town and are found, deemed and declared to be public nuisances wherever the
same may exist and the creation, maintenance or failure to abate any nuisances
is hereby declared unlawful:
      (1)   Any condition which is a breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes
or a breeding ground or harbor for rats or other pests;
      (2)   A place of heavy growth of weeds, grasses, vines or other
vegetation over 12 inches in height;
      (3)   A place of growth of vines, shrubs or other vegetation when such
condition is causing a breeding ground for rodents or is a focal point for any
other nuisance enumerated in this section;
      (4)   A place of growth of poison sumac, poison ivy, poison oak or other
noxious vegetation;
      (5)   An open place of collection of stagnant water where insects tend to
breed;
      (6)   Any concentration of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes,
paper, automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash, refuse, brush, old clothes,
rags or other combustible materials or objects of a like nature;
      (7)   Any concentration of building materials including concrete, steel
or masonry which are not suitable for building construction, alterations or
repairs, and which are in open places;
      (8)   An open space of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or
any other rotten or putrescent matter of any kind; however, nothing in this
division (C)(8) shall be construed to prevent the generally accepted use of a
properly maintained compost pile or storage of animal manure being used as
fertilizer for lawns and gardens and for other agricultural or horticultural
purposes;
      (9)   Any household or office furniture, appliances or other metal
products of any kind kept in open places or indoor upholstered furniture kept
outside in a location exposed to the weather;
      (10)   Any products which have jagged edges of metal or glass in areas of
confinement kept in open spaces;
      (11)   Any open place of concentration of trash, refuse, discarded
bottles, cans or medical supplies;
      (12)   Any condition whereby any fence, sign, billboard, shrubbery, bush,
tree, mailbox or other object or combination of objects which obstructs the
view of motorists using any street, private driveway or approach to any street
intersection adjacent to and abutting such and so as to constitute a traffic
hazard as a condition dangerous to public safety upon any such street, private
driveway or at any such street intersections;
      (13)   Any building, structure, fence or retaining wall declared to be
unsafe by the building inspector and which is in danger of collapse so that it
may fall and injure members of the public or damage public or private property;
      (14)   Any buildings or structures which are deemed unsafe by the
building inspector, upon his or her determination that both of the conditions
in G.S. § 160A-426(b) are met, or any buildings or structures which have one of
the following defects shall be deemed unsafe buildings by the building
inspector within the definition of and in addition to G.S. § 160A-426:
         (a)   Those buildings which have parts thereof which are so attached
that they may fall and injure members of the public or damage public or private
property;
         (b)   Those buildings which because of their condition are unsanitary
or unsafe to the public; or
         (c)   Those buildings which are especially liable to fire, including,
but not limited to, those which are unoccupied and are not adequately secured
against entry by authorized persons.
      (15)   Any building or other structure which has been burned, partially
burned or otherwise partially destroyed and which is hazardous to the safety of
any person, is a continuing fire hazard, or which is structurally unsound to
the extent that the building inspector can reasonably determine that there is a
likelihood of personal or property injury to any person or property entering
the premises;
      (16)   Any improper or inadequate drainage, as determined by the Director
of Public Works, on private property which causes flooding, interferes with the
use of, or endangers in any way the streets, sidewalks, parks or other town
owned property of any kind;
      (17)   Any condition, as determined by the Director of Public Works,
which blocks, hinders, or obstructs in any way the natural flow of branches,
streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches or drains;
      (18)   Any stormwater retention or impoundment device which is operating
improperly, as determined by the Director of Public Works; and
      (19)   Any other condition declared to be dangerous or prejudicial to the
public health or public safety and a public nuisance by the Town Council.
   (D)   Emergency cases. In cases where it appears that there is an imminent
danger to the life or safety of any person, unless an unsafe building, as
defined in division (C)(14) of this section, is immediately repaired, vacated,
closed or demolished, the Town Council shall order its immediate repair,
evacuation, closing or demolition, as it may deem necessary, notwithstanding
the other provisions of this subchapter. The Town Manager may take the
temporary measures necessary to safeguard persons from immediate danger of
collapse of such building, and is authorized to temporarily close sidewalks,
streets, buildings and structures in places adjacent to such unsafe buildings,
and to prohibit the same from being used, pending the removal of the danger.
The cost of the emergency measures taken shall become a lien against the
premises upon which the emergency condition existed, upon confirmation of the
cost thereof by the Town Council. The confirmation shall take place upon ten
days written notice to the owner and/or person located at the premises where
the nuisance existed.
   (E)   Nuisance abatement procedures. When any public nuisance as set out in
division (C) of this section is found to exist on any property, including
rights-of-ways and easements, within the town, the following procedures shall
be followed.
      (1)   The Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official of the town
shall notify the owner of the premises where the nuisance is located that
conditions exist which constitute a public nuisance and unless the condition is
abated within five days from the mailing of the notice which shall be sent by
registered or certified mail, the conditions constituting a nuisance will be
abated and the cost of abatement, including an administrative fee, shall
constitute a lien against the premises.
      (2)   (a)   The Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official of
the town is hereby given full power and authority to enter upon the premises
involved for the purpose of abating the nuisance found to exist as herein set
out. If any property owner served with notice shall fail or refuse to correct
or eliminate the condition causing the nuisance within five days after such
notice has been given, the Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official
may proceed to abate the nuisance by utilization of town forces or an outside
contractor.
         (b)   The Code Enforcement Officer or the designated official of the
town may allow the owner additional time to correct or eliminate the condition
causing the nuisance if he or she determines that the failure to correct or
abate the condition was caused by weather conditions or other factors not
within the control of the owner.
      (3)   After the abatement of the nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer
or the designated official of the town shall make a written report of the
actual cost incurred by the town and shall deliver such report to the Town
Manager. The owner of the premises shall be liable to the town for the actual
cost incurred by the town in such nuisance abatement including an
administrative fee. Such cost shall be charged against the property owner and
shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as ad valorem taxes
of such owner are collected and such costs shall be a lien on the real property
subject only to the lien of the town and county ad valorem taxes thereon.
      (4)   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Code
Enforcement Officer or the designated official of the town may notify a chronic
violator that, if the chronic violator’s property is determined to be a
nuisance as defined in division (C)(2), (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section, the
town shall, without further notice in the calendar year in which the notice is
given, take action to remedy the violation and the expense of the action shall
become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
         (b)   The notice shall be served by registered or certified mail.
         (c)   Upon the provision of the notice, the Code Enforcement Officer
or the designated official of the town has full power and authority to enter
upon the premises involved and abate the nuisance found to exist during the
calendar year in which the notice is given without further notice. The Code
Enforcement Officer or the designated official of the town may proceed to abate
the nuisance by utilization of town forces or an outside contractor.
         (d)   The owner of the property shall be liable to the town for the
actual cost incurred by the town in such nuisance abatement including an
administrative fee. Such cost shall be a lien upon the property and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes. For the purpose of this division (E), CHRONIC
VIOLATOR is one for whom, in a previous calendar year, the town abated a
nuisance as defined in division (C)(2), (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section on at
least three occasions.
(Prior Code, § 94.07) (Ord. passed 6-10-2002; Ord. 2018-01, passed 2-12-2018)
Penalty, see §
94.99
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 94.20 NONCOLLECTIBLE REFUSE.
   (A)   The following refuse will not be collected: tree stumps, building
maintenance or demolition debris, rocks or broken concrete, plaster, roofing
material, or any other material that may be determined by the Town Manager to
be unsafe or inappropriate for collection.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of every residence, building or business or
industrial premises shall have the responsibility of collecting and disposing
of all building construction waste and debris. The town will not collect or
remove any building waste or debris.
   (C)   The owner or person in charge of demolished buildings shall have all
material removed by their own means and at their own expense down to below
ground level and this land shall be rough graded so as not to present a
nuisance or safety hazard, be unsightly, or cause drainage run off or erosion
of adjoining property.
   (D)   No waste shall be collected that is considered to be hazardous as
defined in the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C.
§§ 6901 et seq., or in G.S. § 130A-290 or any waste which is volatile,
pathological, infectious, toxic or otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
Materials will not be collected containing dead animals or other obnoxious or
dangerous wastes.
(Prior Code, § 94.20) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995)
§ 94.21 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS.
   All residential premises shall be provided with waste collection containers
and billed for the collection service on a scheduled basis. All residential
collections shall be regulated by the current Solid Waste Collection Policy and
Fee Schedule as set forth by the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 94.21) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995)
§ 94.22 BUSINESS COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   All businesses that produce waste not inconsistent with the quantity
or nature of the waste handled under §
94.20 shall be supplied one or more of the waste collection containers and fall
under the same regulations put forth for residential collections in the Solid
Waste Collection Policy and Fee Schedule.
   (B)   Any business that produces waste that is inconsistent with the
quantity or nature of the waste handled under §
94.20 may be required by the town to privately obtain, maintain and incur all
cost for private bulk refuse collections. These bulk containers must be
maintained in a manner that allows no liquid waste runoff, offensive odors, or
create a nuisance that attracts insects or rodents.
(Prior Code, § 94.22) (Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any violation of any regulation or provision of any section contained
in §§
94.20 through
94.22 shall be liable for a civil fine not to exceed $50. Any violation shall
also constitute a misdemeanor. Should the town be required to remedy the
violation, all provisions of §
94.06 will apply.
   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies provided by §
94.07, any owner of a property whose property shall be declared a public
nuisance as provided in §
94.07 shall be subject to a civil penalty in manner of $50 for the first
offense, $100 for the second offense in the calendar year and $250 for the
third and subsequent offenses in the calendar year. If a person fails to pay
the civil penalty within 30 days after being notified of the amount due, the
town may recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action
in the general court of justice in the nature of a suit to collect debt.
(Prior Code, § 94.99)
   (D)   (1)   Any person found in violation of §
94.05 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $25 and not more
than $500 for each incident, to be determined by the schedule below:
 
Littering      Violation of §                                           $25
               94.05(A) by discarding incidental refuse
               Violation of §
Simple dumping 94.05(A) by dumping any amount of household refuse or §  $100
               94.05(B) or (C)
Hazardous      Violation of §                                           $500
dumping        94.05(D) or(E)
 
      (2)   Violation of §
94.05 shall also make the individual liable for all cost incurred to remedy the
violation as determined by §
94.06.
(Prior Code, § 94.05)
(Ord. 95-10, passed 10-9-1995; Ord. passed 6-10-2002)
CHAPTER 95: NOISE
Section
   
95.01   Unreasonably loud or disturbing noise prohibited
   
95.02   Certain noises restricted
§ 95.01 UNREASONABLY LOUD OR DISTURBING NOISE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to create or assist in creating any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of such character,
intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public health, welfare and
peace is prohibited.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create
any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, or the use of any gong or siren
upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle;
      (2)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, loudspeaker,
amplifier or musical instrument in such manner or with such volume as to annoy
or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence;
      (3)   The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long continuous noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in
the vicinity;
      (4)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, bicycle, skateboard or other
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (5)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler
or engine, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of danger;
      (6)   The sounding of any bell, gong or any type of horn or siren
attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of
persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (7)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or service
station in any residential area so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be
emitted therefrom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or
on Sundays;
      (8)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school or institution of learning while the same is in session, which
unreasonably and unnecessarily interferes with the working of such institution,
provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such street indicating that such
area is in a school area;
      (9)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
      (10)   The erection, including excavation, demolition, alterations or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 9:00 a.m.
through 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, except in the case of urgent necessity in the
interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the Building
Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while
the emergency continues;
      (11)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless
the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (12)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturb the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
      (13)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale, or display of merchandise;
      (14)   The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes except where specific
license is received from the town; or
      (15)   Shouting, fighting or creating noise through loud or boisterous
speech or singing so as to be audible off the premises upon which such
activities and noise occur or so loud as to disturb the peace and tranquility
of persons occupying residences, motels, hotels, rest homes, nursing homes or
hospitals in the vicinity.
   (C)   This section shall not apply during any period directly after the
announcement of any potential, impending disaster.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) (Ord. 95-2, passed 6-12-1995; Ord. 02-03, passed 7-8-
2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.02 CERTAIN NOISES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or groups of persons to holler,
shout, scream, sing or make any other noises with their voices which shall be
unreasonably loud and disturbing to the public in general. It shall be
considered that hollering, shouting, screaming, singing or the making of any
other noises with voices by any person or groups of persons shall be
unreasonably loud and disturbing where the same can be heard throughout the
distance of three blocks or 1,200 feet, whichever is the least.
   (B)   The gathering of any group upon the sidewalks, streets or other places
of the town for the purpose of creating, or which creates, mechanical or vocal
sound which is of such intensity or nature as to interfere with the rights of
peaceful occupancy by property owners in the adjoining areas shall be unlawful,
and any individual who participates in, leads, directs or encourages such
actions shall be guilty of violating this section. However, nothing herein
shall prevent the orderly expression of spectators at any regularly organized
sports event or the peaceful assembly of any group for orderly expression or
communication between those assembled.
   (C)   Conduct and noises prohibited by this section shall not become lawful
merely because any person or group of persons engaging in such conduct or
making such noises is participating in a parade, group demonstration or picket
line pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of Chapter 150 of this
code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: PARADES, PICKET LINES AND GROUP DEMONSTRATIONS
Section
   
96.01   Definition
   
96.02   Permit required
   
96.03   Issuance of permits
   
96.04   Regulations concerning picket lines
   
96.05   Unlawful obstruction of streets, sidewalks
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. That portion of a street lying between street intersections.
(Prior Code, § 96.01)
§ 96.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   There shall be no parade, demonstration or aggregating or assembling
of groups on the public streets, sidewalks or public places or in or around any
public building of the town except upon the issuance of a permit therefor under
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block the sidewalks, streets or
public places of the town by any exhibition, demonstration, picket line or
commercial venture so as to prevent the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, except that a special permit may be granted by the Chief of Police for
temporary and peaceful occupancy of a limited portion thereof for purposes
other than boisterous or disorderly demonstration or commercial gain.
Participation in such illegal exhibition, demonstration, picket line or
commercial venture by any individual through leadership, organization or
physical participation therein shall be unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue permits as required by §
96.02 and in the issuance thereof he or she shall:
   (A)   Require a written application therefor to be filed 24 hours in advance
of the parade or group demonstration. The application shall be on a form
prescribed by the town, shall require the application to be signed by the
person filing such application, shall require the applicant to state the
proposed place, time, purpose and size of such parade or group demonstration
and whether or not any minors below the age of 18 years shall participate;
   (B)   Refuse to issue a permit when the activity or purpose stated in the
application would violate any ordinance of the town or statute of the state, or
when the activity or purpose would endanger the public health or safety or
would hinder or prevent the orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
on the sidewalks or streets of the town;
   (C)   Specify in the permit whether or not minors below the age of 16 years
will be permitted to participate. The Chief of Police shall pass upon whether
or not minors below the age of 16 shall be permitted to participate in the
parade or group demonstration and shall base his or her determination upon
whether or not the purpose, time or place of the participation will be
detrimental to or endanger the health, welfare or safety of minors;
   (D)   Require that the application for a permit specify and the permit
designate the person in charge of the parade or group demonstration. Such
person in charge shall accompany the parade or group demonstration and shall
carry such permit with him or her at that time;
   (E)   The permit may set the starting time and duration of the parade or
demonstration and may set the speed of its travel, the space between persons or
vehicles, the portions or areas of the streets and sidewalks to be used, the
length of the parade or group, and such other requirements as the Chief of
Police may include in the permit for the control of free movement of traffic
upon the streets and sidewalks, or for the health, safety and property rights
of the participants and general public. Failure to comply with the requirements
set forth in the permit shall be unlawful.
   (F)   Among other considerations, consider and find as a requisite to
issuance the following:
      (1)   The activity will not require excessive diversion of police from
other necessary duties;
      (2)   The activity will not interfere with the right of property owners
in the area to enjoy peaceful occupancy and use of their property; and
      (3)   The activity can be conducted without unreasonable interference
with normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the area, will not prevent
normal police or fire protection to the public, and will not be likely to cause
injury to persons or property, provoke disorderly conduct or create a public
disturbance.
   (G)   No permit shall be issued for demonstrations, parades and such other
purposes as contained in this chapter for the activities herein allowed to be
used and exercised between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
(Prior Code, § 96.03) (Ord. passed 7-12-1976)
§ 96.04 REGULATIONS CONCERNING PICKET LINES.
   (A)   Interference prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
physically interfere with such pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address
profane, indecent, abusive or threatening language to or at such pickets which
would tend to provoke such pickets or others to a breach of the peace.
   (B)   Intimidation prohibited. The police officers of the town may, in the
event of the assemblage of persons in such numbers as to tend to intimidate
pickets pursuing their lawful objective, through numbers alone or through use
of inflammatory words, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may
arrest any person who fails to absent himself or herself from the place of such
assemblage when so directed by the police.
   (C)   Peaceful picketing.
      (1)   Peaceful picketing in the furtherance of a lawful purpose shall be
permitted in the town provided such picketing is done under the following
conditions.
      (2)   Picketing done contrary to the provisions of this division (C)
shall be unlawful.
         (a)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic.
         (b)   Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use one of the two sidewalks within a block of the town at any one
time.
         (c)   Such pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective for
which the picketing is done; provided, that the words used are not defamatory
in nature or would tend to produce violence.
         (d)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and may not
march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.
         (e)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the same
sidewalk for picketing and such would result in the presence of more than ten
pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group of pickets
for the use of such sidewalk on an equitable basis.
(Prior Code, § 96.04) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 UNLAWFUL OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the town
shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse
or move on when directed to do so by a police officer.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to disperse or move
when so directed by a police officer.
   (B)   No person or group of persons shall block, impede or obstruct the
sidewalks within the town in such a manner as to hinder or interfere with the
free use of the sidewalks by any other person lawfully using the same.
(Prior Code, § 96.05) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $50 or
imprisoned not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 96.99)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSES
      
111.   CABLE TELEVISION
CHAPTER 110: LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Purpose, construction of chapter
   
110.03   Town Tax Collector; duties
   
110.04   License tax levied
   
110.05   Application for license
   
110.06   Issuance of license
   
110.07   Duration of license; due date
   
110.08   Refusal of license
   
110.09   Duties of licensee
   
110.10   Proration of tax; seasonal business
   
110.11   No refund of tax
   
110.12   Separate places of business
   
110.13   Changes in business during tax year
   
110.14   Assignment of license
   
110.15   Duplicates
   
110.16   Revocation of license
   
110.17   Exemptions
   
110.18   Notice of deficiency; conference
   
110.19   Collection of unpaid tax
   
110.20   Unlawful to conduct business without license
   
110.21   Schedule of license taxes
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Each trade, occupation, profession, business and franchise taxed
under this chapter.
   CONDUCTING BUSINESS or CONDUCTING BUSINESS WITHIN THE TOWN. A person
CONDUCTS BUSINESS when he or she engages in one act of business taxed under
this chapter. He or she CONDUCTS BUSINESS WITHIN THE TOWN if he or she
maintains a business location within the town or if, either personally or
through agents, he or she solicits business within the town limits or picks up
or delivers goods or delivers services within the town limits.
   PERSON. Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm or
other legal entity.
   SEASONAL IN NATURE. A business is SEASONAL IN NATURE when it is conducted
for profit six months out of the year or less.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE, CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter is enacted for revenue purposes only. Therefore, it should be
construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its terms. In
addition, issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter does not excuse a
licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or statute. This
chapter does not prevent the town from imposing license taxes on additional
businesses, from increasing or decreasing the amount of any license tax, or
from regulating any business taxed
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.03 TOWN TAX COLLECTOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Town Tax Collector is designated as the proper town official to
collect license taxes and to issue privilege licenses.
   (B)   If the Town Tax Collector has reason to believe that a person is
conducting a business in the town in violation of this chapter, he or she shall
conduct an investigation to determine the person’s tax liability.
   (C)   The Town Tax Collector shall maintain for three years a record of each
conference held pursuant to this chapter. The record shall contain the
applicant’s or licensee’s name, the date of the conference and a brief
statement of the issues discussed and the result reached. After three years,
the Town Tax Collector shall dispose of the record pursuant to G.S. § 121-5.
   (D)   Whenever this chapter requires the Town Tax Collector to give a
written statement or notice to an applicant or a licensee, he or she may do so
in one of three ways:
      (1)   By personally delivering the statement or notice to the applicant
or licensee;
      (2)   By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address specified for that purpose in the
license application; or
      (3)   By causing the statement or notice to be served on the applicant or
licensee in accordance with the procedures of service of process under Rule 4,
North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
(Prior Code, § 110.03) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.04 LICENSE TAX LEVIED.
   An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business conducted
within this town which is listed in the schedule of taxes contained in §
110.21, in the amount set forth in that section. Each person who conducts a
business so listed within this town is subject to this chapter. Each person has
the duty to determine whether the business he or she conducts is taxed under
this chapter and, if so, whether that tax has been paid for the current tax
year.
(Prior Code, § 110.04) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.05 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   A person shall apply to the Town Tax Collector for each license required by
this chapter no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due. The
application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the Town Tax
Collector, shall contain:
   (A)   The name of the applicant and whether he, she or it is an individual,
a partnership, a corporation or some other entity;
   (B)   The nature of the business;
   (C)   Where the business is conducted;
   (D)   An address to which may be mailed notices and statements required by
this chapter;
   (E)   Whether the business is one regulated by a state occupational
licensing board subject to G.S. Chapter 93B and, if so, the serial number of
the state license the applicant currently holds; and
   (F)   Any other information the Town Tax Collector determines to be
necessary to compute the amount of tax due.
(Prior Code, § 110.05) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   After receipt of the completed application, if the Town Tax Collector
believes that no reason exists for refusal of a license under §
110.08 he or she shall determine the amount of tax due and notify the applicant
of that amount. The Town Tax Collector shall not issue a license until the tax
is paid.
   (B)   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where
the business is conducted, if it is to be conducted at one place, the nature of
the business licensed, the period for which the license is issued and the
amount of tax paid. In addition, if a machine is licensed the license shall
show the serial number of the machine. The Town Tax Collector shall keep a copy
of each license issued.
   (C)   If the applicant disputes the amount the Town Tax Collector determines
to be due, he or she may either refuse to pay and request a conference with the
Town Tax Collector to discuss the determination or pay the amount and request a
conference to discuss his or her right for a refund. If a conference is
requested, the Town Tax Collector shall arrange it within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 110.06) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.07 DURATION OF LICENSE; DUE DATE.
   (A)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall cover the 12-month
period beginning July l and ending June 30. The tax is due on July l of each
year. However, if a person begins a business after July l of a year, the tax
for that year is due before the business is begun.
   (B)   If §
110.21 so provides, a license may be issued for a period of one day, one week
or some comparable period of less than a full license year.
(Prior Code, § 110.07) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.08 REFUSAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   After receipt of the completed application, if the Town Tax Collector
believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under division (B) of this
section, he or she shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall not
issue the license. At the applicant’s request, the Town Tax Collector shall,
pursuant to §
110.03(D), give him or her a written statement of the reason for refusing the
license. The applicant may within ten days after the day he or she receives
this statement request a conference to discuss the refusal. In his or her
request he or she shall specify why his or her application for a license should
not be refused. The Town Tax Collector shall arrange the conference within a
reasonable time.
   (B)   The Town Tax Collector shall refuse to issue a license or shall revoke
a license when:
      (1)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of tax
due or his or her qualifications for a license; and
      (2)   The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to compute
the amount of tax due.
   (C)   If the Town Tax Collector refuses to issue a license, the applicant
may reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the
application was refused no longer exists and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the Town Tax Collector shall issue the license
pursuant to §
110.06.
(Prior Code, § 110.08) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.09 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   A licensee shall post his or her license or licenses conspicuously in
the place of business licensed. If he or she has no regular place of business,
the license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by the proper
town officials. If a machine is licensed, the license shall be affixed to the
machine.
   (B)   Each person who conducts business in the town shall permit the Town
Tax Collector to inspect his or her business premises during normal business
hours to determine the nature of the business conducted there and to examine
his or her books and records to determine the nature and amount of business
transacted.
   (C)   (1)   Each person who conducts a business taxed under this chapter
shall keep all records and books necessary to compute his or her tax liability.
      (2)   If a person fails to keep books and records as required, the Town
Tax Collector shall make his or her own determination of that person’s tax
liability from the information available to him or her.
(Prior Code, § 110.09) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 PRORATION OF TAX; SEASONAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   If a business is begun after January 31 and before July l, the amount
of tax due is half the amount otherwise due.
   (B)   If a business is seasonal in nature and if the amount of tax is not
based on gross receipts, the amount of tax due is half the amount otherwise
due.
(Prior Code, § 110.10) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.11 NO REFUND OF TAX.
   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his or her business during the
license year, he or she is not entitled to a refund.
(Prior Code, § 110.11) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.12 SEPARATE PLACES OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax
must be paid for each place of business unless two or more places of business
under common ownership, each conducting a business subject to the same tax
under this chapter, are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and
open into each other, and are operated as a unit.
   (B)   In addition, a separate privilege license tax must be paid for each
business taxable under this chapter conducted by the taxpayer at any one
location; however, the Town Tax Collector may issue a single license for all
taxable businesses conducted at one location by a single taxpayer.
(Prior Code, § 110.12) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.13 CHANGES IN BUSINESS DURING TAX YEAR.
   (A)   (1)   A licensee or his or her assignee shall report a change in the
information contained in the license application to the Town Tax Collector
within ten days after the change occurs.
      (2)   If information shown on the license itself is affected, the
licensee or his or her assignee shall surrender the license to the Town Tax
Collector when reporting the change.
   (B)   If there are no reasons for revoking the license under §
110.08(B) and the change results in the imposition of a separate or additional
tax, the Town Tax Collector shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon
payment of the separate or additional tax.
   (C)   If there are no reasons for revoking the license under §
110.08(B) and the change does not result in an imposition of a separate or
additional tax, the Town Tax Collector shall reissue a license reflecting the
change upon payment of a fee of $1.
   (D)   If there is reason for revoking the license under §
110.08(B), the Town Tax Collector shall refuse to reissue a license and shall
begin proceedings to revoke the license pursuant to §
110.16.
(Prior Code, § 110.13) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.14 ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE.
   A license may be assigned if a business licensed under this chapter and
carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person and the purchaser
is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change shall be
reported to the Town Tax Collector pursuant to §
110.13. Otherwise, each license issued under this chapter is a personal
privilege and is not assignable.
(Prior Code, § 110.14) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.15 DUPLICATES.
   Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the Town
Tax Collector shall furnish a duplicate for a fee of $1.
(Prior Code, § 110.15) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.16 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Town Tax Collector shall revoke a license if a reason exists to
revoke it as set forth in §
110.08(B).
   (B)   Before the Town Tax Collector may revoke a license, he or she shall
give the licensee written notice of the grounds for revocation, pursuant to §
110.03(D). The licensee may within ten days after the day on which notice is
served request a conference with the Town Tax Collector in writing. The request
shall specify the reasons why the license should not be revoked. The Town Tax
Collector shall arrange the conference within a reasonable time. If the
licensee requests a conference, the Town Tax Collector may not revoke the
license until after the conference.
   (C)   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days after
the day on which notice is served, the Town Tax Collector shall revoke the
license.
   (D)   If the Town Tax Collector revokes a license, the former licensee may
apply for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the
license was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing
to issue a license, the Town Tax Collector shall issue the license pursuant to
§
110.06.
(Prior Code, § 110.16) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.17 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section
or by state law, no person is exempt from the payment of a privilege license
tax levied by this chapter.
   (B)   A person who operates a business for a religious, educational, civic,
patriotic, charitable or fraternal purpose, when the entire gross income of the
business is used for such a purpose, is exempt from paying any privilege
license tax levied by this chapter.
   (C)   Blind persons and persons who serve in the United States armed forces
or the merchant marine are exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied
by this chapter to the extent provided by G.S. §§ 105-249 and 105-249.l.
   (D)   A person exempt from paying a privilege license tax levied by this
chapter shall nevertheless obtain a license from the Town Tax Collector. The
license shall state that the licensee is exempt from paying the privilege
license tax.
(Prior Code, § 110.17) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.18 NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY; CONFERENCE.
   (A)   If the Town Tax Collector determines that a person has not paid the
full amount of tax due under this chapter either for the current license year
or for a prior license year, he or she shall give the person written notice of
the deficiency pursuant to §
110.03(D). The notice of deficiency shall specify the total amount of tax due,
the category of business in §
110.21 upon which the tax is based, the amount of tax paid, any interest due,
the balance owed, the manner and time period in which the person may respond to
the notice of the deficiency, and the consequences to the person if he or she
fails to respond as specified.
   (B)   The person may within ten days after the day on which notice is served
request a conference in writing. The request shall specify the person’s
objections to the notice of deficiency. By way of illustration but not
limitation, a person who receives notice of a deficiency may object on the
following grounds:
      (1)   The tax due has already been paid;
      (2)   The Town Tax Collector miscalculated the amount of tax due;
      (3)   The Town Tax Collector based his or her calculation on incorrect or
insufficient information concerning either the nature or the amount of business
conducted; and
      (4)   The Town Tax Collector based his or her determination on an
erroneous interpretation of a provision of §
110.21 that establishes a category of business subject to a particular tax.
   (C)   (1)   If the taxpayer requests a conference, the Town Tax Collector
shall not proceed to collect the deficiency until he or she hears the
taxpayer’s objections and determines that the deficiency should become final.
The Town Tax Collector shall maintain a record of each conference held for
three years pursuant to §
110.03(C).
      (2)   The record shall contain the name of the taxpayer, the date of the
conference and a brief statement of the issues discussed and the results of the
discussion.
      (3)   After three years, the Town Tax Collector shall dispose of the
record pursuant to G.S. § 121-5.
   (D)   If the taxpayer fails to request a conference under division (B), the
deficiency shall become final and the Town Tax Collector shall proceed to
collect the deficiency as provided in §
110.19.
(Prior Code, § 110.18) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.19 COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAX.
   (A)   The Town Tax Collector may use any of the following methods to collect
a deficiency:
      (1)   Criminal prosecution in accordance with §
110.99(A);
      (2)   Equitable relief in accordance with §
110.99(B);
      (3)   The remedies of levy and sale and attachment and garnishment in
accordance with G.S. § 160A-207; and
      (4)   The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal property of the
taxpayer within the town in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 105-109.
   (B)   Any person who commences or continues to conduct a business taxed
under this chapter without payment of the tax is liable for the additional tax
of 5% imposed by G.S. § 105-109 for each 30 days that the tax is delinquent.
(Prior Code, § 110.19) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
§ 110.20 UNLAWFUL TO CONDUCT BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE.
   A person may not commence a business conducted within the town and taxed
under §
110.21 until the privilege license tax due is paid and may not continue such a
business beyond the period for which the license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 110.20) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 SCHEDULE OF LICENSE TAXES.
   A license tax shall be levied and collected for the privilege of engaging in
business within the town limits as set forth in the schedule of license taxes
on file and available for inspection in the office of the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 110.21)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Conducting business within this town without having paid the privilege
license tax imposed by §
110.04, or without a valid license issued pursuant to §
110.06, or without posting a license pursuant to §
110.09(A) is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 105-109. Each day
that a person conducts business in violation of this chapter is a separate
offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings pursuant to this
division (A) does not relieve a person of his or her liability for taxes
imposed under this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in division (A) of this
section and pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(d), the town may seek an injunction
against any person who conducts a business in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.99) (Ord. passed 6-18-1984)
CHAPTER 111: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Franchise required
   
111.04   Grant of nonexclusive authority
   
111.05   Powers, rights reserved to town
   
111.06   Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; conflict with laws
   
111.07   Application for franchise
   
111.08   Supervision by town
   
111.09   Notice
   
111.10   Acceptance of franchise
   
111.11   Franchise term; extension
   
111.12   Performance bond
   
111.13   Construction timetable; extensions
   
111.14   Conditions on street occupancy
   
111.15   Liability and indemnification
   
111.16   Service quality requirements
   
111.17   Operation and maintenance of system
   
111.18   Service to public schools
   
111.19   Emergency use of facilities
   
111.20   Payments to town
   
111.21   Filings and communications with regulatory agencies
   
111.22   Maps, plats and records
   
111.23   Other business activities
   
111.24   Employment policy
   
111.25   Rights of individuals
   
111.26   Complaint procedure
   
111.27   Removal of facilities
   
111.28   Unauthorized use of system
   
111.29   Rates
   
111.30   Preferential and discriminatory practices
   
111.31   Failure of town to enforce franchise
   
111.32   Transfers and assignments
   
111.33   Termination of franchise
   
111.34   Abandonment of system; sale
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   In the public interest and for the promotion of the public health, safety,
welfare and convenience and pursuant to statutory authority contained in G.S. §
160A-319 and other applicable laws, the following rules are adopted, which
rules set forth the conditions, limitations, restrictions and requirements
under which a person may construct or cause to be constructed, operate and
maintain a community antenna television system and engage in the business of
providing a community antenna television service in the incorporated areas of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person submitting an application to the town for a franchise
to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the Town
Council.
   BASIC SUBSCRIBER SERVICE. The simultaneous delivery by the grantee to
television receivers or any other suitable type of audio-video communication
receiver of Tier l service (eleven channels).
   CATV. A community antenna television system.
   CHANNEL. A band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electro-magnetic
spectrum, which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal
or a number of non-video signals.
   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM or CATV SYSTEM. A system of antenna,
coaxial cables, wires, wave guides or other conductors, equipment or facilities
designed, constructed or used primarily for the interception and receipt of
television or radio signals, directly or indirectly off the air, and the
distribution or transmission of such signals by means of cables or other
similar devices to subscribers.
   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC. That agency as presently
constituted by the United States Congress or any successor agency.
   FINANCE OFFICER. The Finance Officer of the town.
   FRANCHISE. The permission, license, franchise or authority given under this
chapter to conduct and operate a community antenna television system in the
town.
   GRANTEE. The person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the Town
Council under this chapter or anyone who succeeds that person in accordance
with the provisions of the franchise.
   GRANTEE CHANNELS. The channels on the CATV system which are reserved by this
chapter for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the
retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC’s cable casting
rules and regulations.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. Any and all compensation in any form whatsoever
received by the grantee from subscribers and users pursuant to its exercise of
the franchise granted to it and any contributing grant or subsidy, including
connection, disconnection and installation fees, received directly or
indirectly by the grantee from subscribers or users within the town. However,
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the
grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any state, municipality
or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of the
governmental unit.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS. Channels on the CATV system which are
placed on both the basic service and the tier service and reserved by this
chapter for use by the town.
   MAYOR. The existing or succeeding Mayor of the town or his or her designate.
   NON-BASIC SUBSCRIBER SERVICE. Any communications service other than basic
subscriber service provided over the CATV system by a grantee directly or as a
carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates or any other person engaged in
communications services including, but not limited to, pay television, burglar
alarm, data or other electronic intelligence transmissions, facsimile
reproduction, meter reading and home shopping.
   PAY TELEVISION. The delivery over the CATV system of video signals in
intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge, over and
above the charge for basic service, on a per program, per channel or per tier
basis.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, firm, corporation or other business
entity.
   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS. Channels on the CATV system specially designated as
noncommercial public access channels.
   STREET or ROAD. The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court,
boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the state
or any of its municipal corporations or political subdivisions for the purpose
of public travel. The term includes other easements or rights-of-way as shall
be now held or hereafter held by the state or any of its municipal corporations
or political subdivisions existing within the incorporated areas of the town to
which the grantee may become entitled to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing or transmitting CATV system transmissions over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances,
attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to
a CATV system.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service
of the grantee.
   TIER SERVICE. One or more channels offered together in a programming block
by the grantee to the subscribers.
   TOWN. The Town of Plymouth, North Carolina.
   TOWN ATTORNEY. The chief legal officer of the town.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the town.
   TOWN MANAGER. The chief administrative officer of the town or his or her
designee.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.03 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction, operation
or maintenance of a CATV system in the incorporated areas of the town unless
such person or the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first
obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to provide a CATV service in
the incorporated areas of the town unless such person shall have first obtained
and does currently hold a valid franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 GRANT OF NONEXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   There is granted by the Town Council to the grantee the nonexclusive
right, privilege and franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain a CATV
system in the incorporated portions of town, subject to the conditions and
restrictions provided in this chapter. The right, privilege and franchise may
be offered to qualified applicants after the applicants have been examined by
the town. This examination shall consider, but not be limited to or by, the
legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the
applicant and whether construction plans and arrangements are shown to be both
feasible and adequate to meet the minimum requirements established in this
chapter.
   (B)   The authority granted to construct, erect, operate and maintain a CATV
system in the town and to obtain all rights-of-way and easements pursuant
thereto is not and shall not be deemed to be an exclusive right or permission.
The town expressly reserves the right to grant similar nonexclusive franchises
to other persons, firms or corporations to conduct CATV within the same or
other areas of the town at any time. No additional franchise granted by the
town shall in any way affect the obligations of the grantee.
(Prior Code, § 111.04) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.05 POWERS, RIGHTS RESERVED TO TOWN.
   (A)   Without limitation on the rights which the town might otherwise have,
the town expressly reserves the right, power and authority to exercise its
governmental power to the full extent that such power may be vested in or
granted to the town including, but not limited to, the power and authority to
amend this chapter; to determine through the Town Council any question of fact
relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of this chapter;
and to grant additional franchises within the town to other persons for the
conduct of CATV under any conditions whatsoever acceptable to the town,
notwithstanding the same might be alleged to be more favorable than the rights
granted under another franchise.
   (B)   The town shall, if it deems it necessary, have the right and privilege
to inspect the construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
cable television system of the grantee in order to ensure the proper
performance of the terms of the franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 111.05) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.06 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES; CONFLICT WITH LAWS.
   (A)   The grantee shall at all times during the term of the franchise comply
with all laws and regulations of the state, the federal government and any
administrative body or agency of either. The grantee shall also be subject to
all lawful exercises of the police power of the town and to such reasonable
regulations as the town shall prescribe for the general conduct of persons
providing CATV service within the town.
   (B)   Consistent with the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission as they affect CATV, any modification or amendment
thereof by the Federal Communications Commission shall, to the extent
applicable, be considered a part of the franchise as of the effective date of
the amendment and shall be incorporated therein within one year of the
effective date of the Federal Communications Commission’s amendment or at the
time of the renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first.
   (C)   Whenever any law of the state or the federal government or regulation
of any agency of either shall be in conflict with and supersede any provision
of the franchise, then for so long as such federal or state law or regulation
shall be in force and effect such franchise provision shall stand suspended and
be of no force and effect and the grantee shall not be required to comply with
such franchise provision. However, the validity of the remaining portions or
provisions of the franchise shall not be affected thereby.
      (1)   The grantee and the town shall mutually exchange information of the
existence and effective date of any such federal or state law or regulation or
any amendments thereto as soon as it shall come to the knowledge of either.
      (2)   The town and the grantee shall state and agree in the franchise
that they would have entered into the franchise agreement notwithstanding that
any provision of the agreement shall be suspended or of no force and effect
because of any conflicting state or federal law or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 111.06) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.07 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The franchise application or franchise renewal shall be on a written
application and upon a form approved by the Town Council. A fee of $300 shall
be submitted to the town as a part of the application or franchise renewal
process.
   (B)   The application form shall set forth such facts in detail as the
Council or its designee may deem appropriate including, but not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated
association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all
persons, including corporations, having a proprietary or equitable interest in
and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the applicant, and the nature of
such proprietary or equitable interest shall be described. The term “equitable
interest” shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent
assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and
shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from
the grant of a franchise under this chapter;
      (2)   If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall
furnish all information required in division (B)(1) of this section and the
names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of the
corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder
whether such shares are held or to be held legally of record or beneficially;
      (3)   If the applicant is a publicly-held corporation, as defined by the
rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement
shall contain the states in which incorporated or qualified to do business; the
names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation; the names
and addresses of and number of shares owned by all stockholders, both nominal
and beneficial, owning 3% or more of the outstanding stock of any class; and a
certified copy of the applicant’s articles of incorporation, together with
amendments thereto. If requested to do so by the town, the applicant shall
state the names and addresses of all persons whose beneficial interest in the
applicant amounts to 3% or more, regardless of how the interest is held,
together with the number of shares owned or held by each;
      (4)   A statement demonstrating the applicant’s experience and expertise,
if any, in establishing a CATV system and in providing a CATV service,
including the names and locations of any other CATV systems currently operated
or if requested to do so, information on any CATV systems formerly constructed,
operated or maintained by the applicant;
      (5)   A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in
rendering the CATV service including any contemplated ownership of or for the
facilities to be used once service commences;
      (6)   1.   A copy of applicant’s certified audit for the fiscal year next
preceding the application date prepared by a certified public accountant and an
income statement and balance sheet for the fiscal quarter next preceding the
application, which may be either audited or unaudited, which shall show the
applicant’s financial status and its financial ability to complete the
construction of the proposed CATV system and to provide the CATV service.
         2.   Information with respect to financial projections of the proposed
system, including methods of financing, shall be submitted as part of the
application. All financial documents requested and submitted in compliance with
this division (B)(6) shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. All financial and ownership information relating to the
applicant submitted in compliance with this section shall be confidential and
shall not be regarded as public information to the extent provided by law;
      (7)   A detailed schedule of the rates and charges to subscribers for
installation and services together with a list of those services to be provided
to subscribers; the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the
cables used in redistributing signals; the service areas or districts; the
commencement and completion dates of initial construction of the CATV system
and the proposed dates the service will be available to the areas or districts
named; and a construction schedule for the service areas or districts named
which shall give particular attention to projected service to more remote areas
or districts;
      (8)   For purposes of the franchise, a copy of any existing arrangement,
agreement or contract between the applicant and any public utility providing
for the use of facilities of the public utility including, but not limited to,
poles, lines, cable or conduits;
      (9)   A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings,
whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any person
or entity with respect to the ownership, control or transfer of the proposed
franchise or the proposed CATV system and service. If a franchise is granted to
a person who is an agent or representative of another person, and such
relationship is not disclosed in the original application, the franchise shall
be void and of no force and effect;
      (10)   The town may, following submission of the application, request
such other clarifying information as it may deem appropriate; and
      (11)   All applications shall be considered firm and final, shall be
signed and verified by the officers of the corporation, and shall set forth and
bind the applicant to the provisions thereof.
(Prior Code, § 111.07) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.08 SUPERVISION BY TOWN.
   (A)   A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system
subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the town having
jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws and
ordinances.
   (B)   The title of the office or official of the town having primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and
implementation of complaint procedures is the Town Manager or his or her
designee.
(Prior Code, § 111.08) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.09 NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever under the terms of the franchise either party shall be
required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in
writing.
   (B)   If notice is to be served on the town, it shall be delivered either by
first-class U.S. mail or by handing such notice to the Town Manager at the
Municipal Building.
   (C)   (1)   If notice is to be served on the grantee, it shall be delivered
either by first-class U.S. mail or by handing the notice to such officer at
such address as the grantee shall from time to time direct.
      (2)   The original name and address of the officer on behalf of the
grantee shall be included in the grantee’s acceptance of the franchise as
provided in §
111.10.
(Prior Code, § 111.09) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.10 ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise it
does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding the power and
authority of the town to grant the franchise.
   (B)   The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the town for any
loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of
the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the town, nor for the
failure of the town to have the authority to grant all or any part of the
franchise or to properly exercise such authority.
   (C)   By accepting the franchise the grantee acknowledges that it has not
been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding, promise or other
statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the town or by any
other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not
expressed in the franchise agreement.
   (D)   (1)   The grantee further acknowledges by the acceptance of the
franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions thereof, is
willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and
conditions, and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the
event of any dispute over the meaning thereof the same shall be construed
strictly against the grantee and in favor of the town.
      (2)   The acceptance shall be in the following form:
   The undersigned ___________ does hereby accept and approve the foregoing and
attached franchise agreement and all of its terms, conditions and amendments; and
in consideration of the benefits and privileges granted to it does hereby agree to
abide by, carry out, observe and perform all of the obligations and things provided
to be carried out and performed by it in the franchise agreement approved by the
Town Council. All prior acceptance documents shall be superseded by this agreement.
 
         This the ________ day of ________, 20______.
 
      Attest:
      _________________      _______________
                     By: ___________
         Secretary            President
 
      State of North Carolina,
      County of Washington.
 
      On the ______ day of ________, 20______ , before me, a Notary Public in and
for the county and state aforesaid, personally appeared _________, the President
and _______, the Secretary of ________, grantee and for themselves and as such
officers respectively, before and on the behalf of the corporation, acknowledge the
signing and execution of the foregoing instrument and acknowledge that the seal
affixed to the instrument is the corporate seal of the grantee corporation; that
they affixed such corporate seal to and otherwise executed the instrument on behalf
of the grantee corporation; and that the signing and execution of the instrument is
their free and voluntary act and deed as such officers respectively and is the free
and voluntary act of the corporation for all of the uses and purposes in the
instrument mentioned, all pursuant to authority and direction duly given by the
Board of Directors of the grantee corporation.
 
      In testimony where, I have hereunto subscribed my name and affixed my
notarial seal on the day and year first above written.
                           ___________________
                              Notary Public
 
      My commission expires:
 
      ___________________
 
 
   (E)   Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any action to be
performed by or on behalf of the grantee, time shall be deemed of the essence
and any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always
be sufficient grounds for the town to revoke the franchise.
   (F)   A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not
at any time set up against the town in any claim or proceeding any condition or
term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the town had
no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to
accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their
entirety. This provision shall not preclude the grantee from the exercise of
its judicial remedies for interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.10) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.11 FRANCHISE TERM; EXTENSION.
   (A)   The franchise granted shall be for a term of 15 years unless the same
shall sooner expire by reason of other provisions of the franchise agreement.
   (B)   The term of the franchise shall commence on the first day of the first
month next following the date the grantee hereunder accepts and agrees to abide
with the terms and conditions of the franchise by filing a written acceptance
thereof with the Clerk pursuant to §
111.10, which acceptance shall be filed within a period of 30 days from the
date of the award to the grantee of its franchise. If the acceptance is not
filed within this time, the franchise so awarded shall be deemed void and of no
further force and effect and the offer of the franchise to the grantee shall
stand revoked.
   (C)   (1)   Upon the expiration of a franchise, the town on its own motion
may require the grantee to operate the franchise for an extended period of time
not to exceed six months from the date of any such resolution. All provisions
of the franchise shall continue to apply to operations during an extension.
      (2)   The town shall serve written notice at the grantee’s business
office of intent to extend under this division (C) at least 30 days prior to
the expiration of the original franchise.
(Prior Code, § 111.11) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Term of CATV franchise, see G.S. § 160A-319
§ 111.12 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   (1)   The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of its
acceptance of a franchise, file with the Clerk and at all times thereafter
maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at the
grantee’s sole cost and expense, a corporate surety bond with a company and in
a form approved by the Town Attorney in the amount of $10,000, renewable and
negotiable annually and conditioned upon the faithful performance by the
grantee of all of the terms and conditions of its franchise for the term
thereof.
      (2)   The surety bond renewal negotiation shall not extend beyond 30
days, after which the town’s decision shall be determinative and final.
   (B)   If the town shall under the provisions of §
111.34 revoke the franchise of the grantee, other than by reason of the
involuntary acquisition by the town of the grantee’s property, the town shall
be entitled to recover under the terms of such bond the full amount of any loss
occasioned to the town by reason of such breach or violation up to the full
amount of such bond.
   (C)   (1)   No recovery by the town of any sum pursuant to the performance
bond required in division (A) of this section shall be any limitation on the
liability of the grantee to the town under the terms of this section, except
that any sum so received by the town shall be deducted from any recovery which
the town might have against the grantee under the terms of this chapter.
      (2)   Any recovery by the town of any sum pursuant to the performance
bond shall cause and require the grantee to renew and refund the bond back to
the initial amount of $10,000.
(Prior Code, § 111.12) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.13 CONSTRUCTION TIMETABLE; EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall
proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations
which are required for construction and installation of the CATV system and the
conduct of the grantee’s business including, but not limited to, any utility
joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other
permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by any duly constituted
regulatory agency (including registration with the Federal Communications
Commission) having jurisdiction over the construction, installation and
operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission
facilities.
   (B)   Within 90 days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses,
registrations and authorizations, the grantee shall pursue the completion of
the CATV system and rendition of services with reasonable diligence so that it
will accomplish significant construction of its system within one year after
commencement of initial construction. The grantee shall thereafter equitably
and reasonably extend energized cable to a substantial percentage of the town
meeting density requirements included within the incorporated area of the town
as now or hereafter existing. Such percentages shall be determined as follows.
      (1)   The grantee shall extend cable television service to those areas
within the town where the number of potential subscribers is 20 occupied
dwellings or more per mile of cable.
      (2)   The grantee shall extend energized cable to a least 25% of the area
meeting density requirements each year, including the first year after
beginning operations, so that the entire area of the town assigned or granted
meeting density requirements shall be covered with energized cable within four
years from the date upon which installation begins.
   (C)   (1)   Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently
pursue each of the requirements of the franchise agreement and to complete each
of the matters set forth therein, or failure to commence rendering service to
subscribers within one year after the commencement of construction and
installation shall be grounds for termination of the franchise agreement.
      (2)   However, the town may extend the time for the commencement and
completion of construction and installation of service for additional periods
in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of
circumstances beyond its control.
   (D)   The provisions of this section may be modified in a franchise grant
agreement when the agreement is a renewal of an existing franchise or where the
grantee is purchasing an existing CATV system located in the town and applying
for a new franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 111.13) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.14 CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by a grantee within the town shall be so located as to cause minimum
interference with the proper use of streets, highways and public rights-of-way
and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who abut any of the streets, highways or public rights-of-way.
The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all
existing and future town, county, state and national construction and
electrical codes.
   (B)   A grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any
poles or facilities within the streets, highways or public rights-of-way within
the town for the conduct of its CATV system but shall use the existing poles
and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power, telephone and other
utility companies under such terms and agreements as the grantee may negotiate
with these companies. However, when the grantee is unable to reach mutually
satisfactory rental agreements with appropriate electrical power, telephone and
other utility companies, or where it is not practicable to do so, the grantee
may locate its poles or facilities within the streets, highways or public
rights-of-way within the town but shall cooperate with the Town Manager in the
location and placement of its poles and facilities.
   (C)   The grantee, or its successors and assigns, shall maintain attachments
on poles that the town now uses, or has been authorized to use by other
franchises now in force, in such manner that they will not interfere with the
use of the poles by the town. The grantee shall grant to the town, free of
expense, joint use of any and all poles owned or erected by it for any proper
municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free
use and enjoyment of the grantee’s own wires and fixtures.
   (D)   Whenever the state or other properly constituted authority shall
require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of
its streets, highways or public rights-of-way within the town, it shall be the
obligation of the grantee upon 30 days’ notice of such requirement to
immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably
necessary to meet the requirements of the state or such properly constituted
authority. This relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at
no charge or expense to the town.
   (E)   Whenever in any place within the town all the electric and telephone
utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee
to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such
places. If the electric utilities and telephone utilities shall be located
underground in any place within the town after a grantee shall have previously
installed its property, the grantee shall at the same time or immediately
thereafter, upon request of the town, remove and relocate its property
underground in such places. The expense of this relocation shall be negotiated
between the town and the grantee and paid for by the town. Facilities of a
grantee placed underground at the property owner’s request in an area where
electric utilities and telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with
the additional expense paid by the property owner, if the grantee so elects.
For underground lines, the grantee shall apply for standard town underground
construction permits, which shall not unreasonably be withheld.
   (F)   (1)   Whenever the grantee shall take up or disturb any pavement,
sidewalk or other improvement of any street, avenue, alley, highway or other
public place, the same shall be replaced and the surface restored in as good
condition as before entry within 48 hours after completion of the grantee’s
work.
      (2)   Upon failure of the grantee to make the restoration within this
time or to begin the restoration within this time if the restoration cannot be
made within such time, or upon the grantee’s delay of more than 24 hours in the
continuation of a restoration begun, the town may serve upon the grantee,
within 24 hours after receipt of such notice, begins or resumes the proper
restoration, the town may cause the proper restoration to be made, including
the removal of excess debris, and the expense of same shall be paid by the
grantee upon demand by the town.
   (G)   The grantee shall, at its expense and after 48 hours notice thereof,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or
other public place any property of the grantee when required by the town or the
North Carolina Department of Transportation by reason of traffic conditions,
public safety, street closing or abandonment, highway or street construction,
change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water
pipes, power lines, signal lines or any other type of structures or
improvements; and, the town or the North Carolina Department of Transportation
shall not be liable for any disturbances of the grantee’s installation
resulting therefrom. This division (G) applies to streets or roads as defined
in §
111.02.
   (H)   The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging the streets, roads, alleys, easements, sidewalks and public places
of the town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
contact with the facilities of the grantee. All matters mentioned in this
division (H) shall be performed at the grantee’s expense.
   (I)   (1)   A grantee shall on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the town temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires
to permit the moving of such building. The expense of the temporary removal,
raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the
same, and a grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in
advance.
      (2)   A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours advance notice to
arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between
a grantee and a holder of a building moving permit, such disagreement will be
resolved by the town.
   (J)   (1)   The grantee’s work, while in progress, shall be properly
executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other
devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having
occasion to use the portion of the streets involved or adjacent property.
      (2)   Any opening or obstruction in the streets shall be guarded and
protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or
boardings, the bounds of which shall be clearly designated by warning lights of
approved types.
(Prior Code, § 111.14) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 150
§ 111.15 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The grantee shall at his or her sole cost and expense fully indemnify,
defend and save harmless the town, its officers, boards, commissions, agents
and employees against any and all claims, demands, suits, actions, liability
and judgments for damage arising out of the construction, operation and
maintenance of the CATV franchise, and against all liabilities to others
including, but not limited to, any liability for damages by reason of, or
arising out of, any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners,
authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be transmitted or
distributed by the grantee, and against any loss, cost expense and damages
resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney’s fees, arising out of the
exercise or enjoyment of the franchise, irrespective of the amount of the
comprehensive liability policy required thereunder. This indemnity shall not
apply to damages occasioned solely and exclusively by acts of the town, its
agents or employees.
   (B)   Within 30 days after the granting of the franchise and at all times
during the term of the franchise, the grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums
for and file with the Clerk executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing
the payment of premiums for a general comprehensive public liability insurance
policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the town, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees from any and all claims by any person
whatsoever on account of injury to or death of any person occasioned or alleged
to have been occasioned by the operations of the grantee under the franchise
therein granted, in the amount of at least $100,000 for personal injury or
death of any person and $300,000 for personal injury or death of any two or
more persons in any one occurrence. Renewal certificates of such insurance
shall be promptly forwarded to the Clerk as such renewals are made, and such
insurance shall be constantly kept in force and effect during the term of the
franchise. The grantee or the insurance company shall file with the Clerk a
written notice of any material alteration or cancellation of any insurance
coverage at least 30 days prior to the effective date of property damage
insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the town, its officers,
boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any
person whatsoever for property damage occasioned or alleged to have been
occasioned by the operation of a grantee under a franchise granted under this
chapter, in the amount of at least $100,000 for property damage to any one
person and $300,000 for property damage to two or more persons in any one
occurrence.
   (C)   The grantee shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the town, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims
of any person whatsoever for copyright infringement occasioned by the sole
operation and control of a grantee under a franchise granted under this chapter
or alleged to have been so caused or occurred.
   (D)   The insurance as provided for in division (B) of this section shall be
kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of the
franchise and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the
maintenance and operation of the CATV system.
   (E)   All insurance contracts shall be in form satisfactory to the Town
Attorney and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do
business in the state and acceptable to the Town Attorney and Clerk, which
acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld, and they shall require 30 days
written notice of any cancellation or reduction in coverage to both the town
and the grantee. A copy of all insurance policies shall be filed with the
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 111.15) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.16 SERVICE QUALITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The grantee shall construct a cable television system capable of
delivering at least 19 channels.
   (B)   All programs of broadcasting stations required to be carried by the
Federal Communications Commission shall be distributed or transmitted by the
grantee to the subscriber in their entirety without delay from the time
originally broadcast and without additional announcements, advertisements or
other deletions, additions or changes to the programs. However, nothing shall
prohibit such changes, deletions or delays as may be required by law.
   (C)   All programs of all broadcasting stations carried by the grantee shall
be transmitted or distributed by the grantee without material degradation of
picture quality or sound and without significant variation between the quality
of the picture or sound transmitted or distributed by the grantee to the
subscribers between the programs of one broadcasting station and another, so
far as the same may be within the control of the grantee.
   (D)   Whenever any broadcasting station carried by the grantee shall
transmit or broadcast any television program or part thereof in color, it shall
be the duty of the grantee to distribute or transmit that program or that part
thereof in color to its subscribers.
(Prior Code, § 111.16) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.17 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   The CATV system shall be installed and maintained at all times in
compliance with FCC CATV technical standards as set forth in the FCC rules and
regulations and any amendments thereto. These shall be considered minimum
technical standards, and overall technical performance of the system shall be
assessed in relation to these minimum standards and the grantee’s application
setting forth the technical specifications it proposed to provide.
   (B)   The CATV system to be operated by the grantee shall be capable of
providing a minimum capacity of 19 channels of video service including all
broadcast television stations and access channels.
   (C)   The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Interruptions for system maintenance, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by
notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system.
   (D)   The grantee shall operate and maintain its cable television system in
such a manner that there will be no interference with television or radio
reception through individually owned receiving antennas.
   (E)   The grantee shall install and maintain a cable television system which
shall be in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry to the end
that the subscribers in the town shall receive the best possible cable
television service.
(Prior Code, § 111.17) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.18 SERVICE TO PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
   The grantee shall provide one free connection and monthly service at no
charge to each public school in the town that is passed by its cable.
(Prior Code, § 111.18) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.19 EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES.
   In the event of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of
the Town Manager, make available its CATV plant facilities to the town at no
cost to the town for emergency use during the period of such emergency or
disaster and shall provide such personnel as are necessary within the judgment
of the grantee to properly operate under the circumstances. If actual voice
broadcast shall be necessary in such emergency, the town shall assume any
liability for violation of FCC rules and shall hold the grantee harmless.
(Prior Code, § 111.19) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.20 PAYMENTS TO TOWN.
   (A)   The grantee shall pay to the town during the life of the franchise a
sum equal to 3% of the gross annual revenues from all sources attributable to
the operations of the grantee within the confines of the town. This fee shall
be paid quarterly and within 15 days from the end of each quarter. The grantee
shall file with the town annually within 60 days after the expiration of the
grantee’s fiscal year a financial statement prepared according to generally
accepted accounting procedures by a certified public accountant or other person
satisfactory to the town, showing in detail the gross annual revenues of the
franchise in the incorporated areas of the town during the preceding quarters.
It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the town within 60 days after the
time for filing such statement the sum, if any, due and not paid during the
preceding quarters. All payments shall be made to the office of the Clerk. In
the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed
in the franchise agreement, interest on such payment shall apply from such date
at a rate not to exceed 2% above the average prime rate of interest as set by
the local banking institutions as set out in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   If the grantee’s franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to
the end of the applicable term, whether initial term or renewal term, the
grantee shall immediately submit to the town a financial statement prepared as
required by division (A) of this section, showing the gross annual revenues of
the grantee in the town for the time elapsed since the last 12-month period for
which the grantee had paid to the town the required percentage of its gross
annual revenues. The grantee shall pay to the town not later than 30 days
following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such gross
annual revenues from its operation in the town.
   (C)   The town shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s records showing
the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed, and the
right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the
franchise shall be accorded to the town during reasonable business hours. No
exercise by the town of such right of inspection shall be deemed a waiver by it
of any right under the franchise agreement or of its right to a true accounting
of all amounts due or owed to it by the grantee.
   (D)   No acceptance of any payment by the town shall be construed as a
release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the town might have for
further or additional sums payable under the terms of a franchise granted under
this chapter or for any performance or obligation of the grantee.
   (E)   The payment of any and all fees by the grantee is in addition to any
ad valorem taxes which the town may levy on the grantee’s real or personal
property and any other tax which may lawfully be levied by other governmental
units.
(Prior Code, § 111.20) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.21 FILINGS AND COMMUNICATIONS WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES.
   Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange
Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation shall be
submitted simultaneously to the town by filing the same with the Town Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 111.21) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.22 MAPS, PLATS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   A grantee shall file with the Town Manager or his or her designee
annually a copy, true and accurate, of maps or plats of all existing and
proposed installations (excluding customer house drop installations) upon
streets, highways and public ways. These maps and plats shall be kept up-to-
date on an annual basis.
   (B)   The grantee shall file a map with the Clerk on or before January 31 of
each year showing the assigned areas and locations of the town being served by
the cable television system; this map shall be accurate as of the end of the
calendar year immediately preceding the date of filing. The map shall be kept
up-to-date showing all changes by additions and deletions made during the year
for which it was filed.
   (C)   A grantee shall continually keep on file with the Clerk a current list
of all officers and management employees attached to the local franchise office
with their current addresses.
   (D)   All books and records of a grantee relative to its subscribers and
subscriber revenues concerning its operations within the town shall be made
available for inspection and audit by the Town Manager or his or her designee
within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit has been made.
   (E)   Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by
the grantee as they relate to subscribers for the operation of a CATV system
under the franchise shall be filed with the Town Council and at the local
office of the grantee and shall be available for inspection during normal
office hours.
(Prior Code, § 111.22) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.23 OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   The grantee, or any officer or employee of the grantee, shall not engage
directly or indirectly in the retail business of selling, renting, repairing or
installing television receivers, radio receivers or accessories for such
receivers (excluding converters and security devices) within the town during
the term of the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 111.23) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.24 EMPLOYMENT POLICY.
   (A)   In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of
the CATV system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, marital status, age,
sex or national origin. The grantee shall post in conspicuous places available
to employees and applicants for employment notices setting forth the provisions
of this nondiscrimination clause: The grantee shall in all solicitations or
advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the grantee state that
all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without
regard to race, creed, color, sex, marital status, age or national origin.
   (B)   The grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge
from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in
terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed,
color, marital status, age or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 111.24) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.25 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   The grantee shall be prohibited from using or allowing the use of
subscriber lists for any purpose unconnected with the provision of service over
the cable system.
   (B)   No monitoring of any terminal connected to the cable system shall take
place without specific written authorization by the user of the terminal in
question on each occasion. However, the grantee may provide for system-wide,
non-individually addressed “sweeps” for the purpose of verifying system
integrity, controlling return-path transmission, or billing for pay services.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to tape or monitor a system line without
authorization from the parties whose communication might be overheard. However,
the grantee may provide for systemwide, non-individually addressed “sweeps” for
the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path
transmission, or billing for pay services.
   (D)   The grantee shall not in its rates or charges, in making available the
services or facilities of its cable system, in its rules or regulations, or in
any other respect make or grant preferences or advantages to any subscriber or
potential subscriber to the system, or to any user or potential user of the
system, and shall not subject any such person to any prejudice or disadvantage.
This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to
stimulate subscriptions to the system or other legitimate uses thereof; nor
shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classification shall be entitled.
(Prior Code, § 111.25) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice of the procedure for reporting and resolving complaints shall
be given to each subscriber at the time of initial installation to the cable
system. A contact telephone number shall be given to each subscriber for each
subscriber to directly report his or her complaints to the grantee.
   (B)   In order to limit failures and keep malfunctions of the CATV system to
a minimum and that the same might be promptly corrected at all times after
notice of malfunction or failure, the grantee shall consistently maintain an
office in the town which shall be open during normal business hours Monday
through Friday, inclusive. The grantee’s office shall have a listed telephone
number, and the telephone shall be so operated that complaints or requests for
repairs or adjustments because of malfunctions can be received at any time of
day, every day of the year.
   (C)   The grantee shall provide such adjustments and repairs as are
necessary to provide a quality signal to the subscriber within 72 hours of the
time the report of trouble is made, and repairmen shall be available for such
purpose during normal business hours and on an emergency basis. The grantee
must respond to a cable outage call within 48 hours after such call is
received. The grantee shall place no higher priority on servicing existing
customers with a quality signal than hooking up new customers.
   (D)   Failures or malfunctions of the CATV system shall be corrected by the
grantee promptly after notice of such failure or malfunction, unless such
failure or malfunction is over a substantial portion of the grantee’s system
and is caused by storm, fire, lightning, explosion, civil commotion or other
similar catastrophe.
(Prior Code, § 111.26) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.27 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall
promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such
subscriber upon his or her request.
   (B)   In any event, the facilities of the grantee shall be so constructed
and designed that by the use of ordinary household tools, without special
skills or knowledge, and without unreasonable risk of harm, the subscriber may
be capable at any time of disconnecting the system of the grantee from the
subscriber’s television set or receiver so that the set or receiver may be used
independently of the system of the grantee.
(Prior Code, § 111.27) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.28 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, or
otherwise, with any part of a franchised CATV system within the town for the
purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures,
programs or sound.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, or
otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system within the town for the
purpose of enabling himself, herself or others to receive any television
signal, picture, program or sound without payment to the owner of the system.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used
for distribution of cable television signals, pictures, programs or sound.
(Prior Code, § 111.28) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.29 RATES.
   (A)   (1)   The rates and charges to be made and collected by the grantee
for cable television service (excluding premium pay service) and approved in
the franchise agreement shall not be increased without the prior formal
approval of the Town Council after a public hearing.
      (2)   The town reserves the right to request such records and information
from the grantee as are necessary for review of the proposed rate increases.
   (B)   (1)   The Town Council reserves the right and authority to review the
schedule of service and installation charges approved in the franchise
agreement.
      (2)   This review may be made for the purpose of appropriate adjustment
of such rates so as to be fair and reasonable to both the grantee and the
subscriber in the delivering and receiving of first-class cable television
service of the highest caliber.
(Prior Code, § 111.29) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.30 PREFERENTIAL AND DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.
   The grantee shall not as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations or any other respect make or grant any undue preference or
advantage to any person, or subject any person to undue prejudice or
disadvantage. However, connection and service charges may be waived or modified
during promotional campaigns of the grantee.
(Prior Code, § 111.30) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 FAILURE OF TOWN TO ENFORCE FRANCHISE.
   The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and
conditions of the franchise by any failure of the town upon any one or more
occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or
conditions.
(Prior Code, § 111.31) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.32 TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   The franchise shall be deemed a privilege to be held in personal trust
by the grantee. It shall not be sold, sublet, transferred, leased, assigned or
disposed of in whole or in part either by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, or otherwise without the prior consent of the Town Council,
expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be
prescribed. No title, whether legal or equitable, or any right, interest or
property in the franchise shall pass to or vest in any person either by the act
of the grantee or by operation of law without the written consent of the Town
Council. The Town Council shall act upon a request for such consent within 60
days of the date thereof, and such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
The granting, giving or reserving of any one or more of such consents by the
Town Council shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent.
   (B)   Nothing in the franchise shall act to give the grantee vested property
rights such that the same may be effectively transferred or disposed of,
whether voluntarily or involuntarily, without the consent of the Town Council.
   (C)   Any transfer, assignment or other distribution of any of the rights
under the franchise shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly
executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the Clerk within 30 days
after such transfer or assignment shall have been executed or affected, and
shall reflect therein the consent of the Town Council.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage, pledge
or hypothecation of the CATV system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing
by a grantee from another person of the CATV system equipment or part thereof
for financing purposes or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 111.32) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.33 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to
the town, the town reserves as an additional, separate and distinct power the
right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee
thereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of
this chapter and shall within 30 days following written demand by the town to
effect such compliance fail to do so;
      (2)   A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
lawfully determined debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt;
      (3)   A grantee attempts to dispose of any of its property in violation
of and contrary to the terms of the franchise;
      (4)   A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud in its conduct or
relations under the franchise with the town or subscribers or potential
subscribers; or the grantee has made a material false statement in the
application for the franchise;
      (5)   The town condemns all of the property of the grantee within the
town by the lawful exercise of eminent domain; and
      (6)   A grantee, contrary to the best interests of public convenience and
welfare, fails to provide subscribers with regular, adequate, reasonable and
proper service. In fulfilling its obligation, a grantee will follow applicable
FCC standards as they relate to CATV and the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No revocation shall be effected, except for reason of condemnation as
provided in division (A)(5) of this section unless or until the Town Council
shall have adopted a resolution setting forth the causes and reasons for the
revocation and the effective date thereof. Such resolution shall not be adopted
without 60 days notice, or such extended period as may be allowed by the
Council, to a grantee and without an opportunity for a grantee to be heard upon
the proposed adoption of such proposed resolution. If the revocation as
proposed in such resolution depends on a finding of fact, such finding of fact
as made by the Council after the hearing, if requested by the grantee, shall be
conclusive.
   (C)   A grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any
sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance
of such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control.
(Prior Code, § 111.33) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.34 ABANDONMENT OF SYSTEM; SALE.
   (A)   If the use of any part of the grantee’s CATV system is discontinued
for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or if such system as
installed does not comply with the requirements of this chapter and the
grantee’s franchise, or if the grantee’s franchise is terminated, revoked or
not renewed, the town may in its discretion require that the system be sold for
cash to a franchise designated by the Town Council at a purchase price equal to
the system’s fair market value as determined in division (C) of this section.
   (B)   Under the conditions set forth in division (A) of this section, the
town may at its option purchase the CATV system for cash at its fair market
value.
   (C)   Fair market value shall be determined by the town consistent with
generally accepted appraisal and accounting principles. No consideration or
value shall be given for any right or privilege granted by this chapter or the
grantee’s franchise. Any dispute between the town and the grantee over
determination of the cable system’s fair market value as a going concern shall
be resolved by a panel of three appraisers: one to be selected by the town, one
to be selected by the grantee, and the third to be selected by the other two
appraisers. The grantee shall fully cooperate with the appraisers. The cost of
this appraisal shall be borne equally by the grantee and the successor grantee.
The grantee after having received full consideration shall execute such deeds,
bills of sale and other documents as may be necessary to effectuate the
transfer.
(Prior Code, § 111.34) (Ord. passed 11-14-1983)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 111.99)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   MINORS AND YOUTH PROTECTION
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
   
130.01   Begging
   
130.02   Loitering
   
130.03   False alarms
   
130.04   Halloween “trick or treat” restrictions
   
130.05   Spitting
   
130.06   Firearms
   
130.07   Failure to pay fare or fee
   
130.08   Interfering with town employees
   
130.09   Impersonating town officer or employee
   
130.10   Attempts; aiding and abetting
   
130.11   Loitering for purpose of engaging in drug-related activity
   
130.12   Consuming alcoholic beverages in public
§ 130.01 BEGGING.
   (A)   No person shall beg or solicit alms in or on the streets or other
public places, nor in the entrances or corridors to or of any public building,
without a permit therefor from the Town Manager.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any pencils, shoestrings,
chewing gum or similar objects in or on the streets or other public places as
an indirect method of soliciting alms, nor shall any person offer a cup or
other receptacle for the deposit of money or take up any collection in
connection with the playing of any musical instrument in or on the streets or
other public places without having a permit therefor issued by the Town
Manager.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 LOITERING.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LOITER. Standing, lounging, sitting or lying about idly, whether alone or
in company with other loiterers.
   (B)   No person shall loiter at any place within the town and while so
loitering insult, threaten, intimidate or in any manner interfere with or
impede the progress of any person conducting himself or herself in a lawful and
orderly manner.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall without having some business on the premises
loiter in or about any railway passenger station or bus terminal; nor shall any
person habitually loaf or loiter on the streets, nor shall any person
congregate on the streets or sidewalks in such a way as to obstruct or
interfere with the free passage into or out of any public, business or private
property.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the police officer who observes a violation
of this division (C) to first warn the offender and, upon his or her failure to
heed the warning, to arrest him or her.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
explosion or impending danger of explosion.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for police protection or assistance.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for medical assistance by any physician or registered nurse.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 HALLOWEEN “TRICK OR TREAT” RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in any public
place in the town for the purpose of making “trick or treat” visitations, or to
go on or in any private premises for such purpose, except as provided in
division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to children 12 years of
age and under between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on each Halloween
night or upon such other night as may be designated by the Town Council.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or her
minor child or ward to violate the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 130.04) (Ord. passed 10-8-1984) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 SPITTING.
   No person shall spit upon the sidewalk or upon the floors of any church or
public building.
(Prior Code, § 130.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 FIREARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm at any
time or place within the town except when used in lawful defense of person or
property or pursuant to lawful directions of a law enforcement officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any pellet gun, air
rifle or other mechanism or device designed or used to project a pellet, BBs or
other missile by compressed air or mechanical action with less than deadly
force, except at places designated for such purpose by the Town Council or upon
private property with the consent of the property owner and under supervision
of a competent adult.
(Prior Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.07 FAILURE TO PAY FARE OR FEE.
   No person, except persons entitled to free transportation, shall ride upon
any bus, taxicab or other public conveyance without paying therefor the fare
prescribed or allowed by law, or attend any show or other amusement without
paying the prescribed fee.
(Prior Code, § 130.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 INTERFERING WITH TOWN EMPLOYEES.
   (A) No person shall negligently or willfully interfere with, hinder or
obstruct any officer or employee of the town who is engaged in, en route to, or
returning from the performance of official duty, whether such interference,
hindrance or obstruction is by threat, assault, or otherwise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hamper, molest,
resist or hinder a police officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duty.
(Prior Code, § 130.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.09 IMPERSONATING TOWN OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   No person shall falsely represent himself or herself to be an officer or
employee of the town, or without proper authority wear or display any uniform,
insignia or credential which identifies any town officer or employee; nor shall
any person without proper authority assume to act as an officer or employee of
the town, whether to gain access to premises, obtain information, perpetrate a
fraud, or for any other purpose. However, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent a private citizen from making a lawful citizen’s arrest
for felony or breach of the peace committed in his or her presence.
(Prior Code, § 130.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.10 ATTEMPTS; AIDING AND ABETTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any act which
is prohibited by this code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order
or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof; and it shall
be unlawful for any person to aid or abet the commission or attempted
commission of any act which is prohibited by this code or other ordinance or by
any rule, regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to
authority thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to avoid the doing of
any act which is required by this code or other ordinance or by any rule,
regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority
thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet the avoidance
or attempted avoidance of any act which is required by this code or other
ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given
pursuant to authority thereof.
(Prior Code, § 130.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.11 LOITERING FOR PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER. For the purposes of this
section, shall mean a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting
officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation
involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in
the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. §§ 90-86 et seq., or has
been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any
political subdivision of this state or of any other state or federal law.
      PUBLIC PLACE. For the purposes of this section, means any street,
sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility, or the doorways and entranceways to any building which
fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on any of those places,
or any property owned by the town.
   (B)   Loitering. It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about
in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose
to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina Control
Substances Act, G.S. §§ 90-86 et seq. Such circumstances shall include:
      (1)   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping or attempting to stop passersby,
or repeatedly attempting to engage passersby in conversation;
      (2)   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles;
      (3)   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other persons;
      (4)    Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller;
      (5)    Such person behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful
drug-related activity;
      (6)    Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby,
whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects;
      (7)    Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance of a
police officer;
      (8)    Such person is at a location frequented by persons who use,
possess or sell drugs; or
      (9)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor or seller, or is known to be or has been involved in drug-related
activities.
(Prior Code, § 130.11) (Ord. 90-2, passed 4-9-1990; Ord. 95-6, passed 9-11-
1996) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.12 CONSUMING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MALT BEVERAGES. Beer, lager beer, malt liquor, ale, porter and other
brewed or fermented beverages containing 0.5% alcohol by volume and not more
than 6% of alcohol by volume.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
other organizations or groups, or combination of person acting as a unit.
      UNFORTIFIED WINES. Wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by
natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet or dextrose sugar,
and having an alcoholic content of not less than 5% and not more than 17% of
absolute alcohol by volume and that has been approved as to identity, quality
and purity by the North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
   (B)   Offering or drinking in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to
consume a malt beverage or unfortified wine on or in any public place owned or
occupied by the town.
(Prior Code, § 130.13) (Ord. 95-5, passed 9-11-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Damaging or tampering with town’s personal property
   
131.02   Removing public records
   
131.03   Trespassing upon or damaging town’s real property
   
131.04   Cisterns, water receptacles to be screened
   
131.05   Fishing from bridge prohibited
   
131.06   Use of town docks
   
131.07   Swimming, diving
   
131.08   Illegal deposits
§ 131.01 DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH TOWN’S PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly use, tamper with,
render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or otherwise
interfere with any books, records, furniture, equipment, gear, apparatus, tools
or other items of personal property belonging to, leased to or used by the town
or any agency thereof.
(Prior Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 REMOVING PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   No person shall remove any record, document, book or other paper
belonging to the town, or any other town property, from the office or place
whether is properly belongs, without authority from the custodian thereof, who
may require a receipt therefor, except on written order from the Town Council
or the Mayor or the Town Manager or pursuant to a valid subpoena duces tecum.
   (B)   All public records and accounts shall be available to the public for
inspection and use during all regular business hours in the offices where
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.03 TRESPASSING UPON OR DAMAGING TOWN’S REAL PROPERTY.
   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly trespass upon or
damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with any real property belonging
to, leased to or used by the town or any agency thereof.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Police Department to enforce trespassing regulations, §
33.060
§ 131.04 CISTERNS, WATER RECEPTACLES TO BE SCREENED.
   No person shall, at any time or place, keep or maintain any cistern, tub,
barrel, tank or other receptacle used for the storage of water without having
such cistern, tub, barrel, tank or other receptacle effectively screened or
covered and so constructed and kept as to prevent breeding of mosquitoes.
(Prior Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.05 FISHING FROM BRIDGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from Bridge No. 89 on State
Route 1325 over Canaby Creek inside the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 131.05) (Ord. 81-3, passed 11-9-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.06 USE OF TOWN DOCKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dock or moor any ship, boat, barge,
vessel or other watercraft, other than watercraft of the “rowboat” class not
interfering with navigation or docking facilities, at any town docking facility
for a period of more than five consecutive days within a period of 30
consecutive days, or to store or leave on such dock for a period of more than
24 consecutive hours any goods, wares, merchandise or other property, without
first applying for and obtaining permission from the Town Manager who may, in
his or her discretion for good cause, extend such time upon payment by such
person to the town the sum of $10 per day for each day such ship, boat, barge,
vessel or other watercraft may be docked or moored at or to such dock, or such
goods, wares, merchandise or other property may be stored or left thereon
during such extension.
(Prior Code, § 131.06) (Ord. 91-2, passed 2-11-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.07 SWIMMING, DIVING.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to swim or dive from any town bulkhead,
pier, dock or boardwalk facility.
(Prior Code, § 131.07) (Ord. 91-2, passed 2-11-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.08 ILLEGAL DEPOSITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person navigating any boat in the Roanoke
River to pump, unload or dump any bilge oil or other inflammable gases or oils
in such river within the corporate limits or opposite the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to throw offal, garbage, rubbish or other refuse
into any waterway within the town.
(Prior Code, § 131.08) (Ord. 91-2, passed 2-11-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 132: MINORS AND YOUTH PROTECTION
Section
   
132.01   Purpose
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Offenses
   
132.04   Exceptions
   
132.05   Enforcement
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect juveniles from victimization and
exposure to criminal activity by establishing a curfew for juveniles under the
age of 16 years in the town. This chapter is intended to promote the health,
safety and welfare of both juveniles and adults by creating an environment
providing better protection and security for all concerned. The purpose is also
to protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity that occurs
after the curfew hour.
(Prior Code, § 99.01) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ADULT. Parent, guardian or someone over the 18 years of age
authorized to accompany the juvenile for a designated period of time.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated to which the
public has access or is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   JUVENILE. Any person under the age of 16 years who is not married or been
emancipated from their parents or guardian.
   OWNER/OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation, operating, managing or conducting any establishment, including the
employees, members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of corporation.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place that is generally open to and used by the public or
a substantial group of the public, whether it be publicly or privately owned,
including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, public
vehicular areas and parking lots, shops, restaurants, convenience stores,
schools and school grounds, places of business and amusement, playgrounds,
parks, church grounds, similar areas that are open to the public, and other
common areas open to or accessible to the public.
   RESTRICTED HOURS. The time of night referred to herein is based upon the
prevailing standards of time, whether eastern standard time or eastern daylight
savings time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the town.
Restricted hours will mean 12:00 midnight on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday or Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Prior Code, § 99.02) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 132.03 OFFENSES.
   Except as provided by division (D) of this section, the following offenses
constitute a violation of this chapter:
   (A)   A person under the age of 16 years of age shall be violation of this
section by being present in any public place or establishment within the town
during the restricted hours;
   (B)   It shall be violation of this section for any person 16 years or older
to aid or abet a juvenile in the violation of division (A) of this section;
   (C)   A parent or guardian of a juvenile shall be violation of this section
if he or she knowingly permits, and/or by inadequate supervision, allows the
juvenile to remain on the premises of any establishment or in any public place
within the town during the restricted hours;
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this section for a parent or guardian of a
juvenile to refuse to take custody of the juvenile during the restricted hours;
and
   (E)   The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment shall be in
violation of this section if he or she knowingly allows a juvenile to remain
upon the premises of the establishment during the restricted hours. The term
knowingly includes knowledge that an operator or employer should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the patrons of an establishment.
(Prior Code, § 99.03) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 132.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   A juvenile who is in a public place or establishment during the restricted
hours shall not be in violation of this section if the juvenile is:
   (A)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or authorized adult over 18 years of
age;
   (B)   Using a direct route to or from a place of employment;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle motor vehicle with parental consent;
   (D)   Reacting or responding to an emergency;
   (E)   Attending or traveling to or from, by direct route, any school,
religious or recreational activity or other organized activity which is
supervised by adults and that accepts responsibility for the juvenile. The
parent or guardian must have knowledge of the organized activity in which the
juvenile is involved; and
   (F)   If the owner, operator or employee of an establishment notifies the
Police Department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during restricted hours and refused to leave.
(Prior Code, § 99.04) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 132.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police
officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the
public place or establishment during restricted hours.
   (B)   The officer shall notify the parent and advise the presence of Youth
Protection Ordinance (i.e., this Chapter 132) and document this accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 99.05) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 9-9-2002)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A juvenile who violates any provision of this chapter is subject to
being adjudicated delinquent. The court may, in its discretion, impose any
dispositional alternative(s) that are provided in the North Carolina Juvenile
Code for any juvenile who is delinquent.
   (B)   Any person other than a juvenile who violates any provision of this
chapter may be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to a fine not to
exceed $100, and imprisonment in the discretion of the court in accordance with
G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 99.99) (Ord. 2002-05, passed 9-9-2002)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CODE
      
152.   MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
      
153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
154.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Signs hanging over streets and sidewalks
   
150.02   Playing in streets
   
150.03   Damaging trees or shrubs
   
150.04   Obstructions prohibited; removal
   
150.05   Survey and boundary lines
   
150.06   Town to only accept streets of specified length
   
150.07   Roller skates and skateboards
Excavations; Construction
   
150.20   Excavation permit required
   
150.21   Bond
   
150.22   Construction requirements
Utility Poles and Underground Conduits
   
150.35   Permit required for placement of poles
   
150.36   Use of poles for lines of another company
   
150.37   Use of poles and underground conduits by town
   
150.38   Poles, wires to be kept in safe condition
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 SIGNS HANGING OVER STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hang or suspend any sign over
or above any sidewalk or street, the lowest point of which is less than eight
feet from the ground over the sidewalk and the lowest point of which is less
than 15 feet from the ground above the street, and such sign shall be kept
securely fastened at all times.
   (B)   In the event that a greater height than required by division (A) of
this section is required by any other provision of this code or other town
ordinance or by state law, the greater height shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 97.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.02 PLAYING IN STREETS.
   No person shall play baseball, town ball, football or other games of similar
nature on any public street not designated as a play street.
(Prior Code, § 97.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.03 DAMAGING TREES OR SHRUBS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pull down, cut, deface with signs,
break or in any way damage any of the trees, shrubs or flowers on the streets,
parks or squares of the town.
(Prior Code, § 97.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.04 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, construct, place
or maintain any porch, steps, fence, wall or other obstructions whatever in or
over any of the streets, sidewalks or public places, and it shall be unlawful
to repair or improve any porch, steps, fence, wall or other obstruction
whatsoever existing in or over any of the streets, sidewalks or public places.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any sidewalk or street with any
wheelbarrow, wagon or other vehicle or any chair, bench, open gate, chicken
coop, box or other article; it shall also be unlawful to display merchandise on
any sidewalk for the purpose of sale or otherwise. However, this division (B)
shall not apply to baby carriages and invalid chairs rolled on the sidewalks in
such manner as not to obstruct the same.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to notify all persons
about to emplace, erect or construct any building, sidewalk, wall or fence near
the street or any public way or place not to encroach upon such street, public
way or place and if, in the opinion of the Town Manager, any such obstruction
is being or has been constructed he or she shall cause a survey of the line of
the street, public way or place to be made by a competent surveyor, and if such
survey shall show that the street, public way or place is obstructed by any
such building, sidewalk, wall or fence, the owner shall be required to pay the
costs of the survey and to remove all obstructions at once. Every person who
shall be found to have so encroached on any street, public way or place by any
such building, sidewalk, wall or fence and refuses or neglects to remove the
encroachment upon notice from the Town Manager within one week from the date
thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. All officers of the
town who observe any such encroachment shall promptly notify the Building
Inspector thereof.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to obstructions authorized by permit.
(Prior Code, § 97.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.05 SURVEY AND BOUNDARY LINES.
   The Town Manager, when he or she deems it to be necessary, shall appoint a
competent surveyor to accurately ascertain, run out and mark the boundary line
of any street, or part thereof, and such boundary line shall conform to the
official town map which is on file in the office of the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 97.05)
§ 150.06 TOWN TO ONLY ACCEPT STREETS OF SPECIFIED LENGTH.
   The Town Council will not accept and take over for maintenance any street or
avenue, as distinguished from alleys, for public use unless it has a minimum
width of 50 feet and will not accept the dedication of any street or avenue in
the town for public use, development and maintenance unless it has a minimum
width of 50 feet.
(Prior Code, § 97.06)
§ 150.07 ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS.
   (A)   No person upon roller skates, including in-line skates, or riding in,
upon or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or other similar
device shall do so upon any sidewalk or pedestrian walkway in the town except
in residential zones.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to any other penalties provided under the code, any
roller skates, in-line skates, coasters, toy vehicles, scooters, skateboards or
other similar devices which are used in violation of this section may be seized
and impounded by any town law enforcement officer for a period of time not to
exceed 14 days; provided, however, that if such device is being impounded as
evidence to be used in a criminal trial, it may be held in the same manner and
for the same period of time as any other evidence.
      (2)   Devices impounded under this section shall be identified and stored
at the police station or such other place designated for such purposes by the
Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 97.07) (Ord. 97-3, passed 4-14-1997)
EXCAVATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
§ 150.20 EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch or other
excavation in or under any street, sidewalk or public place owned or maintained
by the town, or so close thereby as to create a danger of the collapse or
caving in thereof, without first having procured a permit so to do from the
Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 97.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.21 BOND.
   (A)   Each applicant for a permit required by §
150.20 shall, as a prerequisite to the issuance thereof, file with the Town
Manager a bond, payable to the town and in such amount as the Town Manager
shall consider adequate, conditioned upon restoration of the surface of the
place to be excavated in compliance with the requirements of §
150.22.
   (B)   However, in lieu of such bond a cash deposit may be made with the
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 97.16)
§ 150.22 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every holder of a permit issued pursuant to §
150.20 to put such street, sidewalk or public place in as good condition in all
respects as it was prior to the beginning of work under such permit, and every
day of failure so to do shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Permit holders under §
150.20 shall prosecute their work with due diligence, to the end that the work
may be completed, and the surface restored without undue delay.
   (C)   (1)   Every permit holder shall take such precautions as may be
necessary for the protection of persons, animals and property from injury.
      (2)   Such precautions shall include the erection and maintenance of
barriers and lights, and the Town Manager may prescribe in the permit such
other precautions as he or she may deem necessary or prudent.
(Prior Code, § 97.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
UTILITY POLES AND UNDERGROUND CONDUITS
§ 150.35 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PLACEMENT OF POLES.
   (A)   No pole for electric, telegraph, telephone or other purpose shall be
placed on any street, sidewalk or public place without a permit therefor being
obtained from the Town Manager.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the erection of poles on any street or
elsewhere there exists a line of poles on such street or at such place for the
purpose of supporting electric, telephone or telegraph wires.
(Prior Code, § 97.30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.36 USE OF POLES FOR LINES OF ANOTHER COMPANY.
   (A)   Whenever any electric, telephone or telegraph company shall desire to
place lines or wires along any particular street or place upon which it does
not have a line of poles, but upon which there exists a line of poles owned by
another company, then such companies may maintain their wires upon the same
poles.
   (B)   If an agreement cannot be reached between the companies owning the
poles and the companies desiring to place wires thereon, then the companies may
submit the question of compensation to three disinterested persons for
arbitration or they may submit the question to the Town Council for
determination. This section shall apply to poles owned by the town as well as
poles owned by companies operating under franchises from the town.
(Prior Code, § 97.31)
§ 150.37 USE OF POLES AND UNDERGROUND CONDUITS BY TOWN.
   One duct in all underground conduit systems shall be provided for the town
free of charge for the town police or fire alarm telegraph system and other
emergency systems when required, and the town shall have the use of any and all
poles on streets for the same purpose.
(Prior Code, § 97.32)
§ 150.38 POLES, WIRES TO BE KEPT IN SAFE CONDITION.
   It shall be the duty of each owner of poles supporting electric, telephone
or telegraph wires to keep the poles and wires in a safe condition and, for
that purpose, to inspect them once every three months.
(Prior Code, § 97.33)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and intent
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.04   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
151.05   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.06   Compliance
   
151.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.08   Interpretation
   
151.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.20   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.21   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
151.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.23   Corrective procedures
   
151.24   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.35   General standards
   
151.36   Specific standards
   
151.37   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
151.38   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE, but without established
floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
151.39   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
Legal Status Provisions
   
151.50   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
151.51   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of North
Carolina has in G.S. Chapter 143, Art.21, Part 6; Chapter 160A, Art. 19, Parts
3, 5 and 8; Chapter 160A, Art. 8, delegated to local governmental the
responsibility units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of
Plymouth, North Carolina, does ordain as follows.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other
hazards.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed
to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development that
may increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
   (D)   Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Protect human life, safety and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and bridges)
that are located in flood prone areas;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
special flood hazard area.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state or other source using FEMA
approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood
hazard risk zones and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood
insurance rate maps (FIRMS) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if
published.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power. This term describes federal,
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the FREEBOARD
establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Chapter 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a certified local government (CLG) program; or
         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a certified local government
(CLG) program.
      (2)   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) PROGRAMS. Approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980, being 54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or limited storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such an
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as
corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one foot of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including, but not limited to,
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill or any
other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.04.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas,
liquid or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in §§
151.20 through
151.24 and 151.35 through 151.39 is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Prior Code, § 151.02) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.03 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ), of the town.
(Prior Code, § 151.03) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.04 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina
and FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood
insurance rate maps (FIRM), for the Town of Plymouth dated August 19, 1985,
which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date: Town of Plymouth and Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction, dated August 19, 1985.
(Prior Code, § 151.04) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.04.
(Prior Code, § 151.05) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.06 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 151.06) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 151.07) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.08 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 151.08) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages.
   (B)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town or by
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 151.09) (Ord. passed 10-7-2006)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.20 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Manager, or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.35) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.21 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.04, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.04;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
151.04;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
151.04,
151.22 or
151.37; and
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be flood-proofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65)
with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited
to, installation, exercise and maintenance of floodproofing measures;
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
151.36(D)(3) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE
and A1-30.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
151.36(F) and (G) are met; and
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit;
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
151.04;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable; and
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the
reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment of
the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven
day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan and an
inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any
new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea
level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   Manufactured home. If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A,
AO, AE or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in
height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.36(C)(2).
      (4)   Alteration or relocation of watercourse. If a watercourse is to be
altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; a professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing
the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be
submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development
permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.36(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.36(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
151.36(H).
(Prior Code, § 151.36) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator
for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
   (E)   Prevent encroachments, into floodways and non-encroachment areas
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions §
151.39 are met;
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
151.21(C);
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21;
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21(C);
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
151.21(C) and
151.36(B);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section;
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with §
151.04, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.37(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with §
151.04, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state or other source in order
to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the base flood elevation, advise the property owner of the option to apply for
a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the letter of
map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file;
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974,
being 5 U.S.C. § 552a, as amended;
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
151.23;
   (T)   Review, provide input and make recommendations for variance requests;
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with §
151.04, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued
by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs; and
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR).
(Prior Code, § 151.37) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.23 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate or demolish the building, or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, they may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Prior Code, § 151.38) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The town’s Board of Adjustment as established by the town hereinafter
referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
151.02 of this chapter, provided provisions of divisions (I)(2), (I)(3) and (I)
(5) of this section have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
151.02 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25
per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the State of North Carolina upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community;
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area;
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws; and
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a
variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Prior Code, § 151.39) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These include, but are
not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water
heaters and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area or
stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction or replacement
meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
151.24(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21(C).
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 151.50) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
151.04 or
151.37, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.35, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.02.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.02. Structures located in A, AE, AO and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation
shall be in accordance with §
151.39. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in §
151.21(C), along with the operational and maintenance plans.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.02.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes
adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is
above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (D) of this section.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local emergency management coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials;
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages and the like)
are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria
shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
151.35(A);
         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.35(D); and
         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of division (D)(3) of this
section.
      (2)   (a)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square
feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation
or floodproofing certificate.
         (b)   Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all
other accessory structures in accordance with division (C) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 151.51) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.37 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
151.04, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.35, shall apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet
each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria.
      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
151.35 and
151.36.
      (2)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of §§
151.36.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such
base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with §
151.04 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   (a)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
151.02.
         (b)   Requirements of §
151.36 shall also apply.
(Prior Code, § 151.52) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.38 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE, BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
151.35 and
151.36; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Prior Code, § 151.53) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.39 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within
the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.04. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in §§
151.35 and
151.36, shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
      (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood,
based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
      (2)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of
the proposed encroachment.
   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all development shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:
      (1)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.36(C); and
      (2)   The no encroachment standard of division (A) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 151.54) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 151.50 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted August 19, 1985 as
amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention
ordinance of the Town of Plymouth enacted on August 19, 1985, as amended, which
are not reenacted herein are repealed.
   (B)   The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for each
municipal jurisdiction within Washington County is as follows: Town of
Plymouth, enacted on August 19, 1985
(Prior Code, § 151.70) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.51 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof for
which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.71) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
   (C)   Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 151.99) (Ord. passed 9-10-2007)
CHAPTER 152: MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Legislative findings
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Administrator; duties and powers
   
152.04   Responsibilities of owners and occupants; duties during inspection
   
152.05   Conflict with other provisions
   
152.06   Scope and application of chapter
   
152.07   State law adopted by reference
Minimum Standards
   
152.20   Fitness for dwellings and dwelling units
   
152.21   Structural conditions
   
152.22   Basic equipment and facilities
   
152.23   Ventilation
   
152.24   Space, use and location
   
152.25   Safe and sanitary maintenance
   
152.26   Control of insects, rodents and infestations
   
152.27   Rooming houses
Enforcement
   
152.40   Procedure for enforcement
   
152.41   Failure to comply with order
   
152.42   Appeals from orders of the Administrator
   
152.43   Petition to Superior Court by owner
   
152.44   Service of complaints and orders
   
152.45   In rem action by the Administrator
   
152.46   Costs as lien on premises
   
152.47   Alternative remedies
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The Town Council hereby finds and declares that there exists in the town
housing which is unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities and other conditions rendering such
housing unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health or
safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town and
that a public necessity exists to exercise the police powers of the town
pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, as now or hereafter amended, to
cause the repair and rehabilitation, closing or demolishing of such housing in
the manner herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 152.01) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. Such person as shall from time to time be designated by the
Town Manager as the Minimum Housing Enforcement Officer, or his or her
designee.
   AGENT. Any person, firm or corporation who is responsible for the
management, maintenance, operation, renting, leasing or sale of any property,
or who makes application for or seeks a permit or certificate on behalf of the
owner of any property or who in any other way represents the owner of the
property in any particular case.
   ALLEY. A public vehicular or pedestrian way which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
   AREAWAY. Any subsurface space adjacent to a building for affording access to
or for lighting or ventilating the basement or a cellar of such building.
   ATTIC STORY. Any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so designated,
arranged or built as to be used for storage or habitation. If an attic which is
accessible by a fixed stairway has a seven foot clear height for greater than
50% of the width of the floor below, then the space shall be considered as a
story when determining building height.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM. A heated enclosed space containing a lavatory, a toilet, and
either a tub, a shower or a tub/shower combination.
   BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. Any single-family dwelling, in which rooms are
rented by the owner occupant to not more than four persons who are not related
by blood, adoption or marriage to the owner occupant. See also FAMILY.
   CEILING. The surface suspended from or attached to the underside of floors
or roofs which does not form a structural part of a floor or roof or the
underside of an exposed floor or roof construction.
   CEILING. The clear vertical distance from the floor to the finished ceiling;
the lowest space or spaces in a building located under the basement story.
   CENTRAL HEATING UNIT. A unit controlled by a thermostat or some other device
and is designed to provide heating to a dwelling or dwelling unit through a
duct, wall-mounted system or baseboard-mounted equipment.
   DETERIORATED. That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all the minimum standards
established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Minimum Housing Enforcement Officer.
   DILAPIDATED. That a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards of
this chapter except at a cost in excess of 50% of its value, as determined by
finding of the Minimum Housing Enforcement Officer.
   DWELLING. A building or a portion thereof which is wholly or partly-used for
or intended to be used for temporary or permanent residential occupancy for one
or more families.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single independent housekeeping unit with sanitation,
living, dining, sleeping and permanently installed kitchen and bathroom
facilities for use by one family.
   EXIT. A way of departure from the interior of a building or structure to the
exterior at street or grade level.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and other
pests by eliminating their harborage, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and lawful pest elimination method approved
by the Administrator.
   FAMILY. An individual living alone, or two or more persons related by blood,
adoption or marriage, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a shared dwelling unit.
   FIREPROOFING. Protected to resist the damaging effects of fire in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter for such construction.
   FLUE. An enclosed pipe, duct or passageway used only for the transmission of
heat or the products of combustion.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE SPACE or HABITABLE ROOM. Any room or enclosed floor space in a
building or structure used or intended for use for living, sleeping, cooking or
eating, including kitchens and basements, but excluding bathrooms, half-baths,
halls, corridors, pantries, storage space, closets, laundries and other spaces
not used frequently or for extended periods.
   HALF-BATH. An enclosed space containing a toilet or urinal and lavatory
basin.
   HEARTH. The brick, stone or cement area in front of a fireplace.
   HEATING UNIT. All mechanical devices or other appliances that utilize fuel
or another form of energy to produce heat.
   HOUSE or HOUSING. Any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, apartment, residency
hotel, rooming house, boardinghouse, bed and breakfast, inn or similar building
or structure, or part thereof, containing habitable space.
   HOUSING APPEALS BOARD. The Board of Adjustment shall serve as the governing
body to hear housing complaints and appeals.
   IMPERVIOUS TO WATER (AS TO FLOORS). A clean, smooth floor, without cracks or
holes, made of terrazzo, ceramic, asphalt or rubber tile, smooth concrete,
linoleum or other similar material, or made of wood, and, if made of wood, then
with tightly fitting joints, covered with varnish, lacquer or other similar
water-resistant coating.
   INFESTATION. The presence within or around any housing of insects, rodents
or other pests.
   KITCHEN. An area used, or designated to be used, for the preparation of
food.
   LAVATORY. A fixed wash bowl equipped with plumbing.
   MAINTENANCE OF A BUILDING STRUCTURE, APPARATUS OR EQUIPMENT. The way or
manner in which any such building, structure, appliance, apparatus or equipment
is serviced, repaired or altered to perpetuate the use or purpose for which
such building, structure, appliance, apparatus or equipment was originally
intended.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or structure occupied or intended for
occupation as the home or residence of two or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking within their respective
dwelling unit.
   NEW WORK. Any work to be completed that requires a building permit.
   OWNER/OCCUPANT. Any person, firm, corporation, lessee, receiver, trustee,
guardian or personal representative holding legal title or legal right to
occupy or carry on business upon any lot, or any manager, operator or other
person authorized to occupy or conduct business on behalf of an owner. Where
there is more than one owner as defined, their duties and obligations under
this chapter are joint and severable and shall include responsibility for
compliance with this chapter.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations and corporations who have
an interest of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company or
association, and shall include any personal representative, trustee, receiver,
assignee or other similar representative.
   PLUMBING. The water supply system, the sanitary sewer system, the vent
system, fixtures and traps and shall include their respective connections,
devices, appliances and nonessential components within the property lines of
the premises.
   PORTABLE HEATING UNIT. An unvented air heating appliance which is designed
for environmental heating and is not secured or attached to a building by any
means other than an electrical cord.
   PREMISES. A lot or group of lots including any building or group of
buildings or other structures or parts thereof, which may be situated thereon
and considered as a unit devoted to a certain use or occupancy, including the
necessary and customary accessory buildings and other open spaces required or
used in connection with such use of a lot or group of lots.
   PUBLIC AREA. That space within any housing which is open to use or access by
the general public.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the town, county or state
relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other activities
concerning dwellings in the town.
   REMOVAL. The demolition and removal of the entire structure, leaving the
property free and clear of debris and without holes or pockets which may retain
water.
   RESIDENCY HOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing ten or more
guest rooms for transient or permanent residents. Occupancy shall not exceed
two people per guest room. Registration facilities, 24 hour on-site management
and housekeeping services shall be provided. This definition does not include
hotels, motels or other places of lodging that are inspected by the County
Health Department.
   ROOFING. The shingles, tiles, composition, sheet metal covering or other
waterproof protection on top of a roof.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and
the word shall include, but not be limited to, the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
   SPACE HEATING UNIT. A permanently installed unit which utilizes fuel or
another form of energy and is designed to provide continuous heat to a dwelling
or part of a dwelling.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that habitable portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the top-most floor and ceiling or roof above.
   STORY ABOVE GRADE (SEE ATTIC STORY). Any story having its finished floor
surface entirely above grade except that a basement shall be considered as a
story above grade when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
      (1)   More than six feet (1,829 mm) above grade plane;
      (2)   More than six feet (1,829 mm) above the finished ground level for
more than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
      (3)   More than 12 feet (3,648 mm) above the finished ground level at any
point.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground including, but not limited to, the following, walls, fences, buildings,
signs, swimming pools, gas or liquid storage tanks, towers and other similar
items. For the purpose of the flood zone management, STRUCTURE shall mean a
walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a
mobile home.
   SUBSTANTIAL. Firmly constructed, sturdy, safe, sound, solid or stout in a
manner to adequately perform its original purpose.
   TENANT. A person, co-partnership, firm or corporation occupying or using a
building, premises or any part or parts thereof owned by another.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. That conditions exist in a dwelling, dwelling
unit rooming house or rooming unit which violate or do not comply with one or
more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the requirements
established by this chapter.
   VENTILATION. The adequate supply and removal of air to and from a space
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, grilles, ducts or other similar
devices.
   WATER HEATING UNIT. An appliance listed by a testing laboratory which is
capable of heating water to a temperature between 120 and 140°F to all
appropriate plumbing fixtures within a dwelling unit.
   WEATHERTIGHT. So constructed that the structure resists weather and excludes
rain and snow, and prevents the infiltration of air.
(Prior Code, § 152.02) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.03 ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   (1)   Exercise of powers and duties by Administrator. The
Administrator is designated and appointed to exercise the powers and perform
the duties described by this chapter.
      (2)   Conditions resulting in housing unfit for human habitation. The
Administrator may determine that housing is unfit for human habitation if he or
she finds that sufficient conditions exist in such housing which are dangerous
or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such housing, the
occupants of neighboring housing, the occupants of neighboring housing or other
residents of the town. Such conditions may include the following, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing: defects therein increasing the
hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation,
light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects,
uncleanliness; or any violation described in this chapter.
   (B)   Duties. The Minimum Housing Enforcement Officer is hereby designated
as the Administrator empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to
exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the
Administrator:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings
and dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which dwellings
and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this chapter with respect to such dwellings or
dwelling units;
      (2)   To take such action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation
of housing which is deteriorated;
      (3)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
chapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed; and
      (4)   To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed.
   (C)   Powers of the Administrator. The Administrator is authorized to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter, including the following
powers in addition to others herein granted:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the town in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
      (2)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections; provided, such entries shall be made in accordance with law and in
such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession; and
      (4)   To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 152.03) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.04 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS; DUTIES DURING INSPECTION.
   (A)   Owners and occupants are responsible for the following.
      (1)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition, the shared or public areas of the dwelling and the premises thereof.
      (2)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling
unit and the premises thereof which he or she occupies or controls.
      (3)   Rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall dispose of all their rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner
by placing it in the supplied storage facilities. In all cases, the owner shall
be responsible for the availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.
      (4)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper uses
and operation of same.
      (5)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any
part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (B)   Owners and occupants have the following duties during an inspection.
      (1)   Rights of Building Inspector. For the purpose of making
inspections, the Administrator or his or her designee is hereby authorized to
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units and premises.
      (2)   Free access.
         (a)   The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Administrator or his or
her designee free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit and its
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey.
         (b)   Every occupant of a dwelling, or dwelling unit, shall give the
owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises, at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 152.04) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.05 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is found
to be in conflict with any other ordinance or code of the town, the provisions
which establish the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the
promotion and protection of health and safety of the residents of the town
shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 152.05) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.06 SCOPE AND APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all housing in the town
and its extraterritorial planning and zoning jurisdiction irrespective of when
such building was constructed, altered or repaired. Portable, mobile or
demountable buildings or structures, including manufactured homes, mobile homes
and trailers, when used or intended for use for housing within the town’s
jurisdiction shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the use of the word TOWN in
this chapter shall also include the extraterritorial planning and jurisdiction,
as set forth in the zoning ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 152.06) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.07 STATE LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6, entitled Minimum Housing Standards is
hereby adopted in its entirety as if every word were printed herein verbatim.
(Prior Code, § 152.07) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 152.20 FITNESS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held
out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all the minimum standards
of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of §§
152.21 through
152.26.
   (B)   No person shall occupy as owner occupant, or let to another for
occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which
does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of §§
152.21 through
152.26.
   (C)   (1)   Prior to sale or within six months of the sale, any existing
residential structure containing one or more units, the Town Manager or his or
her designee shall be requested to issue a certificate of continued occupancy.
The application for such permit shall be made by the owner and/or the purchaser
and shall comply with such administrative provisions as required by the Town
Manager or his or her designee.
      (2)   The certificate of continued occupancy shall be proof that the
structure in question complies with the applicable town ordinances, codes,
regulations and policies of the town and that is in compliance with the land
use regulations of the town or is considered a legal nonconforming use. If the
applicant applies for a certificate of continued occupancy the owner or buyer
shall have 45 business days to bring the property into compliance. The owner or
buyer shall be issued a temporary certificate of continued occupancy until the
completion of the work.
   (D)   Prior to the occupancy of any existing residential unit in an existing
structure containing one or more units, the Town Manager or his or her designee
shall issue a certificate of continued occupancy. The application of such
permit shall be made by the owner and/or purchaser and shall comply with such
administrative provisions as required by the Town Manger or his or her
designee. The certificate of continued occupancy shall be proof that the unit
in question complies with applicable town ordinances, codes, regulations and
policies of the town and that it is in compliance with the land use regulations
of the town or is considered a legal nonconforming use. If the applicant
applies for a certificate of continued occupancy the owner or buyer shall have
45 business day to bring the property into compliance. The owner or buyer shall
be issued a temporary certificate of continued occupancy until the completion
of work.
(Prior Code, § 152.15) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997; Ord. passed 11-1-1998)
§ 152.21 STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or
other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall not have
holes or cracks which might admit rodents.
   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or their foundation supports
shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall
be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse.
   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be
provided.
   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall
be finished of suitable materials which will, by use of reasonable household
methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness and shall be maintained in such a
manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between
various spaces.
   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weathertight and watertight.
   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to
constitute a fire hazard.
   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the
ground.
(Prior Code, § 152.16) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.22 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   Plumbing system.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and
to the public sewer or other approved sewer disposal.
      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and adequate supply of both cold water
and hot water. All system connected to a potable water supply.
      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the North
Carolina Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and
good working order.
      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling
unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or
shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user.
   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities
for providing heat in accordance with either divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section.
      (1)   Central and electric heating systems. Every central or electric
heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to which
is connected a minimum temperature of 70°F measured at a point three feet above
the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where central or electric heating systems
are not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with
sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances
may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms with a minimum temperature
of 70°F measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter
conditions.
   (C)   Electrical system.
      (1)   (a)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric
lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least
two floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles, connected in such
manner as determined by the North Carolina Electric Code.
         (b)   There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room,
laundry room and furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall type
electric fixture for lighting. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are
not provided in any habitable room, then such habitable room shall contain at
least three floor or wall type electric convenience receptacles.
      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall
have adequate lighting by electric lights at all times when natural lighting is
not sufficient.
      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained
in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed in
accordance with the North Carolina Electrical Code (Volume IV of the North
Carolina Building Code).
(Prior Code, § 152.17) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.23 VENTILATION.
   (A)   General. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The total minimum window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area
of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window or
any room and such light-obstructing structures are located less than five feet
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such
room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the
total floor area of such room.
   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately
ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room
shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent
ventilation.
   (C)   Bathroom water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for
habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.
(Prior Code, § 152.18) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.24 SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.
   (A)   Room sizes.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in
each habitable room as required by the North Carolina Building Code (Volume I-
B of the North Carolina Building Code).
      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
      (3)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for
each occupant under 12 years of age.
   (B)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six inches.
   (C)   Floor area calculation.
      (1)   Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling unit may count for not
more than 10% of the required habitable floor area.
      (2)   The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is
less than 42 feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area computing
the total area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
   (E)   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling
height are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and
      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window or
windows face a stairwell, window well or access way.
(Prior Code, § 152.19) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.25 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior
roof shall be substantially weathertight and rodent proof; shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair; and shall be capable of affording privacy;
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may
cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint
or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture
or weather.
   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar
door, and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent
proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every outside and inside stair,
porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or
utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or
installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained
in satisfactory working condition.
   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain through
drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be
kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental
to health.
   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of
egress as required by the State Residential Building Code (Volume I-B of the
State Building Code).
(Prior Code, § 152.20) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.26 CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATIONS.
   (A)   Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes,
flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoor space shall have supplied and installed screens and a self-closing
device; and every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used
or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens
installed.
   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed or such other
approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single-dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or
other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit
in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of
the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit
shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as
required by the town, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit
shall be supplied an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an
adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each
dwelling unit, to be approved by the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an
approved outside garbage can as required by the town.
(Prior Code, § 152.21) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.27 ROOMING HOUSES.
   All the provisions of this chapter, and all of the minimum standards and
requirements of this chapter shall be applicable to rooming houses, and to
every person who operates a rooming house or who occupies or lets to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided in the
following divisions.
   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, property connected to an approved
water system and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied
for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever said facilities are shared.
All such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and
shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not
more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities.
Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold
water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 feet of floor area for each occupant 12
years of age or older and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
   (C)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower required by division (A) of this section shall be located
within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford privacy and
are separate from habitable rooms, which are accessible from a common hall and
without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein.
   (D)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and
for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house; he or
she shall further be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house
is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
(Prior Code, § 152.22) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.40 PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Preliminary investigation; placarding; notice; hearing.
      (1)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Administrator by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the town charging that any dwelling
or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the
inspector, upon inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for
human habitation, he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, cause to be posted on the main entrance of
such dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words: “This
building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building
for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so
posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.
      (2)   (a)   The Administrator will further issue and cause to serve upon
the owner or the parties in interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit a
complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be
held before the Administrator at a place therein fixed, not less than ten nor
more than 30 days after serving of said complaint.
         (b)   The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
         (c)   Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least person
signing a petition relating to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may
attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Administrator.
   (B)   Procedure after hearing.
      (1)   After such notice and hearing, the Administrator shall state in
writing his or her determination whether such dwelling or dwelling unit is
unfit for human habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or
dilapidated.
      (2)   (a)   If the Administrator determines that the dwelling or dwelling
unit is deteriorated, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of
fact in support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner to repair, alter and improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to
comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this chapter within
a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days.
         (b)   Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and
close such dwelling or dwelling unit until such repairs, alterations and
improvements have been made.
      (3)   If the Administrator determines that the dwelling is dilapidated,
he or she shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order
directing and requiring the owner to either repair, alter and improve such
dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with minimum standards of fitness
established by this chapter, or else vacate and remove or demolish the same
within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.
(Prior Code, § 152.30) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.41 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.
   (A)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or
dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Administrator to
repair, alter or improve the same within the time specified therein, or if the
owner of a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to comply with an order of the
Administrator to vacate or close, and remove or demolish the same within the
time specified therein, the Administrator shall submit to the Town Council at
its next regular meeting a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition
the Superior Court for an order directing such owner to comply with the order
of the Administrator, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).
   (B)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated dwelling
unit, or of a dilapidated dwelling, to comply with an order of the
Administrator within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not
been sought or has not been granted as provided in division (A) of this
section, the Administrator shall submit to the Town Council an ordinance
ordering the Administrator to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit to be
repaired, altered or improved, or vacated and closed and removed or demolished
as provided in the original order of the Administrator.
(Prior Code, § 152.31) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.42 APPEALS FROM ORDERS OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appeals, generally. An appeal from any decision or order of the
Administrator may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal from the
Administrator shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision
or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the Administrator
and with the Housing Appeals Board a notice of appeal which shall specify the
grounds upon which the appeal is based.
   (B)   Administrator’s duties. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board, all the papers
constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When
the appeal is from a decision of the Administrator refusing to allow the person
aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall remain in force
until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the
Administrator requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall
have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board,
unless the Administrator certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is
filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a
copy of which shall be furnished the appellant) a suspension of his or her
requirement would cause imminent peril to life, or property, in which case the
requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be
granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day’s written notice to the
Administrator, by the Board, or by a court of record upon petition made
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Time; notice. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give notice to all the parties and shall render its decision
within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as in its
opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the
powers of the Administrator, but a concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the
Administrator. The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any
case where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the application of
the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
   (D)   Review. Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.
   (E)   Housing Board of Appeals to hear appeals.
      (1)   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the
Administrator pursuant to §
152.40(B) shall be heard and determined by the Housing Appeals Board. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided for under §§
154.220 through
154.227 of this code of ordinances shall serve as the Housing Appeals Board.
      (2)   (a)   The Board shall have the power to fix the times and places of
its meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedures and any other rules and
regulations which may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.
         (b)   The Board shall perform the duties prescribed by G.S. § 160A-
388, Board of Adjustment, and shall keep an accurate journal of all its
proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 152.32) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.43 PETITION TO SUPERIOR COURT BY OWNER.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Administrator or a decision
rendered by the Board shall have the right within 30 days after issuance of the
order or rendering of the decision, to petition the Superior Court for a
temporary injunction restraining the Administrator pending a final disposition
of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).
(Prior Code, § 152.33) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.44 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Administrator shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the
whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the Administrator in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Administrator
shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of such complaint or
order upon such person may be made by publishing same once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published and circulating in the
town.
   (B)   Where service is made by such publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by
the complaint or order.
(Prior Code, § 152.34) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.45 IN REM ACTION BY THE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply
with an order of the Administrator issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and upon adoption by the Town Council of an ordinance authorizing and
directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5) and §
152.41, the Administrator shall proceed to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit
to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with the minimum standards of
fitness established by this chapter, or to be vacated and closed and removed or
demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Town Council.
   (B)   Pursuant to activities of §§
152.40,
152.44 and this section, each such ordinance shall be recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds of Washington County, and shall be indexed in the name of
the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5).
(Prior Code, § 152.35) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.46 COSTS AS LIEN ON PREMISES.
   (A)   As provided by G.S. § 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of any
repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, caused to be made or done by the Administrator pursuant to §
152.24 shall be a lien against the real property upon which such costs were
incurred.
   (B)   Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and
the costs collected as provided by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10.
(Prior Code, § 152.36) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.47 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
chapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and §
152.05, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.
(Prior Code, § 152.37) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and
close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Administrator duly
made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order,
and each day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. It shall be
unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to which
an order has been issued pursuant to §
152.40(B)(1) and (B)(2), to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after
the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, improvement or
its vacation and closing, and each day that such occupancy continues after such
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 152.99) (Ord. passed 8-11-1997)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
Standard Provisions
   
153.001   Authority
   
153.002   Title
   
153.003   Purpose
   
153.004   Jurisdiction
   
153.005   Interpretation
   
153.006   Compliance
   
153.007   Policy concerning adequacy of public facilities
   
153.008   Acceptance of public services
   
153.009   Consistency with official plans
   
153.010   Consistency with comprehensive plan
   
153.011   Resubdivision procedures
   
153.012   Vacation of plat
Inclusions and Exceptions
   
153.025   Subdivision defined
   
153.026   Plats not subject to regulations
Legal Provisions
   
153.040   Duty of property owner and/or authorized agent
   
153.041   Duty of Register of Deeds
   
153.042   Duty of Clerk of Court
   
153.043   Duty of Planning Board
   
153.044   Penalties for violation
   
153.045   Severability
   
153.046   Amendments
   
153.047   Prior inconsistent ordinances
   
153.048   Variances
Definitions
   
153.060   General
Subdivision Review Procedures
   
153.075   Overview
   
153.076   Sketch plan review process
   
153.077   Minor subdivision review process
   
153.078   Major subdivision review process
   
153.079   Subdivision review and administrative control
   
153.080   Subdivision review sheet
   
153.081   Expedited subdivision review process
Design and Construction Standards
   
153.095   General
   
153.096   Streets
   
153.097   Stormwater management
   
153.098   Utilities
   
153.099   Other improvements
   
153.100   Other requirements
STANDARD PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 AUTHORITY.
   The enactment of this chapter is pursuant to the authority granted to
municipal governments under G.S. Chapter 160D, as amended and supplemented.
(Prior Code, § 155.01) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.002 TITLE.
   Upon adoption, the title of this chapter shall be the “Plymouth Subdivision
Ordinance”, known hereafter as the “subdivision ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 155.02) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.003 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a user-friendly,
reasonable and uniformly enforceable procedures and standards for the
development and subdivision of land within the territorial planning
jurisdiction of the town. It is designed to provide for, including, but not
limited to, coordination of streets, transportation, recreation facilities,
community facilities, infrastructure and utilities within proposed
subdivisions, to service proposed subdivisions and minimize future expenditures
by the town taxpayers for provision of these and related services.
   (B)   It is further designed to redistribute population and traffic in a
manner that will avoid undesired congestion and overcrowding, and to create
wholesome conditions essential to public health, safety and general welfare.
Also, to provide for proper legal description, monumentation and recording of
land that will ensure easy identification and permanent location of all real
estate boundaries.
   (C)   In addition, this chapter is designed to encourage the wise,
productive and beneficial use of the natural resources of the town, to maintain
a healthy and pleasant environment, and to preserve the natural historical
beauty of the town and its territorial planning jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 155.03) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.004 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations of this chapter shall apply throughout the town and its
extraterritorial planning jurisdiction as now and hereafter established.
(Prior Code, § 155.04) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.005 INTERPRETATION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall be interpreted as
follows:
   (A)   The word MAY is permissive.
   (B)   The words SHALL and WILL are mandatory.
   (C)   The present tense and the future tense include the present tense.
   (D)   The singular of words is inclusive of the plural and the plural is
inclusive of the singular.
   (E)   All other word interpretations shall be pursuant to §
153.060.
(Prior Code, § 155.05) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.006 COMPLIANCE.
   Legally created unimproved lots as of the effective date of this chapter
must, after the adoption of this chapter, be improved in compliance herewith
and be in compliance with regulations, ordinances and statutes incorporated by
reference herein.
(Prior Code, § 155.06) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.007 POLICY CONCERNING ADEQUACY OF PUBLIC FACILITIES.
   No preliminary plat shall be approved unless and until the Planning Board
determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the
area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the
Planning Board and at no cost to the town, submit sufficient information and
data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use
of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision. Public facilities
and services to be examined for adequacy will include, but not be limited to,
roads and public transportation facilities, sewerage, water service, electric
and natural gas service.
   (A)   Establishing guidelines. Periodically the Town Council will establish,
by resolution, and after public hearing, guidelines for the determination of
the adequacy of public facilities and services. To provide the basis for the
guidelines, the Planning Board must prepare an analysis of current growth and
the amount of additional growth that can be accommodated by future public
facilities and services. The Planning Board must also recommend any changes in
preliminary plat approval criteria it finds appropriate in the light of its
experience in administering these regulations.
   (B)   Preliminary plat. The applicant for preliminary plat approval must, at
the request of the Planning Board, submit sufficient information and data on
the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of
public facilities and services by possible uses of said subdivision.
   (C)   Comprehensive plan consistency required. Proposed public improvements
shall conform to and be properly related to the local government’s
comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvements plan.
   (D)   Water service. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be
connected to a county/ municipally approved public water system capable of
providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire
protection.
   (E)   Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served
by a municipally approved means of wastewater collection and treatment.
   (F)   Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate
potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed
to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The local government may require
the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or construction.
   (G)   Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient and functional
system consistent with the town’s transportation improvement plan, for
vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation; shall be properly related to the
comprehensive plan; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic
characteristics of each proposed development as same relates to the town as a
whole.
   (H)   Extension policies.
      (1)   All public improvements with required written easements shall be
extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Municipal
utilities, streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities,
electric lines and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new
development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure.
      (2)   The local government may require the applicant for a subdivision to
extend off-site improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required
public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of
plat approval.
(Prior Code, § 155.07) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.008 ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC SERVICES.
   No street shall be maintained by the town or street dedication accepted for
ownership and/or maintenance by the town, nor shall water, or sewer, or other
town utilities or services be extended to or connected within any subdivision
until the requirements set forth by this chapter and other applicable
regulations, ordinances and statutes, have been fully complied with and a final
plan has been approved, in writing, by the Town Council and recorded with the
County of Washington Register of Deeds. All lots for residential use, improved
after the effective date of this chapter, shall front and abut a public street.
No final plat shall be approved or recorded showing private streets, unless a
subdivision exclusively involves nonresidential uses.
(Prior Code, § 155.08) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.009 CONSISTENCY WITH OFFICIAL PLANS.
   Subdivision plans shall be consistent and in compliance with all officially
adopted land use plans, thoroughfare plans, water and sanitary sewer connection
and/or extension ordinances, the Coastal Area Management Act of 1974, being
G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., as amended and supplemented, and any and all other
officially adopted ordinances and/or plans applicable to the town’s health,
safety, welfare and orderly growth.
(Prior Code, § 155.09) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.010 CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   Applications submitted pursuant to this chapter and approvals, if any,
granted pursuant to this chapter shall be consistent with the adopted town
comprehensive plan, its amendments and supplements.
(Prior Code, § 155.10) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.011 RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules and
regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 155.11) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.012 VACATION OF PLAT.
   (A)   Written instrument required. Any plat or any part of any plat may be
vacated by the owner at any time before the sale of any legally created lot in
the subdivision by a written instrument to which a copy of such plat shall be
attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
   (B)   Town Council approval. Such written instrument referred to in division
(A) of this section shall be approved in writing. The Town Council may reject
any such instrument, which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its
public uses, improvements, streets or alleys.
   (C)   Form and effect. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or
approved and recorded and filed in the same manner as a final plat; and being
duly recorded or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the
streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described
in such plat.
   (D)   Owners of lots must join. When legally created lots have been sold,
the plat may be vacated in the manner provided in this section only when all
owners of the lots in the subdivision as shown on said plat join in the
execution of the instrument described in this section.
(Prior Code, § 155.12) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
INCLUSIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 153.025 SUBDIVISION DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, building sites or other divisions of land for the purpose (expressed or
implied) of sale or building development (immediate or future) and includes all
division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing street patterns.
(Prior Code, § 155.20) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.026 PLATS NOT SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS.
   Only under the following conditions will the prevailing definition of
subdivision not be enforced:
   (A)   When the combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots (the total number of lots) does not increase and/
or the resultant lots equal or exceed the standards of the municipality as
required by this chapter;
   (B)   When the division of land into individual parcels greater than five
acres does not involve the dedication of a street right-of-way;
   (C)   When the public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for widening
or opening streets takes place;
   (D)   When the division of a tract under single ownership is involved whose
entire area is no greater than two acres and is divided into no more than three
lots, provided no street right-of-way dedication is involved and the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as required by
this chapter; or
   (E)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a
probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under G.S. Chapter 29.
(Prior Code, § 155.21) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
LEGAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.040 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER AND/OR AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   A plat must be prepared, approved and recorded whenever the subdivision of
land takes place as defined in §
153.025. The property owner shown on the subdivision plat submitted for
recording, or the authorized agent for such owner, shall sign a statement (see
§§
153.077(C) or
153.078(G)) on the final plat stating whether any land shown there under his or
her ownership is subject to the subdivision ordinance regulations of the town.
(Prior Code, § 155.30) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.041 DUTY OF REGISTER OF DEEDS.
   (A)   The Register of Deeds of Washington County shall not file or record a
plat of a subdivision of land located within the territorial planning
jurisdiction of the town that has not been approved, in writing, in accordance
with this chapter.
   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter to record any deed indicating a lot
on a preliminary or sketch plan until a final plat has been signed and recorded
pursuant to this code. This duty will commence from the date the subdivision
ordinance is filed with the Register of Deeds of Washington County.
(Prior Code, § 155.31) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.042 DUTY OF CLERK OF COURT.
   The Clerk of Superior Court shall not order or direct the recording of a
plat if the recording would be in conflict with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.32) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.043 DUTY OF PLANNING BOARD.
   (A)   The Town Planning Board shall act as a review/advisory body under the
procedures spelled out in §§
153.076 through
153.078.
   (B)   The Planning Board shall require compliance with all applicable
procedures standards set forth under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.33) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.044 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who, being the owner or
the agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial planning
jurisdiction of this chapter, thereafter subdivides his or her land in
violation of this chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other uses of a plat showing a subdivision of land before
the plat has been properly approved under the terms of this chapter and
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Washington County, shall be
guilty of a first degree misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds in
the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring land does not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The town,
through its attorney or other official designated by the Town Council, may
enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer or sale of land, and the Court shall, upon
appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the offending
party to comply with this chapter. Further, violators of this chapter shall be
subject, upon conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided by G.S. § 14-
4. If an appeal is made, all enforcement actions, including fines, shall be
paused during an appeal process.
(Prior Code, § 155.34) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.045 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 155.35) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.046 AMENDMENTS.
   This chapter may be amended from time to time by Town Council after giving
public notice of and holding a public hearing with respect to such amendment,
and public notice of the public hearing must be given at least once a week for
two consecutive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
town and said notice shall be published the first time not less than 15 days
nor more than 25 days before action on the amendment is to be taken; however;
provided that no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been
proposed by the Planning Board or shall have been submitted to said Board for
review and recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 155.37) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.047 PRIOR INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances or regulations other than the zoning ordinance of the town,
which are in conflict with this chapter, are hereby repealed. Should the
requirements of these regulations conflict with those of the town zoning
ordinance, the more stringent requirements shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 155.38) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.048 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally. Where because of severe topographical or other conditions
peculiar to the site, and not caused by the owner/applicant, strict adherence
to the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship, the Town
Council may, on recommendation of the Planning Board, authorize a variance to
the terms of this chapter only to the extent that is absolutely necessary and
not to an extent which would violate the spirit and/or intent of the chapter.
   (B)   Prior business use lot/parcel variance. The subdivision variance is
intended only for businesses established prior to adoption of the Town of
Plymouth zoning (September 12, 1983) and subdivision ordinances (July 9, 2001).
The purpose of the variance procedure is to allow long term established
businesses to continue their same use, but not be prohibited from expansion
and/or continued functional viability because of restrictions imposed following
their original establishment. The business variance must comply with the
following:
      (1)   The proposed situation is expected to result in impacts which are
no greater than those associated with the existing use/situation;
      (2)   The proposed situation will be no less compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood than is the existing use/situation;
      (3)   Approval of the change will not lessen the public health, safety
and general welfare;
      (4)   Failure to approve the change in nonconforming use would result in
hardship to the owner of the property and/or business on which the
nonconforming use/situation is located; and
      (5)   The same business use must continue with any expansion.
   (C)   Nonconforming lot. A nonconforming lot or situation including
setbacks, lot width and lot size may be created as a result of a variance
granted by division (B) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 155.39) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2013-09, passed 10-16-2013;
Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
DEFINITIONS
§ 153.060 GENERAL.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
   AUTHORIZED AGENT. One who is designated, in writing, and is legally acting
as representative for, or by the authority of the subdivider.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Town of Plymouth Board of Adjustment.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the front property line which
establishes the minimum allowable distance between nearest portions of any
building, steps, eaves, gutters and similar fixtures, and the street right-of-
way line when measured perpendicularly thereto.
   CAMA. The Coastal Area Management Act of 1974, and as amended and
supplemented.
   CORNER LOT. A legal lot, which occupies the interior angle at the
intersection of two street lines. The street line forming the least frontage
shall be deemed the front of the lot except where the two street lines are
equal, in which case, the owner shall be required to specify orientation when
requesting a building permit.
   DEDICATION. A gift, by the owner, of a right to use land for stated
purposes. A DEDICATION must be in writing and in recordable form, and is
completed with an acceptance and recordation.
   DISCLOSURE STATEMENT. A statement prepared and signed by the subdivider and
the buyer of the subject real estate, fully and completely disclosing the
status (whether public or private) of the street upon which the lot fronts. The
statement shall also include an explanation of the consequences and
responsibility as to maintenance and construction of proposed roadways.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A continuous (through) legal lot of the same depth as
the width of a block containing two tiers of legal lots and which is accessible
from both of the streets upon which it fronts.
   EASEMENT. A grant in writing and in recordable form by the property owner
for use by the public, a corporation or person(s) of a strip of land for
specific reasons.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION. The land lying outside of the corporate
limits of the town but within the one mile district designated by the Town
Council subject to municipal planning and development controls as provided for
in G.S. § 160D-202, as amended and supplemented.
   GROUP DEVELOPMENT. A development comprised of two or more legal buildings,
such as a group of apartments, where the land is not subdivided into the
customary streets and lots.
   LOT. A portion of a legal subdivision or any other parcel of land intended
as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. The word LOT
includes the word parcel or plot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a legal subdivision, a plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Washington County
prior to the adoption of this chapter, or a legal lot described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of
this chapter.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract or parcel into five or more lots.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. All divisions of land, which are not exempt from review
by the definition for major subdivision and which result in four or fewer lots
fronting on an existing paved public road.
   OFFICIAL MAP OR PLAN (LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN). Any maps
or plans officially adopted by the Mayor and Town Council as a guide for the
development of the town.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   A land development project comprehensively planned as an entity via
a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in infrastructure, utilities,
roads, building siting, mixtures of building types and land uses, recreational
areas and useable open spaces and the preservation of significant natural
features.
      (2)   Included within this definition shall be PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS and PLANNED UNIT NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS or combination
thereof.
   PLANNING BOARD. The Town Planning Board of Plymouth, North Carolina.
   PLAT.
      (1)   A map or plan delineating a tract or parcel of land to be
subdivided, land to be dedicated for public use, or right-of-way for street or
utility purposes.
      (2)   The word PLAT shall include the terms map, plot and plan.
   PLAT, FINAL. A map of land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for
filing of record with necessary signatures, consents, affidavits, dedications,
acceptances and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining
lots and blocks, streets, public areas and other dimensions of land, as
prescribed by this chapter.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the
character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed subdivision of land, as prescribed by this chapter.
   RESERVATION.
      (1)   A reservation of land not involving the transfer of property rights
in writing and in recordable form.
      (2)   It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from
development for a stated period of time.
   REVIEW OFFICER. The Town Manager or his or her designee who is responsible
for reviewing, processing and assisting in the review of subdivision requests
and providing technical assistance in the evaluation of requests.
   SHOULDER. The graded part of the right-of-way that lies between the edge of
the main pavement, concrete, cement (main traveled way) and the curbline.
   SIDEWALK (AREA). A paved, concrete and/or cement path provided for
pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a road within the right-of-
way.
   SINGLE TIER LOT. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier, or a nonresidential use and to which vehicular
access from the rear is usually prohibited.
   SKETCH PLAN. A written schematic representation of the proposed subdivision
layout and design.
   STREET. A public dedicated right-of-way for vehicular traffic.
      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET or MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. A street connecting widely
separated areas and designed to carry a large volume of traffic which may be
fast, heavy, or both. ARTERIAL STREETS are sometimes referred to as major
thoroughfares, freeways and the like, and are usually numbered state and
federal highways.
      (2)   MINOR THOROUGHFARE. See distinction set forth in the Street
Classification Table contained in §
153.096(E).
      (3)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which serves as the connecting street
system between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system. (See
distinction between minor and major in the Street Classification Table
contained in § 153.096(E)).
      (4)   CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having but one end open to traffic and
the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular turn-around
provided.
      (5)   FRONTAGE ROAD. A street that is parallel to a full or partial
access controlled street facility and functions to provide controlled access to
adjacent land.
      (6)   MINOR STREET. A street whose primary function is to provide access
to abutting properties and is designed to discourage use by through traffic.
MINOR STREETS may also be referred to as neighborhood streets.
   STRUCTURE. Any improvement and/or anything constructed or erected, the use
of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is
attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, entity, partnership or corporation who
subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. As defined in §
153.025.
   SUBDIVISION REVIEW SHEET. The official document of action concerning all
subdivision requests of the Town of Plymouth.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of Plymouth, North Carolina; the governing
board of the municipality of Plymouth, North Carolina.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. The Thoroughfare Plan as drawn by the North Carolina
Department of Transportation as the basis for the development of the
transportation road design for the Town of Plymouth.
   ZONING CLASSIFICATION. The appropriate zoning designation as set forth in
the municipal zoning ordinance of Plymouth, North Carolina.
(Prior Code, § 155.50) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 153.075 OVERVIEW.
   The following sections outline the steps and design requirements for
subdivision plat approval. The procedures are divided into three categories for
the purposes of this chapter, major, minor and expedited. Each category is
defined and procedural requirements are set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.60) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.076 SKETCH PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   A sketch plan of a proposed subdivision may, upon the payment of the
appropriate fee, be submitted by the subdivider for discussion and
consideration by the Planning Board. The town encourages all subdividers to
take advantage of this service. The sketch plan shall be drawn to a convenient
scale of not more than 100 feet equals one inch. It must include a general
description of the proposed subdivision as well as the following items as may
be applicable:
      (1)   The proposed name, street address and location of the subdivision
with north arrow (the proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any
previously recorded subdivision);
      (2)   The total acreage of the proposed subdivision;
      (3)   The tentative street and numerical lot arrangement, with proposed
street widths;
      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and the
subdivider;
      (5)   The proposed lot sizes and number of lots;
      (6)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision
and adjoining it;
      (7)   Zoning classification of the tract and adjoining properties;
      (8)   Sketch vicinity map, if outside the town corporate limits; and
      (9)   Name, address, telephone number of sketch plan preparer and date of
preparation.
   (B)   The Planning Board or its designee shall, upon the payment of the
appropriate fees, review the sketch plan for general compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable regulation, ordinance
and/or statute. The Planning Board or its designee shall provide the subdivider
or the subdivider’s designee with a copy of the regulations pertaining to the
proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in preparation and
submission of the preliminary and final plats.
(Prior Code, § 155.61) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.077 MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Purpose. The minor subdivision review procedure affords the sale of
lots and/or tracts of land which qualify as subdivisions under the definition
in state statutes, but which will have little impact on town subdivisions of
land which involve no street right-of-way dedication and four lots or less, to
be used solely for residential development, may follow the abbreviated
procedure, which only requires that a final plat be submitted for approval. No
more than four lots under one owner from one tract shall be eligible for
consideration under the abbreviated procedure in any five-year period.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MINOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of property that conforms to the
following conditions:
         (a)   Involves no more than four lots (expressed or planned) fronting
on an existing approved street; or
         (b)   Not involving any new street, either on periphery of property or
for prospective interior access;
         (c)   Not requiring extension of public water and/or sewage lines;
         (d)   Not requiring creation of new drainage easements through
property to serve property the rear;
         (e)   Does not create any new or residual parcels that do not confirm
to the requirements of the Plymouth municipal zoning ordinance and this
chapter; and
         (f)   Does not constitute an enlargement or extension of a previously
approved minor plat (by county or town) above four lots maximum. The fifth lot
(expressed or planned) constitutes a major subdivision.
   (C)   Plat review.
      (1)   Submission. The subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator
five copies of the proposed final plat, and five copies of a completed and
signed application, accompanied by a filing fee of $100.
      (2)   Content of plat. The minor subdivision final plat shall be prepared
and sealed by a state professional registered land surveyor. It shall be drawn
to the scale of one inch to 100 feet. Sheet sizes shall be no smaller than 12
inches by 18 inches, and no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches, and in
accordance with the standards and practices of the Washington County Register’s
office. Three copies of the final plat shall be drawn on reproducible Mylar.
The plat shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The proposed subdivision name, address and location with the
boundaries, north point, legend, date, revision date and purpose if applicable,
scale, title block and certifications. The proposed name shall not duplicate
the name of any previously recorded subdivision;
         (b)   The name(s), address(es) of the land owner(s), subdivider,
mortgagee, state professional registered land surveyor, as well as the
telephone numbers of any other professionals engaged in the design of the
subdivision;
         (c)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the
subdivision, and adjoining it, along with any structures contained thereon, if
located within an area of special flood hazard, as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the location of the base flood elevation shall be
indicated. A drainage plan and calculations, including description of the
effects of a 100-year storm;
         (d)   Zoning classification(s) of the tract, which is the subject
matter of the subdivision, as well as the zoning classification(s) of adjoining
properties;
         (e)   Sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to surrounding area;
         (f)   The total acreage of the proposed subdivision and layout of lot
arrangement, including block/lot lines, block/lot dimensions and block/lot
numbers;
         (g)   Plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, water distribution lines, street lighting, gas, telephone
electric service, illustrating connections to existing systems, or plans for
individual water supply systems and/or sewer disposal systems, showing line
size, and location of fire hydrants and manholes;
         (h)   Wooded areas and/or farm lands proximate to the proposed
subdivision;
         (i)   Proposed rights-of-way or easements, location, width and/or
purpose;
         (j)   Plat shall be accompanied by a copy of any proposed deed
restrictions or restrictive covenants;
         (k)   1.   Each subdivision within town limits shall be located within
500 feet of at least a six-inch water line and fire hydrant (size to be
determined by the Fire Chief and/or Town Engineer).
            2.   All fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the
town’s existing policy;
         (l)   Certificate of ownership and dedication: the following shall be
placed on the final plat and signed by the owner(s) of the subdivision:
 
I (We), hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown
and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with
my (our) free consent; established minimum building setback lines, and dedicate
all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites and easements to public or
private use as noted. Furthermore, I (we) dedicate all sewer and water lines to
the Town of Plymouth and certify the land as shown hereon is within the
planning jurisdiction and subject to the subdivision ordinance of the Town of
Plymouth, North Carolina.
_____________________                        _______________________________
Date                                 Owner(s)
_____________________                        _______________________________
Date                                 Owner(s)
North Carolina, Washington County
I, _______________ a Notary Public of the County and State aforesaid, certify
that the owner(s) listed above personally appeared before me this day and
acknowledge the execution of the foregoing instrument, witness my hand and
official stamp or seal, this ____ day of _____________, _______.
________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: ________________________
 
 
         (m)   Certificate of review officer.
 
North Carolina, Washington County
I, ______________________ , Review Officer of Washington County, certify that
this map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory
requirements for recording.
_____________________                      __________________________
Date                                 Review Officer
Map: _______________ Book: _______________
 
 
         (n)   Certificate of accuracy.
 
 
I, ___________________, certify that this plat was drawn under my supervision
form (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in
Book __________, Page ___, etc.) (other); that the ratio of precision as
calculated by latitudes and departures is 1/ _________; that the boundaries not
surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____,
Page ___; that this plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30 as
amended. Witness my original signature, registration number, and seal this
________ day of ______ (2001, etc.).
                                    ___________________________
                                    Surveyor
Seal or Stamp
___________________________
Registration Number
 
         (o)   Certificate of approval of the design and installation of
streets, utilities and other required improvements.
 
I hereby certify that all streets, utilities and other required improvements
have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to town
specifications in __________ Subdivision.
______________________                     ________________________________
Date                                 Zoning Administrator
 
         (p)   Coastal Area Management Act certificate. (*This certification,
depending on the circumstances, may or may not be applicable.)
 
 
The area designated hereon is in part located within, is in totality (located
within/is not located within) an area of environmental concern, and (requires/
does not require) a CAMA permit prior to construction of improvements.
_____________________                     _______________________________________
Date                              Coastal Area Management Act Permit Officer
 
   (D)   Review process (approval/disapproval).
      (1)   The final plat shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator, or
other members of the town staff, and the town’s consulting engineer for plat
compliance with this chapter and with other applicable state, county and
municipal ordinances. The Town Manager, at the request of the Zoning
Administrator, or own his or her own initiative may retain appropriate
professionals to check the final plat for technical compliance with appropriate
statutes, regulations or ordinances, charging the cost to the subdivider.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall check the plat for compliance with
town ordinances, and distribute prints of the proposed subdivision to any
governmental agency or agencies having a specific interest in the subdivision
for their comments or recommendations, including where applicable but not
limited to the Washington County Health Department, North Carolina Department
of Transportation, the Land Resources Division of the North Carolina Department
of Environment and Natural Resources, the USDA Natural Resources Conversation
Service, the U.S. Postal Service, Washington County Building Inspections,
Washington County Schools, Plymouth Fire Chief, Plymouth Police Chief, Plymouth
Town Manager, other appropriate Plymouth staff and CSMD (sewage capacity).
      (3)   Within 30 working days of receipt of the application for the
proposed final plat, and appropriate fee, the Zoning Administrator shall send
his or her recommendations to the Town Manager for approval, approval with
conditions, or disapproval of the final plat. If the final plat is in
compliance with this chapter, the Town Manager or the Town Planner shall
approve the plat with or without conditions.
      (4)   If the Town Manager disapproves the final plat, he or she shall
state in writing his or her reasons for such action, specifying the provisions
of this chapter with which the plat does not comply. One copy of this statement
shall be transmitted to the subdivider within five working days of disapproval;
and one copy each shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator and the Town
Manager as part of this proceeding.
      (5)   Appeal from the Town Manager’s ruling shall be by petition to the
Town Council to be heard at its regularly scheduled meeting following the Town
Manager’s written ruling.
      (6)   The original tracing and one paper print of the final plat shall be
returned to the subdivider. One paper print shall be retained in the Manager’s
office.
      (7)   The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the
Washington County Register of Deeds for recording within 60 business days after
the date of final approval; otherwise, such approval shall be null and void.
Additionally, one copy of the final plat shall be an original drawn in ink on
linen or film, suitable for reproduction. Four copies shall be black or blue
line print, and shall also be on diskette in DXF (Digital Exchange Format),
version CAD 14 or the electronic format compatible to existing town
requirements. No zoning compliance certificates will be issued until the
provisions of this section are complied with.
      (8)   The approval of a final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or
affect the acceptance by the town of any dedication shown on the plat. However,
the Town Council, by resolution, may accept any dedication made to the public
of lands or facilities for parks or other public purposes, when the lands or
facilities are located within its subdivision regulation jurisdiction.
Acceptance of dedication of lands or facilities located within the subdivision
regulations jurisdiction shall not place on the town any duty to open, operate,
repair or maintain the land or facility.
      (9)   Any minor subdivision approved and filed pursuant to this section
shall be reported in writing to the Planning Board and Town Council within 60
days of its filing with the County Register’s office by the Town Planner/Zoning
Administrator or Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 155.62) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.078 MAJOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Purpose. The major subdivision review process provides for a more
comprehensive analysis of the proposed subdivision. The process is lengthier
and more involved due to the likely impact of a larger subdivision on the town,
its surroundings, resources, utilities, infrastructure, service requirements,
environment, and roadways, both proposed and existing, all of which must be
carefully reviewed and analyzed. The review process allows for determining and
minimizing any adverse effects and assures quality development.
   (B)   Definition. Major subdivisions shall include any subdivision other
than that which meets the definition of minor subdivision. (See § 153.077(B).)
   (C)   Preliminary plat review (i.e., number of copies, fee and time frame).
      (1)   Generally. The owner, subdivider and/or his or her agent shall pay
the fee, and submit 15 copies of the application, preliminary plat and any
supplementary materials to the Zoning Administrator at least 35 business days
prior to the Planning Board meeting at which said plat is to be considered.
      (2)   Content of plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared and sealed
by a state professional registered land surveyor. It shall be drawn to the
scale of one inch to 100 feet. Sheet sizes shall be no smaller than 12 inches
by 18 inches, and no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches, and in accordance with
the standards and practices of the Washington County Register’s Office. The
plat shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The proposed subdivision name, the boundaries, north point,
legend, date, revision date and purpose if applicable, scale, title block and
certifications (the proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any
previously recorded subdivision);
         (b)   The name(s), address(es) of the land owner(s), subdivider,
mortgagee, state professional registered land surveyor, as well as the
telephone numbers of any other professionals engaged in the design of the
subdivision;
         (c)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the
subdivision, and adjoining it, along with any structures contained thereon, if
located within an area of special flood hazard, as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the location of the base flood elevation shall be
indicated. A drainage plan and calculations, including description of the
effects of a 100-year storm;
         (d)   The location of existing and platted property lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, railroads, transmission lines, sewers, bridges,
culverts, storm drains, water mains and any public utility easements, both on
the land subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining;
         (e)   The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided drawn
accurately with all bearings and distances shown;
         (f)   Existing structures and wooded areas and/or farmland areas,
marshes and any peculiar, natural conditions affecting the site and/or
proximate to the proposed subdivision;
         (g)   Name(s) and addresses) of adjoining property owners or
subdivisions;
         (h)   Zoning classification, with use, if any, both of the land to be
subdivided and of adjoining land;
         (i)   Existing and proposed lines of streets, lots, easements,
reservations, dedications, and public or common areas within the subdivision,
and sufficient information to determine the location, direction and length of
every street, cul-de-sac, lot line, easement, reservation, dedication and
boundary line, and to establish those lines on the ground;
         (j)   The total acreage of the proposed subdivision and layout of lot
arrangement, including lot and block lines, lot dimensions and block and lot
numbers;
         (k)   Proposed streets, existing and platted streets on adjoining
properties, and in the proposed subdivision, designated either public or
private, indicating right-of-way and/or easement depths, pavement widths, and
centerline curve or corner radius data, including site distances, and typical
street cross-sections;
         (l)   Plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, water distribution lines, street lighting, telephone electric
service, illustrating connections to existing systems, or plans for individual
water supply systems and/or sewer disposal systems, showing line size
accompanied by preliminary approval from Washington County Health Department,
and location of fire hydrants and manholes; each subdivision within town limits
shall be located within 500 feet of at least a six-inch water line and fire
hydrant (size to be determined by the Fire Chief and/or Town Engineer). All
fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the town’s existing policy;
         (m)   Other proposed rights-of-way or easements, location, width or
purpose;
         (n)   Proposed minimum building setback lines;
         (o)   Contours with vertical intervals of two feet or less;
         (p)   Proposed location and size of parks, school sites or other
public open spaces, if any;
         (q)   Sketch vicinity map showing relationship between subdivision and
surrounding area;
         (r)   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a copy of any
proposed deed restrictions or restrictive covenants; and
         (s)   The location of all areas of environmental concern (AEC) within
the subdivision.
   (D)   Review by interested agencies. The Zoning Administrator shall check
the plat for compliance with town ordinances and distribute prints of the
proposed subdivision to any governmental agency or agencies having a specific
interest in the subdivision for their comments or recommendations, including
where applicable but not limited to the Washington County Health Department,
the North Carolina Department of Transportation, the Land Resources Division of
the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources, the USDA
Natural Resources Conversation Service, the U.S. Postal Service, Washington
County Schools, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Town Engineer, other appropriate town
staff; Planning Board Chairperson, County Water Management Supervisor
(applicable only in extraterritorial jurisdiction) and local CAMA permit
officer to determine if the property lines are within designated area of
environmental concern (AEC) and the permits which are applicable. The Zoning
Administrator shall consolidate such recommendations and present them, together
with his or her own, to the Planning Board.
   (E)   Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall review the preliminary
plat and shall recommend approval, conditional approval with recommended
changes or disapproval with reasons. The Zoning Administrator shall then
request the Town Clerk to place the Planning Board review of the preliminary
plat on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Town Council.
   (F)   Review by Town Council. The Town Council shall review the preliminary
plat with the recommendations of the Planning Board and shall approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove the plat within 90 business days after
submission. If the Town Council fails to act within 90 business days, the plat
shall be deemed approved.
      (1)   Approval. If the Town Council approves the preliminary plat, such
approval shall be noted on three copies of the plat, one copy to be returned to
the subdivider and two copies to be kept in the permanent records of the
Planning Department and Town Manager’s Manager’s office.
      (2)   Conditional approval. If the Town Council recommends approval of
the preliminary plat conditioned on modifications being made to bring the plat
into compliance, it shall retain two copies of the originally submitted
preliminary plat with its certificate that the plat will be approved when the
conditions noted are met and shall return one copy to the subdivider with its
written conditions for approval. The subdivider shall have 60 business days in
which to make the changes needed to bring the plat into compliance. The
subdivider shall submit three copies of the corrected plat to the Zoning
Administrator who will review it to ensure that the recommended changes have
been made and who will place review of the corrected plat on the agenda for the
next Town Council meeting. If the preliminary plat has been properly amended,
the Town Council will certify the plat as approved. If the subdivider fails to
resubmit the plat within 60 business days or has not submitted a plat with
adequate modification as required by the Town Council within 60 business days,
then the subdivider must resubmit a proper preliminary plat to the Zoning
Administrator and begin the preliminary plat approval process again, including
payment of fees, before approval can be given.
      (3)   Disapproval. If the preliminary plat is disapproved by the Town
Council, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing,
specifying the provisions of this chapter with which the subdivider has not
complied in the preparation of his or her plat. One copy of such reasons and
one copy of the plat shall be retained in the permanent records of the Town
Council. One copy of the reasons and one copy of the plat shall be returned to
the subdivider. A subdivision plat resubmitted after being disapproved by the
Town Council shall be treated as a newly submitted plat, and begins the
preliminary plat approval process again, including payment of fees.
   (G)   Final plat review.
      (1)   Submission required within 12 months. Within 12 months after
approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider or his or her agent shall
submit to the Zoning Administrator five copies of the final plat, unless an
extension of time for submission of the final plat is requested from and
allowed by the Planning Board. If a final plat is not submitted or extension of
time allowed within 12 months of approval of the preliminary plat, the
preliminary plat shall become null and void.
      (2)   Content of plat. The final plat shall be prepared and sealed by
either a North Carolina registered surveyor or engineer. The final plat shall
be drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or larger, on sheets 20 inches by
24 inches, and shall conform to the preliminary plat as it was approved. One
copy of the final plat shall be an original drawn in ink on linen or film
suitable for reproduction. Four copies shall be black or blue line prints, and
shall also be on diskette in DXF (Digital Exchange Format), Version CAD14 or
the electronic format compatible to existing town requirements. The final plat
shall show the following information:
         (a)   The exact boundary lines for the tract to be subdivided fully
dimensioned by length and bearings, and the location of intersecting boundary
lines of adjoining lands, with adjacent subdivisions identified by official
names and recording data;
         (b)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments,
markers and control points;
         (c)   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce
on the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line,
right-of-way line, easement line and setback line, including dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, radii, central angles and tangent distances for
the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the
boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest 1/
100 of a foot and all angles to the nearest 30 seconds;
         (d)   The location, with a metes and bounds description, of all
rights-of-way, reservations, easements and areas to be dedicated to public use
with the purpose of each stated;
         (e)   The accurate location, purpose and dimensions of areas to be
used for purposes other than residential and public;
         (f)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision and lots with dimensions numbered consecutively throughout each
block;
         (g)   Right-of-way lines, widths, pavement widths and names of all
streets and location and widths of all adjacent streets and easements;
         (h)   The name of the subdivision, the names and addresses of the
owner/subdivider and state registered engineer or surveyor, and any other
professional engaged in the plan design;
         (i)   The date of the survey and plat preparation, a north arrow
indicating whether true north or magnetic, graphic scale, legend, title block,
revision dates, if any, and purpose;
         (j)   The deed restrictions proposed for the subdivision must
accompany the final plat, if any;
         (k)   A statement explaining the status of the streets and a copy of
any maintenance agreement regarding streets shall be submitted with the final
plat;
         (l)   Sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to the surrounding area;
         (m)   Proposed minimum building setback lines;
         (n)   Proposed location and size of parks, school sites or other open
public spaces, if any;
         (o)   Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the
Planning Board to be pertinent to the review of the final plat;
         (p)   The location of all areas of environmental concern (AEC) within
the subdivision;
         (q)   The following signed certificates shall appear on each of the
five copies of the final plat that are submitted to the Planning Board by the
subdivider.
            1.   Certificate of ownership and dedication. The following shall
be placed on the final plat and signed by the owner(s) of the subdivision:
 
I (We), hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown
and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with
my (our) free consent; established minimum building setback lines, and dedicate
all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites and easements to public or
private use as noted. Furthermore, I (we) dedicate all sewer and water lines to
the Town of Plymouth and certify the land as shown hereon is within the
planning jurisdiction and subject to the subdivision ordinance of the Town of
Plymouth, North Carolina.
_____________________                        _______________________________
Date                                 Owner(s)
_____________________                        _______________________________
Date                                 Owner(s)
North Carolina, Washington County
I, a Notary Public of the County and State aforesaid, certify that the owner(s)
listed above personally appeared before me this day and acknowledge the
execution of the foregoing instrument, witness my hand and official stamp or
seal, this ________ day of ______________, ___________________.
________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires: ________________________
 
 
            2.   Certificate of approval for recording. The following
certificate shall be placed on the final plat for endorsement by the Town
Clerk:
 
 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plan shown hereon, has been found to
comply with the subdivision ordinances of the Town of Plymouth, and further,
that this plan has been approved by the Town Council for recording in the
office of the Register of Deeds of Washington County within thirty (30) days of
the date of this certificate.
_____________________                      __________________________
Date                                 Town Clerk
Seal
 
            3.   Certificate of review officer.
 
 
North Carolina, Washington County
I, ______________________ , Review Officer of Washington County, certify that
this map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory
requirements for recording.
_____________________                      __________________________
Date                                 Review Officer
Map: _______________ Book: _______________
 
 
            4.   Certificate of accuracy.
 
 
I, ___________________, certify that this plat was drawn under my supervision
form (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in
Book __________, Page ___, etc.) (other); that the ratio of precision as
calculated by latitudes and departures is 1/ _________; that the boundaries not
surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____,
Page ___; that this plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30 as
amended. Witness my original signature, registration number, and seal this
________ day of ______ (2001, 2002, etc.).
___________________________
Surveyor
Seal or Stamp
___________________________
Registration Number
 
            5.   Certificate of approval of the design and installation of
streets, utilities and other required improvements.
 
 
I hereby certify that all streets, utilities and other required improvements
have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to town
specifications in __________ Subdivision.
______________________                     ________________________________
Date                                 Zoning Administrator
 
            6.   Certificate of public street design approval. (*This
certification, depending on the circumstances, may or may not be applicable.)
 
 
I (We) hereby certify that the design of the proposed subdivision street(s)
shown on this plat complies with the current minimum construction standards for
subdivision roads of the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division
of Highways/Town of Plymouth.
______________________                     ________________________________
Date                                 District/Town Engineer
 
            7.   Street maintenance disclosure. (*This certification, depending
on the circumstances, may or may not be applicable.)
 
Maintenance of the public street(s) shown on this plat is (are) intended to be
the responsibility of the N.C. Department of Transportation/Town of Plymouth,
provided that all requirements for acceptance are met. Until such time as the
N.C.D.O.T./Town of Plymouth accepts the street(s), I (we) will provide for
necessary maintenance. (NOTE: This statement shall not serve as a substitute
for any other statutory disclosure requirements.)
______________________                     ________________________________
Date                                 Owner(s)
 
            8.   Coastal Area Management Act certificate. (*This certification,
depending on the circumstances, may or may not be applicable.)
 
The area designated hereon is in part located within, is in totality (located
within/is not located within) an area of environmental concern, and (requires/
does not require) a CAMA permit prior to construction of improvements.
_____________________                     ______________________________________
Date                              Coastal Area Management Act Permit Officer
 
         (r)   No final plat shall be approved until the subdivider has
installed in the area represented on the final plat all improvements required
by this chapter, including, but not limited to, the plans for utility layout,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone
and electric service, illustrating connections to existing systems or plans for
individual water supply systems and/or sewerage disposal systems. Plans must
show line sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes pumps force
mains and gate valves, or shall have guaranteed their installation as provided
in this code. The town shall not require a developer, as a condition to
subdivision approval, to bury a power line existing above ground and outside of
property to be subdivided. No property shall be sold or deed registered by the
Washington County Register of Deeds before the subdivider provides a proof of
filing to the Town Council that as-built plans have been filed with the Town
Clerk and a final plat has been approved and recorded in the Registry of Deeds
pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   Improvements installed before approval. In lieu of prior completion
of the improvements, the town may, for the purpose of approving a final plat,
accept a guarantee from the developer that improvements shown on the
preliminary plat will be completed at the expense of the developer. The
guarantee provided by the developer to the town will be one of the following:
         (a)   A surety bond made by a surety company licensed to do business
in North Carolina;
         (b)   A certified check drawn in favor of the town;
         (c)   Cash deposited with the town; and
         (d)   An irrevocable letter of credit (in form and content approved by
the town).
      (4)   Guarantee. Such guarantees shall equal 125% percent of the cost of
improvements as determined by a North Carolina registered professional engineer
and verified by the town’s consulting engineer. Performance guarantees shall be
approved by the Planning Board and the Town Council. Guarantees shall run for
12 months. As 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% of the project is completed, a
corresponding percentage of the guarantee may be released.
   (H)   Planning Board review. The final plat shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board for conformance to the approved preliminary plat within 25 days
of its submission or at its next regular meeting, whichever is later. The
Planning Board may appoint an engineer to check the final plat against the
subdivision’s actual layout for correctness, charging the costs to the
subdivider.
   (I)   Approval of final plat.
      (1)   If the final plat is in compliance with this chapter or the
Planning Board approves the change made from the approved preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall approve the final plat. Such approval shall be indicated
on each copy of the plat by the following signed certification.
 
Certificate of Approval for Recording
I/We, hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Plymouth, North Carolina,
and that this plat has been approved by the Planning Board of the Town of
Plymouth for recording in the office of the Register of Deeds of Washington
County.
_____________________                     ______________________________________
Date                           Chairperson of Plymouth Planning Board
 
      (2)   Upon execution of the afore referred certificate of approval for
recording, the Planning Board shall forward the plat to the Town Council for
review and disposition prior to the Town Clerk executing his or her certificate
of approval for recording.
   (J)   Disapproval of plat.
      (1)   If the Planning Board recommends disapproval of the final plat, the
reasons shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this chapter
with which this plat does not comply. One copy of this statement shall be
transmitted to the subdivider within 15 business days of recommended
disapproval.
      (2)   One copy of the statement and one copy of the final plat shall be
retained by the Planning Board as part of its permanent record and one copy of
the statement and plat shall be forwarded to the Town Council for review and
disposition.
   (K)   Final plat recordation.
      (1)   The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the
Washington County Register of Deeds within 60 days after the date of the
Planning Board approval; otherwise, such approval shall be null and void.
      (2)   One copy of the approved final plat marked filed by the Washington
County Register of Deeds shall be returned to the Town Manager to be kept in
the town’s permanent files.
(Prior Code, § 155.63) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.079 SUBDIVISION REVIEW AND ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROL.
   (A)   Administrative officer. The Town Manager will act as the primary
administrative and review officer in the implementation of this chapter.
   (B)   Subdivision review sheet. The form provided in §
153.080 will act as the primary tool in the review of all subdivisions and the
execution of steps involved in the implementation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 155.64) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.080 SUBDIVISION REVIEW SHEET.
   Subdivision #
   Origination Date
   TOWN OF PLYMOUTH
   SUBDIVISION REVIEW SHEET
I.   GENERAL DATA
   A.   NAME OF OWNER ____________________________   PHONE
_____________________
      ADDRESS _________________________________________________________________
   B.   NAME OF APPLICANT ____________________________   PHONE
_____________________
      ADDRESS _________________________________________________________________
   C.   ADDRESS, TAX ID NUMBER, PIN NUMBER, AND GENERAL LOCATION OF SUBDIVISION
_________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
   D.   TOTAL ACREAGE
__________________________________________________________
   E.   NUMBER OF LOTS
__________________________________________________________
   F.   TAX MAP (IDENTIFIER NUMBER)
______________________________________________
   G.   ZONING (IDENTIFIER CLASS)
_________________________________________________
   H.   ADJOINING PROPERTY HOLDERS
_________________________________________________________________
      Name            Address
_________________________________________________________________
      Name            Address
_________________________________________________________________
      Name            Address
   I.   GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT
_______________________________________________________________________
   J.   CONTACTS
      ATTORNEY ____________________________   PHONE _____________________
      ADDRESS ______________________________________________________________
      SURVEYOR ____________________________   PHONE _____________________
      ADDRESS ______________________________________________________________
      OTHER PHONE ____________________________   PHONE _____________________
      ADDRESS _________________________________________________________________
II.   TYPE OF SUBDIVISION
MAJOR [More than four (4) lots]            Yes      No
MINOR [Four (4) lots or less]            Yes      No
III.   TYPE OF RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
MULTI-FAMILY UNITS               Yes      No
SINGLE-FAMILY UNITS               Yes      No
MIXED RESIDENTIAL                  Yes      No
IV.   CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL
CONFORMANCE WITH ZONING PLAN   Yes      No
V.   REVIEW PROCESS
   A.   SKETCH PLAT
Approved ____________________________   Date _____________________
      Approved Conditionally _________________   Date _____________________
      Disapproved ____________________________   Date _____________________
      Date of Submittal __________________________________________________
Nature of Revisions (if applicable) ____________________________________
   B.   PRELIMINARY PLAT REVISIONS
      Approved ____________________________   Date _____________________
      Approved Conditionally _________________   Date _____________________
      Disapproved ____________________________   Date _____________________
      Date of Submittal __________________________________________________
Nature of Revisions (if applicable) ____________________________________
   C.   FINAL PLAT REVISIONS
Approved ____________________________   Date _____________________
      Approved Conditionally _________________   Date _____________________
      Disapproved ____________________________   Date _____________________
      Date of Submittal __________________________________________________
Nature of Revisions (if applicable) ____________________________________
VI.   FINAL DISPOSITION
   PLANNING BOARD ACTION
      Approved By Planning Board ___________________   Date
_____________________
      Approved Conditionally By Planning Board ________   Date
_____________________
      Disapproved By Planning Board _________________   Date
_____________________
   TOWN COUNCIL ACTION
      Approved By Town Council ____________________   Date
_____________________
      Approved Conditionally By Town Council___________   Date
_____________________
      Disapproved By Town Council ____________________   Date
_____________________
   OTHER ACTION
_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________
REVIEW OFFICER ____________________________   DATE _____________________
(Prior Code, § 155.65) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.081 EXPEDITED SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-803(c), certain subdivisions only require a plat for
approval by the Subdivision Administrator if they meet the criteria below:
   (A)   It is not exempt per G.S. § 160D-802(a)(2);
   (B)   No portion of the land has been divided as an expedited subdivision in
the past ten years;
   (C)   The subdivided area is greater than five acres;
   (D)   There are no more than three lots created;
   (E)   The created lots meet size requirements for any other land use
regulations;
   (F)   The created lots are used in a manner consistent with any zoning
requirements; and
   (G)   The created lots have a permanent means of ingress and egress.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 153.095 GENERAL.
   (A)   Generally. Each proposed subdivision shall include and contain the
improvements specified in this subchapter, the town zoning ordinance,
applicable municipal ordinances and state statutes, to the extent required.
They shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
as stated in the sentence immediately next preceding, and paid for by the
subdivider, unless other means of financing is specifically stated in this
chapter or the regulations set forth previously in this division (A). Land
shall be dedicated and reserved in each subdivision as may be required by the
town. Each subdivision shall adhere to the design standards established by the
town, as enunciated in this chapter and the zoning ordinance of the town, and
other municipal ordinances to the extent applicable.
   (B)   Design standards observed. The subdivider shall observe all design
standards for land subdivision as herein provided and provided elsewhere in
applicable municipal ordinances and state statutes/regulations. These standards
shall be considered minimum standards and shall be varied from or waived only
as provided in §§
153.075 through
153.080.
   (C)   Unsuitable land. Land that the municipality finds to be unsuitable for
subdivision or development due to flooding, environmental concerns, improper
drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or
topography, utility easements or other features that will reasonably be harmful
to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants
of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or
developed unless and until adequate methods are formulated by the developer and
approved, in writing, by the Town Planning Board and Town Council, upon written
recommendation of the Town Engineer, to solve the problems created by the
unsuitable conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not
involve any danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   (D)   Design guides.
      (1)   Minimum lot size. All lots created after the date of adoption of
this chapter shall conform to or exceed a minimum lot size as required by the
town zoning ordinance, and other applicable municipal ordinances, as amended
and supplemented.
      (2)   Mitigation. Design and construction shall reduce, to the extent
reasonably possible, the following:
         (a)   Volume of cut and fill;
         (b)   Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed;
especially on land adjoining a wetland, river, pond or stream, or overlying
easily eroded soils;
         (c)   Number of mature trees or percentage of tree cover removed;
         (d)   Extent of waterways altered or relocated;
         (e)   Number of driveways exiting onto existing streets;
         (f)   Alteration of groundwater or surface water elevations or
chemical constituents;
         (g)   Disturbance of important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features, and scenic or historic envisions; and
         (h)   Soil loss or instability during and after construction (as per
G.S. § 113A-50).
      (3)   Enhancement. Design and construction shall increase, to the extent
reasonably possible, the following:
         (a)   Vehicular use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets
providing house frontage;
         (b)   Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape; and
         (c)   Legal and physical protection of views from public streets.
   (E)   Access adequacy. Every lot shall have access to it that is sufficient
to afford a reasonable means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles as
determined by the Fire Chief and Police Chief, as well as for all those likely
to need or desire access to the property in its intended use.
   (F)   Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows.
      (1)   Utility easements. Written easements, with metes and bounds
descriptions, for underground utilities shall be provided, where necessary, in
or adjacent to street right-of-ways and shall be at least ten feet wide for
municipal utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewer and
electric lines, and as required by the companies involved for other utilities.
Easements shall be provided where necessary along lot lines. The Town Council
will determine whether one easement is sufficient or whether several easements
are necessary to accommodate the various utilities and the subdivider shall
provide the required easements at no cost to the town. These requirements may
be modified only by written approval from the Town Council where a planned unit
development is involved.
      (2)   Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel, swale, stream or contains a water storage
area or facility, there shall be provided, at no cost to the town, a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width to conform substantially to
the lines of said feature, and to provide for the possibility of flooding,
protection of banks on adjacent properties, future maintenance and/or
construction, and other necessary purposes. The width of said easement and/or
right-of-way will be determined by the town in so far as sufficiency for its or
their intended purposes. To the extent practicable, easements shall be along
lot lines.
      (3)   Access, maintenance and/or construction easements. The town, in the
interest of its public health, safety and welfare, may as a condition of
approving a subdivision, require a permanent access, maintenance and/or
temporary construction easement on and over the property, which is the subject
matter of the subdivision. The obtaining of these easements, as may be
required, shall be at no cost to the town.
      (4)   Type of easement. All easements as depicted on a preliminary and/or
final plat shall be so delineated on the preliminary and/or final plat as to
the type of easement and shall contain a metes and bounds description.
      (5)   Easements, appurtenances/utility boxes and/or related structures.
Where utility boxes or easement appurtenances and/or related structures are
deemed necessary, it shall not be located directly in front of the dwelling,
and shall be screened by plantings, blocking their view from both dwelling and
street. Said planting and/or screening is the obligation of the developer and/
or purchaser of the property, and shall be installed prior to the certificate
of occupancy being issued.
(Prior Code, § 155.70) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.096 STREETS.
   (A)   Paved; dedicated. To ensure consistent quality and long-term
maintenance, all streets or roads created after the date of this chapter shall
be paved and dedicated as public streets or roads. The streets or roads shall
conform to the minimum construction standards for subdivision roads as
described by the North Carolina Department of Transportation Minimum
Construction Standards for Subdivision Roads promulgated 2000 or later and/or
with town requirements, whichever of the two is more stringent.
   (B)   Agreement for maintenance. Where the offer of dedication of a street
is not to be accepted by the town or the state, at substantially the same time
as the final plat approval, a written agreement with provisions acceptable to
the Town Council for maintenance of the street shall be executed and made a
part of the preliminary plat by being included by reference therein.
   (C)   Shown on final plat. All streets shown on the final plat shall be
designated in accordance with G.S. § 136-102.6, as amended and supplemented,
and designation as public shall be conclusively presumed an offer of dedication
to the public. Where streets are dedicated to the public but not accepted into
a municipal or state system, a written statement explaining the status of the
streets shall be included with the final plat.
   (D)   Design and layout (temporary streets, during construction and
permanent streets). The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and
location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical and soil conditions, to public convenience
and safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to
be served by such streets.
      (1)   Coordination with surrounding streets. The proposed street layout
within a subdivision shall be coordinated with the existing street system of
the surrounding area and where possible, existing principle streets shall be
extended.
      (2)   Access to adjacent property. Where the subdivision adjoins property
susceptible to being subdivided, streets shall be carried to the boundaries of
the tract proposed for subdivision. Temporary turn-arounds shall be provided.
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property shall not be
permitted.
      (3)   Street intersections.
         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less
than 60 degrees.
         (b)   Centerline offsets for intersecting streets shall not be less
than 150 feet.
         (c)   Through traffic discouraged on minor collector, frontage road
and local streets. Local streets shall be laid out in such a way that their use
by through traffic will be discouraged. Streets shall be designed or walkways
dedicated to assure convenient access to parks, playgrounds, schools or other
places of public assembly.
      (4)   Cul-de-sacs. Permanent dead-end streets shall not exceed 500 feet
in length unless necessitated by topography or property accessibility and in no
case shall be permitted to be over 900 feet. Measurement shall be from the
point where the centerline of the dead end street intersects with the center of
a through street to the center of the turn-around of the cul-de-sac. Where one
cul-de-sac intersects with another cul-de-sac, the end of each cul-de-sac shall
be no more than 500 to 900 feet from a through street, measured as stated
above. The distance from the edge of the pavement on the vehicular turn-around
to the right-of-way line shall not be less than the distance from the edge of
the pavement to the right-of-way line on the street approaching the turn-
around. Cul-de-sacs shall not be used to avoid connection with an existing
street or to avoid the extension of an important street.
      (5)   Half streets. Half streets (i.e., streets of less than the full
required right-of-way and pavement width) shall not be permitted except where
such streets, when combined with a similar street (developed previously or
simultaneously) on property adjacent to the subdivision creates or comprises a
street that meets the right-of-way and pavement requirements of this chapter.
      (6)   Block standards. Block lengths, widths and areas within bounding
roads shall be such that:
         (a)   Adequate building sites suitable to the contemplated zoning use
are provided;
         (b)   Minimum lot dimensions are as set forth in municipality zoning
ordinance;
         (c)   Lengths between intersecting stretches do not exceed 1,200 feet
or are not less than 400 feet; and
         (d)   Sufficient widths are provided to allow two tiers of lots except
where single-tier lots are required to separate development from through
traffic, water areas, common areas or public property.
      (7)   Lot standards. Lots shall be designed such that:
         (a)   Locally designated minimum lot dimensions as set forth in
municipal zoning ordinances are met or exceeded as to each lot. Conformity to
this zoning requirement means, amongst other things, that the smallest lot in
the subdivision must meet all the dimensional requirements of the zoning
ordinance. It is not sufficient merely for the average lot to meet the zoning
requirements; and
         (b)   Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to
provide residential separation from through traffic or other incompatible uses.
      (8)   Driveways. Driveways shall be developed according to the state’s
Department of Transportation’s policy on Street and Driveway Access on North
Carolina Highways and/or town regulations, as amended and supplemented,
whichever is applicable and/or more stringent.
      (9)   Street names and house numbers. Street names shall be assigned by
the developer subject to the pre-approval of the Town Manager and approval of
the Washington County 9-1-1 Emergency Management as to names and numbers.
Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall be
given the same name. Newly created streets shall be given names that neither
duplicate nor are phonetically similar to existing streets within the town’s
planning jurisdiction, regardless of the use of different suffixes. Building
numbers shall be assigned by the town.
      (10)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required by the Town Council on one or
both sides of the street in areas likely to be subject to heavy pedestrian
traffic such as near schools and shopping areas. Such sidewalks shall be
constructed to a minimum width of four feet, and shall consist of a minimum
thickness of four inches of concrete. Alternatively, an area sufficient in size
for sidewalks is to be dedicated on the plan, which is to be recorded. All
sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, unless the development is
platted as a planned unit or group development. Sidewalks shall consist of a
minimum of six inches of concrete at driveway crossings.
      (11)   Street name signs. The subdivider shall be required to provide and
erect, at no cost to the town, street name signs to town standards at all
intersections within the subdivision. No zoning compliance certificates shall
be issued by the town until the street name signs are installed at no cost to
the town, as required by this section.
   (E)   Classification. Streets within a subdivision shall be classed as noted
in the Construction Standards for Subdivision Roads as promulgated 2000 or
later by state’s Department of Transportation and/or town regulations,
whichever is applicable and/or more stringent.
   (F)   Street and drainage requirements. Streets shall be constructed with
curb(s) and gutter(s) according to the Standards set by state’s Department of
Transportation, and/or the Town Engineer and approved, in writing, by the
Planning Board. However, the Planning Board may permit six foot-wide shoulders
and drainage swales in situations where topographic conditions make the
installation of curb(s) and gutter(s) impermissible and/or highly impractical.
The shoulder(s) and drainage swale(s) shall be approved, in writing, by the
Town Council or its designee.
   (G)   Private streets. Except as provided in this section, all lots created
after the effective date of this chapter shall abut a public street. No new
final plat shall be recorded showing private streets.
   (H)   Construction. The design and construction of all streets within the
jurisdiction of this chapter shall be in accordance with the accepted policies
of the state’s Department of Transportation (D.O.T.). The standards contained
in the most recent edition of the D.O.T.’s Construction Standards for
Subdivision Roads shall apply for any items not included in this chapter, or
where stricter than this chapter.
      (1)   Clearing and grubbing. Clearing and grubbing shall be performed to
remove stumps, brush, roots and like material from the area of the traveled
way, shoulder, sidewalks, utility trenches, but elsewhere wherever feasible, as
determined by the town, existing vegetation shall be protected.
      (2)   Grading. Rights-of-way and roadways shall be graded in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the D.O.T.’s Minimum Construction
Standards for Subdivision Roads as amended and supplemented, shall apply for
any items not included in this chapter, or where stricter than this chapter.
      (3)   Street base. All roadways shall be improved with a base course to
the required width of the D.O.T. All construction and materials shall meet the
standards and specifications of the N.C.D.O.T., to the extent not provided for
in this chapter, or where stricter than this chapter.
      (4)   Street surface. All streets shall be paved. The asphalt surface
course shall meet the standards and specifications of the N.C.D.O.T., to the
extent not provided for in this chapter, or where stricter than this chapter.
      (5)   Curb and gutter. Where curb and gutter is provided, such
improvements shall meet the standards and specifications of the N.C.D.O.T., to
the extent not provided for in this chapter, or where stricter than this
chapter.
      (6)   Culvert pipe. All culvert pipe and pipe under drains shall be
installed to the standards and specifications of the N.C.D.O.T., to the extent
not provided for in this chapter, or where stricter than this chapter.
      (7)   Right-of-way widths. Right-of-way widths shall be shown in the
Street Classification Table.
      (8)   Street widths.
         (a)   All streets shall be curbed and guttered with widths as shown in
the Street Classification Table, except in the extraterritorial jurisdiction
area. In the extraterritorial jurisdiction area, curb and gutter shall be
required unless a state registered engineer prepares an alternate plan of
drainage and certifies that the plan will properly remove water from the
streets without curb and gutter, which plan of drainage must be reviewed and
recommended for approval, in writing, by the Town Engineer to the Town Manager,
who will make the ultimate decision with regard to requiring curb and gutter.
         (b)   The street may then be a minimum width of 20 feet from edge of
pavement to edge of pavement in a 60-foot minimum right-of-way. The minimum
cul-de-sac radius shall be 40 feet for pavement of curb and gutter.
Street Classification Table
Street         R/W or Easement* Pavement Width Average Daily No. Of Dwellings
Classification                                 Traffic
Street Classification Table
Street          R/W or Easement* Pavement Width Average Daily No. Of Dwellings
Classification                                  Traffic
Private drive   50*              28 B/B         < 400         < 70
Frontage road   50               28 B/B         < 240         < 20
Minor collector 60               36 B/B         240—3,500   20—400
Major collector 70               50 B/B         3,500—5,000 > 400
Minor           80               65 B/B         5,000—10,000N/A
thoroughfare
Major           100+             Variable       < 10,000      N/A
thoroughfare
 
      (9)   Relationship to greenway plan. If any portion of the area proposed
for subdivision lies within an area designated in the officially adopted
greenway master plan as a greenway corridor, the area so designated shall be
dedicated and/or reserved to the public at the option of the town.
(Prior Code, § 155.71) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.097 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Generally. The Planning Board shall not recommend for approval any
plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and flood
water runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as
approved by the Planning Board, and a copy of design computations shall be
submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be proved so that surface water is not
carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600
feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are
exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that
point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water
drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block.
   (B)   Drainage system. The subdivider shall provide an adequate drainage
system for the proper drainage of all surface water, which complies with NCAC
Title 15A, Chapter 4, Sedimentation Control and NCAC Title 15A, 2H.1000,
Stormwater Runoff Disposal. The design of such a system shall be subject to the
written approval of the state’s Division of Land Resources and the Town
Engineer.
   (C)   Nature of stormwater facilities.
      (1)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Planning Board to
carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist
either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, as
determined by the town, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate
width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the generally accepted
construction standards and specifications of the town, or the state, whichever
is more stringent.
      (2)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.
         (a)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall,
at no cost to the town, install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are
within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal
of stormwaters, subject to the specification of the Town Engineer. However, in
subdivisions containing not less than 15,000 square feet in area and in
business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be
constructed throughout the subdivisions and be conducted to an approved out-
fall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the Town Engineer.
         (b)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the Town Engineer and the Planning Board, the
developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public
utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such
connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the subdivision improvement
agreement required for the subdivision plat.
      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The Town Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by the zoning ordinance and/or other applicable municipal ordinances.
      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The Town Engineer shall also
study the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities
outside the area of the subdivision. Local government drainage studies together
with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to
needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff
incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing
downstream drainage facility, the Planning Board may withhold approval of the
subdivision until provision has been made for the expansion of the existing
downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate
drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility.
      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area
that is subject to flooding, the Planning Board may approve such subdivision
provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the subdivision to an
elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of
12 inches above the elevation of the 100-year floodplain, as determined by the
Town Engineer. The plat of the subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone
along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width that shall be
sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill
shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or
placed in the overflow zone. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be
subject to approval by the Town Engineer. The Planning Board may deny
subdivision approval for areas of extremely poor drainage.
      (6)   Floodplain areas. The Planning Board may, when it deems it
necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage and
sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property
that lies within the floodplain or any stream or drainage course. These
floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage
resulting from clearing, grading or dumping of earth, waste material or stumps,
except at the discretion of the Planning Board.
   (D)   Dedication to drainage easements.
      (1)   General requirements. When a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the
lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be
adequate for the purpose. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the drainage
be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate width for
maximum potential volume of flow.
      (2)   Drainage easements.
         (a)   1.   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way,
perpetual, unobstructed easements at least 15 feet in width for drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with
satisfactory access to the road.
            2.   Easements, with metes and bounds descriptions, shall be
indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a
natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
         (b)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private
land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured, at
no cost to the town, and indicated on the plat.
         (c)   The applicant shall dedicate, at no cost to the town, either in
fee or by a drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing
watercourses to a distance to be determined by the Planning Board.
         (d)   1.   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways.
            2.   Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be
computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density
procedures nor for computing the area requirement of any lot.
(Prior Code, § 155.72) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.098 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Water supply.
      (1)   Statement of purpose. To reinforce compliance with the provisions
set forth in §
153.003, it is the goal, to the extent this requirement would not be
confiscatory, that all future development be connected to municipal water and
sewer systems.
      (2)   Public supply standards. All new subdivisions shall connect to the
town public water system if any perimeter property line is within a reasonable
distance of an existing water line, as determined by the town. The cost of
connection shall be in accordance with town ordinances as amended and
supplemented.
      (3)   Private supply standards. Where a private community water supply
system is proposed, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a letter of
approval from the North Carolina Division of Health Services. Where individual
lots will be served by private wells, this situation will be duly noted on the
preliminary and final plat. Wells must be located at least 100 feet from any
ground absorption system.
      (4)   Design and construction.
         (a)   Water mains shall be designed and installed according to the
town specifications.
         (b)   Before installation, a complete set of construction plans and
specifications for the proposed system, prepared and sealed by a state
registered professional engineer, shall be submitted for approval by the
Planning Board or its designee and a copy submitted to the North Carolina
Division of Health Services.
         (c)   Water supply systems shall be approved by the Town Council as to
location and size of mains.
         (d)   Water mains shall not be less than six inches in diameter,
except that smaller mains may be used on permanent dead-end streets upon
approval of the Planning Board.
         (e)   The town may require installation of oversize mains when it is
in the interest of future development. The town may pay for the portion of the
improvement which exceeds the standards of this chapter.
   (B)   Sewage disposal.
      (1)   Public disposal standards. All new subdivisions shall connect to
the town public sewer system if any perimeter property is within a reasonable
distance of an existing sewer line, as determined by the town. The cost of
connection shall be in accordance with town ordinances as amended and
supplemented.
      (2)   Private disposal standards. Where a private package treatment
system is proposed, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a letter of
approval from the North Carolina Department of Environmental Management. A land
application system, rather than surface water discharging system, is required
when a private package system is proposed. Where individual lots will be
serviced by septic systems, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by
documentation that the site has undergone a preliminary evaluation by the
County Health Department. The final plat shall be accompanied by certification
that all lots intended for development have been approved for septic tank
usage.
      (3)   Design and construction.
         (a)   Sewer mains shall be designed and installed according to the
town specifications.
         (b)   Before installation, a complete set of construction plans and
specifications for the proposed system, prepared by a registered professional
engineer, shall be submitted for approval by the town or its designee and a
copy submitted to the North Carolina Department of Environmental Management.
         (c)   The town may require installation of oversize mains when it is
in the interest of future development. The town may pay for the portion of the
improvement which exceeds the standards of this chapter.
      (4)   Design criteria for sanitary sewers.
         (a)   General guidelines. These design criteria are not intended to
cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and may be required
in those instances when considered justified by the Town Engineer.
         (b)   Design factors. Sanitary sewer systems should be designed for
the ultimate tributary population. Due consideration should be given to the
existing land use plan, current zoning regulations, within this chapter, and
other municipal ordinances as to the extent applicable. Sewer capacities should
be adequate to handle the anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and
industrial waste together with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other
extraneous flow. The unit design flows presented below should be adequate in
each case for the particular type of development indicated. Sewers shall be
designed for the total tributary area using the wastewater flow rates
established by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources. Design flows shall be submitted to the Planning Board for all
projects involving extensions or interconnections to the town system.
One- and two-family dwellings         0.02 cubic feet per second (c.f.s.)/acre
Commercial
   Small stores, offices and the li0.02 c.f.s./acre
   Shopping centers                0.02 c.f.s./acre
   High rise                       As directed by Town Engineer
Industrial                            As directed by Town Engineer
Apartments
   One- and two-story              0.02 c.f.s./acre
   Three- through six-story        0.03 c.f.s./acre
These design factors shall apply to watersheds of 300 acres or less. Design
factors for watersheds larger than 300 acres and smaller than 1,000 acres
shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease from the applicable design
factor for an area of 300 acres to a design factor of 0.01 c.f.s./acre for an
area of 1,000 acres unless otherwise directed by the Town Engineer. Design
factors for watersheds larger than 1,000 acres shall be 0.01 c.f.s./acre
unless otherwise directed by the Town Engineer.
 
         (c)   Maximum size. The diameter of sewers proposed shall not exceed
the diameter of the existing or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable,
unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer.
         (d)   Minimum size. No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in
diameter.
         (e)   Minimum slope. All sewers shall be designed in conformance with
the standards established by the North Carolina Department of Environment and
Natural Resources.
         (f)   Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with strait alignment
between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the Town Engineer.
         (g)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each
line; at all changes in grade, size or alignment; at all intersections; and at
distances not greater than 400 feet.
         (h)   Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer
and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches except where required to
match crowns. The use of drop manholes will require approval by the Town
Engineer. The minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those
specified by the Town Engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special
considerations; however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less
than that indicated above. When a small sewer joins a larger one, the crown of
the smaller sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one. The minimum
drop through manholes shall be 0.1 feet.
         (i)   Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within
street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When
located in easements on private property, access shall be to all manholes. A
manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End lines shall be
extended to provide access from street or alley right-of-way when possible.
Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations. Not less than six feet of
cover shall be provided over the top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way
or three feet in all other areas.
         (j)   Cleanouts and lampholes. Cleanouts and lampholes will not be
permitted.
         (k)   Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical
connection between a public or private potable water supply system and sewer
which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable
supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water
supply sources and structures.
         (l)   Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance
of ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At
points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast
iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten feet in each direction
from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be
required when the water main is at least two feet above the sewer.
   (C)   Other utilities.
      (1)   Wiring. Underground wiring for electric, telephone and cable
television is required unless the subdivider demonstrates, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the town, that underground wiring is impractical due to soil
characteristics and other local conditions.
      (2)   Street lighting. All public streets, sidewalks and other community
areas or facilities in subdivisions created after the effective date of this
chapter shall be sufficiently illuminated, as determined by the town, to ensure
the security and the safety of persons using such streets, sidewalks and other
common areas or facilities. To the extent that fulfillment of this requirement
would normally require street lights installed along public streets, this
requirement shall be applicable only to subdivisions located within the
corporate limits of the town. The quantity, design and location of all lighting
shall be approved by the town.
(Prior Code, § 155.73) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.099 OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Survey. Survey, plat, monuments and control corners shall be provided
in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual of Practice for Land
Surveying in Carolina by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
   (B)   Wheelchair ramps. Whenever curb and gutter construction is used on
public streets, wheelchair ramps for the handicapped shall be provided at
intersections and other major points of pedestrian flow. Wheelchair ramps and
depressed curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the published standards
of the state’s Department of Transportation.
   (C)   Shade trees. Shade trees shall be preserved where possible; where they
do not exist, the planting of appropriate trees is encouraged. Such trees shall
be species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause
interference with utilities, street lighting or visibility at street
intersections.
(Prior Code, § 155.74) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 153.100 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Easements. Reserved for future use, other than as otherwise herein set
forth.
   (B)   Clean-up. Upon completion of the work, the subdivider shall remove
from the street and adjoining property all temporary structures, debris, tree
stumps, loose rocks and surplus materials which may have accumulated during the
process of the work, leaving the subdivision in a neat and orderly condition.
(Prior Code, § 155.75) (Ord. passed 7-9-2001; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE
Section
General Purpose and Legal Authority
   
154.001   Intent
   
154.002   Authority
   
154.003   Short title
   
154.004   Interpretation, purpose and conflict
   
154.005   Validity
   
154.006   Conflict of interest
Adoption
   
154.020   Resolution
   
154.021   Repeal
   
154.022   Jurisdiction
   
154.023   Land use plan
Interpretation and Definitions
   
154.035   Phrases/terminology
   
154.036   Word interpretations
Application
   
154.050   Equitability
   
154.051   Agricultural activities
   
154.052   Areas of environmental concern
   
154.053   Uses of land and structures
   
154.054   One principal building
   
154.055   Lot reduction
   
154.056   Substandard lots of record
   
154.057   Adjoining/vacant substandard lots of record
   
154.058   Newly-incorporated areas
   
154.059   Fences and walls
Nonconforming Uses
   
154.070   Intent
   
154.071   Nonconforming lots
   
154.072   Nonconforming uses of land
   
154.073   Nonconforming structures
Establishment, Delineation and Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
   
154.085   Specified districts
   
154.086   Official zoning map
   
154.087   Updating of map
   
154.088   Interpretation of boundary lines
District Regulations
   
154.100   C Conservation District
   
154.101   R20 Single-Family Residential District
   
154.102   R20A Single-Family Residential District (low density with individual
mobile homes)
   
154.103   R15 Single-Family Residential District (medium density)
   
154.104   R10 Single-Family Residential District (medium density with duplex
units)
   
154.105   R7 Multi-Family Residential District (high density)
   
154.106   R7A Multi-Family Residential District (mixed high density)
   
154.107   OI Office and Institutional District
   
154.108   C1 Central Business District
   
154.109   RDO Riverfront Development Overlay District
   
154.110   C2 Neighborhood Business District
   
154.111   IL Light Industrial District
   
154.112   IH Heavy Industrial District
General Provisions
   
154.125   Short-term vacation rentals
   
154.126   Mobile homes
   
154.127   Mobile home parks
   
154.128   Mobile home park design
   
154.129   Manufactured structures as nonresidential uses
   
154.130   Automobile repair services/automobile sales and service/service
stations
   
154.131   Recreational vehicle (RV) parks
   154.132   Short-term rentals
   154.133   Miniature golf courses
Signs and Billboards
   
154.145   Purpose
   
154.146   Application
   
154.147   Signs exempt from chapter
   
154.148   General requirements
   
154.149   Signs in residential districts
   
154.150   Signs in office and institutional districts
   
154.151   Signs in central business districts
   
154.152   Signs in shopping center districts
   
154.153   Signs in industrial districts
Parking and Loading Requirements
   
154.165   Parking requirements
   
154.166   Application
   
154.167   Special requirements
   
154.168   Certification
   
154.169   Combination of required parking space
   
154.170   Remote parking space
   
154.171   Parking space requirements
   
154.172   Multi-family housing
   
154.173   Curb cuts
   
154.174   Off-street loading
Home Occupations
   
154.185   Home occupations
   
154.186   Satellite receivers
   
154.187   Telecommunications facilities
   
154.188   Home based business
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.200   Enforcing Officer
   
154.201   Duties of Zoning Administrator
   
154.202   Enforcement actions
   
154.203   Zoning permit required
   
154.204   Compliance procedures
   
154.205   Processing of application; plans and fees
   
154.206   Misrepresentations and misunderstandings
   
154.207   Fee schedule
Board of Adjustment
   
154.220   Creation of Board
   
154.221   Appointment of members
   
154.222   Qualifications of members
   
154.223   Board of Adjustment meetings
   
154.224   Responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment
   
154.225   Appeals
   
154.226   Hearing procedures
   
154.227   Variances
Changes and Amendments
   
154.240   Responsibility
   
154.241   Notice and public hearing
   
154.242   Planning Board responsibility
   
154.243   Planning Board composition
   
154.244   Planning Board appointments
   
154.245   Citizen comment
   
154.246   Final action
   
154.247   Third-party down-zonings prohibited
Statutory Vested Right Provisions
   
154.260   Purpose
   
154.261   Definitions
   
154.262   Establishment of a zoning vested right
   
154.263   Approval procedures and approval authority
   
154.264   Duration
   
154.265   Termination
   
154.266   Voluntary annexation
   
154.267   Limitations
   
154.268   Repealer
Special Uses
   
154.280   Application for special use permit
   
154.281   Effect upon special uses
   
154.282   Requirements for certain special uses
   
154.283   Site plan review
   
154.284   Violation of chapter
 
   
154.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Zoning District Schedule
   
Appendix B:   District Requirements
GENERAL PURPOSE AND LEGAL AUTHORITY
§ 154.001 INTENT.
   The zoning regulations and districts herein set forth in this chapter have
been prepared in concern with the town land use plan for the express purpose to
promote the orderly development of the municipality. In so doing, the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the municipality may be served by
limiting problems associated with vehicular traffic congestion; securing safety
from the potential dangers of fire, panic or natural disaster; providing light
and air for all citizens; prohibiting the unsafe, unhealthful overcrowding of
land; and promoting the facilitation of proper services inclusive
transportation, water, sewer, electricity, schools and parks in such a manner
that the overall plan will be served and properly implemented. Also, through
the application of this chapter, those areas having environmental qualities
(areas of environmental concern) which should be preserved or developed in a
judicious manner will be guided to ensure their existence for future
generations. Within the context of this purpose, all requirements and/or
restrictions have been developed with reasonable consideration of all factors
inclusive the suitability of use of land, value of property and buildings, and
the general needs of the populace.
(Prior Code, § 153.001) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.002 AUTHORITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are adopted under the authority granted by
G.S. § 160D-702.
(Prior Code, § 153.002) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.003 SHORT TITLE.
   The official title of this chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Code of the
Town of Plymouth, North Carolina”, and may be further cited as the “zoning
code”.
(Prior Code, § 153.003) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.004 INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT.
   In the interpretation and application, the provision of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this
chapter are at variance with other requirements of the lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive
or that imposing the highest standards shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 153.004) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.005 VALIDITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by the
courts, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole,
or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Prior Code, § 153.005) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.006 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   No staff, governing board or advisory board member shall make a final
decision required by this ordinance if the outcome of that decision would have
a direct, substantial and readily identifiable financial impact on the member
or if the applicant or other person subject to that decision is a person with
whom the member has a close familial, business or other associational
relationship. If a staff member has a conflict of interest under this section,
the decision shall be assigned to the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 153.006) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
ADOPTION
§ 154.020 RESOLUTION.
   (A)   The Town Council do hereby adopt the following:
      (1)   An ordinance properly regulating and restricting the height, size,
location and other open land spaces; the location and standards of certain land
use activities inclusive of commercial, industrial and residential uses through
the creation of districts with recognized boundaries and regulatory controls
for the expressed stated purpose (§
154.001) to promote orderly development for the general welfare of the citizens
of Plymouth, North Carolina.
      (2)   In so doing, the Town Council does accept this chapter and the
accompanying official map as the instruments of interpretation and enforcement.
      (3)   Furthermore, the Town Council provides for a Board of Adjustment,
appeals procedures and the imposition of penalties in order to assure the
equitable enforcement of this chapter and its intent.
   (B)   The Town Council of Plymouth, North Carolina does ordain as follows to
be in full force and effect this, the twelfth day of September, 1983.
(Prior Code, § 153.015) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.021 REPEAL.
   Upon date of adoption (§
154.020), all provisions of the zoning ordinance and its amendments previously
enforced by the Town of Plymouth are hereby repealed, except for such actions
expressly retained herein.
(Prior Code, § 153.016) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.022 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable within the corporate
limits of the town and the extraterritorial limits as adopted under the G.S. §
160D-201.
(Prior Code, § 153.017) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 01-01, passed 1-8-2001;
Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.023 LAND USE PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   Plans shall be adopted by the Town Council with the advice and
consultation of the Planning Board.
      (2)   Adoption and amendment of a comprehensive or land use plan is a
legislative decision and shall follow the process mandated for zoning text
amendments set by G.S. § 160D-601.
      (3)   Plans adopted under G.S. Chapter 160D shall be advisory in nature
without independent regulatory effect. Plans adopted under G.S. Chapter160D do
not expand, diminish or alter the scope of authority for development
regulations.
   (B)   (1)   If a plan is deemed amended by G.S. 160D-605 by virtue of
adoption of a zoning map amendment that is inconsistent with the plan, that
amendment shall be noted in the future land use map. However, if the plan is
one that requires review and approval subject to G.S. 113A-110, the plan
amendment shall not be effective until that review and approval is completed.
      (2)   A statement of reasonableness must be adopted for every zoning map
amendment.
   (C)   The comprehensive plan or land use plan shall be reasonably maintained
by the town.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
§ 154.035 PHRASES/TERMINOLOGY.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Except as
defined herein, all other words shall have their customary dictionary
definition as would be applicable.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the primary
use of a building and located on the same lot with such use of building, but
not to include open air storage or facilities housing more than four animals of
any kind.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Decisions made in the implementation,
administration or enforcement of development regulations that involves the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards as set forth
in this chapter. Also known as ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. A proceeding to gather facts needed to make an
administrative decision.
   ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING. The person whom the Town Council has designated as
its agent for administration and enforcement of this chapter and subsequent
regulations.
   ADULT USE. Any principal or accessory use which excludes minors by reason of
age. This definition does not apply to applicable beverage laws or voluntary
restrictions of the motion picture industry. Any application that meets this
requirement must be compliant with §
154.282(K) to (M).
   ALLEY. Includes a passageway as a thoroughfare through the middle or in the
rear of a block affording access to the rear of property and/or buildings.
   ASSEMBLY AND PROCESSING. The assembly, processing and wholesale of farm and
food products, including meat, fish, poultry, vinegar and yeast. Shall include
the incidental retail outlets for only that merchandise handled at the
wholesale establishment.
   AUTOMOBILE. A self-propelled, free moving, state inspected vehicle, with
four wheels in road worthy, good mechanical condition, (so that it could and
can be driven off any premises), used to transport people and items and
(capable of being) licensed by the appropriate state agency as a passenger
vehicle.
   AUTOMOBILE CARWASH AND DETAILING. Inclusive of facilities with mechanical or
hand-operated equipment used for cleaning, washing, polishing, detailing or
waxing of motor vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SERVICES. Inclusive of automobile repair services,
including minor and major repairs, body working, overhauling, painting and
other specialized services. This shall not include “junkyards” as defined in
this chapter.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SERVICES. Inclusive of new and used car sales, which
may also offer automobile repair services, including minor and major repairs,
body working, overhauling, painting, and other specialized services. This shall
not include “junkyards” as defined in this chapter.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A single-family dwelling which rents a room or rooms
without cooking facilities and which provides a breakfast meal but no other
meals for guests on the premises.
   BILLBOARD. Inclusive of outdoor signs and outdoor advertisements, meaning
any sign (including a standard poster panel) either freestanding or attached to
a structure which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
entertainment or other activity conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on
the premises on which the sign is located.
   BUILDING. A structure with a roof supported by columns or walls, intended to
provide shelter for persons, property, animals or business activity and support
for any use or occupancy. Includes roof, gutters, walls, downspouts, porches,
foundations, crawl spaces, windows, floors and doors. The term includes the
words structure and establishment.
   BUILDING LINE. Inclusive of setback line, denoting the line on the front,
rear and sides of a lot, established according to the zoning district
regulations set forth herein, delineating the area upon which a building may be
erected or maintained.
   CHURCH, CLUB or PRIVATE LODGE. An incorporated or unincorporated association
for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political,
recreational or like activities operated on a non- profit basis for the primary
benefit of its members.
   CURB CUT. Inclusive of driveway referring to a lowered or cut away (paved or
unpaved) curb for purposes of ingress or egress to property abutting a public
street.
   DETERMINATION. A written, final and binding order, requirement or
determination regarding an administrative decision.
   DEVELOPER. A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment
authority, who undertakes any development and who is the landowner of the
property to be developed or who has been authorized by the landowner to
undertake development on that property.
   DEVELOPMENT. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term means:
      (1)   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation,
substantial repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure;
      (2)   Excavation, grading, filling clearing or alteration of land;
      (3)   The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. § 160D-802; or
      (4)   The initiation or substantial change of the use in land or the
intensity of use of land.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this chapter that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project or
development proposal. DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits and variances. The
term also includes all other regulatory approvals required by regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
   DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended
or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for
living purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. Includes apartments, condominiums and townhouses as
a residence designed for occupation by three or more families with separate
living facilities for each.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residence designed for occupation by one
family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. Includes a duplex defined as a residence designed for
occupation by two families only with separate living facilities for each.
   DWELLING, UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EVENT VENUE. A facility for hosting private events, including, but not
limited to, wedding receptions, parties and business retreats.
   EVIDENTIARY HEARING. A hearing to gather competent, material and substantial
evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL AREA. Inclusive of extraterritorial district,
extraterritorial planning area and extraterritorial planning district meaning
the properties or land beyond the corporate limits of the town, adopted in
accordance with G.S. § 160D-202.
   FAMILIAL RELATIONSHIP. A spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent
or grandchild. The term includes the step-, half- and in-law relationships.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premises or residence, living as a
single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
house, fraternity, sorority or transient residents (such as motel or hotel
occupants).
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A home with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care and habilitation services in a family
environment for not more than six resident handicapped persons.
   FENCE/WALL. An artificially constructed barrier constructed of wood, chain
link, masonry, wrought iron, vinyl or any combination of afore-referenced good/
materials, erected to enclose, screen, retain and/or separate areas.
   FIREARM. Any handgun, revolver, rifle, shotgun or any other device designed
to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile is expelled through a barrel by
the force of an explosion or any other form of combustion.
   FIREARMS DEALER. A properly licensed person lawfully engaged in the business
of selling, transferring or leasing, or advertising for, sale, transfer or
lease or offering or exposing for sale, transfer or lease, any firearm.
   FRONTAGE. The distance between the two side lot lines as measured along the
front setback line.
   GREEN POWER PRODUCTION FACILITY. Any facility that produces electrical power
through the harnessing of energy sources which are not expected to be depleted
in a time frame relevant to the human race, also called sustainable energy.
Sustainable energy sources are most often regarded as including all renewable
sources, such as plant matter, solar power, wave power, geothermal power and
tidal power. Wind power is not included for in this definition.
   HANDICAPPED PERSON. A person with a temporary or permanent physical,
emotional or mental disability including, but not limited to, mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments,
emotional disturbances and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally
ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined by G.S. § 122C-3(11)b.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS. An accessory use of a second structure located on the
same parcel with a primary owner occupied single-family residential dwelling,
which must meet the requirement of §
154.188 and with all local zoning and building codes and state/county/local
mandated health and safety regulations. A HOME-BASED BUSINESS may consist of
service-oriented uses and typically will be more intensive than a home
occupation, due to factors such as intensity of use or clients coming to the
residence.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation for gain in a residence by a person or family
residing therein.
   HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. The office, studio or occupational room of a
doctor, dentist, architect, musician, tutor, instructor, professional engineer
or surveyor, attorney, realtor or insurance agent, or similar professional
persons providing services when:
      (1)   The use is conducted within a residence occupied by the
practitioner;
      (2)   No other persons are engaged in the occupation; and
      (3)   There is no display of goods or of advertising, other than an
identification sign.
   HOTEL. Inclusive a motel, tourist home and boarding house, defined as a
commercial structure in which sleeping accommodations are provided and offered
to transient visitors for compensation.
   JUNK YARD. Use of more than 200 square feet of any property for indoor and/
or outdoor storage, sale or resale of junk including scrap material of metal,
rags, paper, lumber, structural steel, equipment, or assortment thereof, or for
the dismantling, demolition and/or abandonment of automobiles, boats and other
vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
   KENNELS. A fenced in or enclosed structure or structures, facility or
facilities in which actual or intended use is to domicile more than four dogs
or other domesticated animals.
   LEGISLATIVE DECISION. The adoption, amendment or repeal or a regulation
under this chapter.
   LEGISLATIVE HEARING. A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed
legislative decision.
   LOT. Includes a parcel denoting a land of sufficient size to meet minimum
zoning requirements for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and
other open spaces as are required in this chapter. Such LOT may consist of the
following:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record; or
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of
two street lines which make an angle of more than 45 degrees and less than 135
degrees with each other. The street line forming the least frontage shall be
deemed the front of the lot except where the two street lines are equal, in
which case the owner shall be required to meet the applicable standards of this
chapter.
   LOT DEPTH. The arithmetic horizontal distance between front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is a part of a subdivided plat which has been
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds of Washington County no
later than the date of the adoption of this chapter, or a lot described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded by the
aforementioned time.
   LOT WIDTH. The arithmetic horizontal distance between side lot lines.
   MEDICAL SUPPLIES AND SERVICES.
      (1)   Services provided in a facility with merchandise for retail sales
used for treating patient physical illness or injury or a facility (with or
without said merchandise), engaged in furnishing the following outpatient
medical, surgical or other personal physical health services: medical, dental,
optical, physical mobility, hearing, certified therapeutic massage therapist
and outpatient physical care facilities. These services would be separate from
and unaffiliated with hospitals and would be properly supervised on site by
board certified or state licensed personnel.
      (2)   This definition shall specifically exclude for profit and not for
profit businesses and establishments engaged in:
         (a)   Psychiatric and mental health services; and
         (b)   Marijuana (medical or otherwise) growing, manufacturing,
dispensing and/or on-site consumption facilities and marijuana associated
paraphernalia and equipment sales, and/or use.
   MICRO WINERY or BOUTIQUE WINERY. A business that processes agricultural
products into beverages (wine) in small batches of less than 7,500 cases per
year and may include an in house tasting room for retail sales of the product
produced on site and its related merchandise. (A case consists of 12 750 ml
bottles of wine).
   MINIATURE GOLF COURSES. A small-scale version of a regulation golf course
played with golf balls and putters on a course featuring obstacles created by
changes in the terrain or features using natural materials such as water, rocks
and vegetation.
   MOBILE HOME. A dwelling unit that:
      (1)   Is not constructed in accordance with the North Carolina State
Building Code for site-built homes;
      (2)   Is composed of one or more components, each of which was
substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported
to the home site or its own chassis;
      (3)   In traveling mode is 40 feet or more in length and eight feet or
more in width; and
      (4)   Bears a permanent label or seal of compliance in accordance with
G.S. § 143-149(6). LABEL OF COMPLIANCE shall mean a permanent label or seal
permanently attached to a manufactured home at completion of construction
thereof which is issued by any independent, solvent and trustworthy person
approved and licensed by the Council (N.C. State Building Council) as being
competent and as having and utilizing initial and follow up manufacturing
inspection services which provide the highest degree of quality control, and on
which seal or label shall be recorded:
         (a)   The person issuing such label or seal and the serial number of
the label or seal;
         (b)   The serial number or other identification number of said
manufactured home; and
         (c)   A certification that said manufactured home was evaluated,
tested and inspected in accordance with the standards and rules and regulations
prescribed in this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME CLASS A. A mobile home constructed after July 1, 1976, that
meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of
construction and that satisfies each of the following additional criteria:
      (1)   The mobile home has a length not exceeding four times its width;
      (2)   The pitch of the mobile home’s roof has a minimum vertical rise of
one foot for each five feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a
type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction;
      (3)   The exterior siding consists of wood, hardboard, aluminum or vinyl
(that does not exceed the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in
composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in
standard residential construction;
      (4)   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, unpierced except for
required ventilation and access, is installed under the home;
      (5)   Stairs, porches, entrance platforms and other means of entrance and
exit to the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the
standard set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance; and
      (6)   The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have
been removed.
   MOBILE HOME CLASS B. A mobile home constructed after July 1, 1976, that
meets or exceeds the construction standards promulgated by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction
but that does not satisfy all of the criteria necessary to qualify the house as
a Class A mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME CLASS C. Any mobile home that does not meet the definitional
criteria of a Class A or Class B mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any tract of land upon which five or more mobile homes
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located, regardless of whether
or not a charge is made for such service on any site or tract of land designed
for such occupancy.
   MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the standards
set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code and composed of components
substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the
building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. Among other
possibilities, a MODULAR HOME may consist of two or more sections transported
to the site in a manner similar to a mobile home (except that the modular home
meets the state’s State Building Code), or a series of panels or room sections
transported on a truck and erected or joined together on the site.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure and/or use of land which does not conform
with the permitted uses for the zoning district in which it is located, either
at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments
to this chapter.
   NON-PROFIT OPERATIONS. Those operations conducted by a properly established
and maintained entity pursuant to the provisions of G.S. Chapter 55A or IRC §
501(c)(3). Such entity must be organized and operated exclusively for those
exempt purposes as defined in IRC § 501(c)(3), and none of its earnings may
inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. Such entity
shall provide proof of its proper establishment and ongoing exclusive
operations upon request by any town official.
   NURSING HOME. Inclusive a convalescent home, rest home or elderly home and
described as a health facility where persons are housed and furnished with
meals and continuing nursing care for compensation, either on a part-time or
full-time basis.
   OPEN-AIR STORAGE. The keeping, stacking or storing of goods without the
benefit of structural shelter.
   OPAQUE. Not able to be seen through; not transparent.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The principal or primary use for which a lot or the main
structure thereon is designed, arranged or intended and for which it is or may
be used, occupied or maintained.
   PSYCHIATRIC AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES. Services provided in a facility for
clients or patients on an outpatient or inpatient basis that would include
evaluation, examination, diagnosis, referral, treatment, counseling, mentoring,
group support services, individual support services, group therapy, and/or
individual therapy in the mental health and/or psychiatric fields and properly
supervised on site by board certified or state licensed personnel.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISION. A decision involving the finding of facts regarding
a specific application of development regulation and requires the exercise of
discretion when applying the standards of the regulation. QUASI-JUDICIAL
DECISIONS include, but are not limited to, decisions variances, special use
permits, and appeals of administrative determinations.
   RECREATIONAL GOODS RENTALS. A brick-and-mortar business that rents
recreational goods on site, inclusive of bicycles, boats, canoes, jet skis,
kayaks and similar recreational equipment.
   SATELLITE RECEIVERS. A structure designed to receive television broadcasts
relayed by microwave signals from earth orbiting communications satellites and
is in excess of four feet in diameter or five feet in height from the base to
the top of the antenna.
   SERVICE STATION. Inclusive of gas station and filling station and defined as
a building or lot dedicated to the rendering of automotive services such as the
sale of gasoline, oil, grease, and accessories, and the minor repair of
automobiles such as tune ups, brake adjustment and tire changes, and excluding
body working, overhauling, painting and other specialized services.
   SHOPPING CENTER. Inclusive of convenience center, shopping mall and
commercial center and defined as more than two commercial establishments
planned and constructed as a single unit with off- street parking and loading
facilities provided on the property and related in location, size and type of
shops to the general trade area in the vicinity.
   SHORT-TERM RENTALS; PARTIAL HOUSE. A resident-occupied single-family
dwelling that consists of the rental of up to two guest rooms for vacation,
leisure, recreation or other purposes for fewer than 30 days. The partial house
short-term vacation rental should be subordinate and incidental to the
principal residential use of the dwelling.
   SHORT-TERM RENTALS; WHOLE HOUSE. The rental of an entire single-family
dwelling to a group operating as one housekeeping unit for vacation, leisure,
recreation or other purposes for fewer than 30 days.
   SIGN. A device (stationary or transportable) designed to inform, direct or
attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is
located as pulled out in §§
154.145 through 153.153.
   SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling
unit are not SLEEPING UNITS.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in
a particular zoning district upon presentation of competent, material and
substantial evidence establishing compliance with one or more general standards
requiring that judgement and discretion be exercised as well as compliance with
specific standards. This definition includes permits previously referred to as
“conditional use permits”.
   SPORTS BAR. A sit down restaurant open to the general public (of all ages)
that would include amenities or entertainment in conjunction with the
restaurant such as a microberewery, public bar located in the restaurant area,
(multiple) television screens, billiard tables, foosball tables and/or darts.
   STREET. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
   TAVERN/NIGHTCLUB. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served
and consumed within the principal building and in which music (live and
otherwise), dancing and/or entertainment is permitted.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. Any structure which:
      (1)   Consists of a single unit completely assembled at the factory;
      (2)   Is designed so that the total structure can be transported on its
own chassis;
      (3)   Is not over 32 feet in length and eight feet in width; and
      (4)   May be used as a dwelling unit (term is inclusive of camper, mini
mobile home and the like).
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of the specific terms of a zoning ordinance. A
VARIANCE may be made where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property not
the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the
regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. VARIANCES are
granted by the Board of Adjustment which must adhere to certain rules and
regulations as set forth in this chapter.
   VIDEO GAMING ARCADE. Any establishment that operates by selling customers
internet time and where the customer may use the computer terminal to surf the
internet or play games to win prizes based on predetermined odds. Included in
this definition would also include, internet sweepstakes, video sweepstakes and
internet café, lounges or other related terms. (Internet cafes shall not be
constructed to be restaurants or dining establishments that also provide just
wireless internet (Wi-Fi) for their customers or patrons to access with the
customers’ or patrons’ laptops or hand-held devices.)
   YARD. Required open space across the front of a lot measured from side lot
line to side lot line and lying between the front property line and the front
building setback line.
   YARD, FRONT. Required open space extending along either side of a lot
measured from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the front
property line and the front building setback line.
   YARD, REAR. Required open space extending across the rear of a lot measured
from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear property line
and the rear building setback line. (Note: a REAR YARD may be used for an
accessory building provided no structure, temporary or permanent, is
constructed within five feet of any property line.)
   YARD, SIDE. Required open space extending along either side of a lot
measured from front setback line to the rear setback line and lying between the
side lot line and the side setback line.
(Prior Code, § 153.025) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
01-03, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. 04-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. passed 11-8-2010;
Ord. 11-02, passed 2-14-2011; Ord. 2013-03, passed 2-11-2013; Ord. passed 7-28-
2014; Ord. 2015-02, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 2015-03, passed 4-13-2015; Ord. 2015-
06, passed 5-11-2015; Ord. 2015-07, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 2015-08, passed 6-8-
2015; Ord. 2016-07, passed 5-9-2016; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2022-
03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-06, passed 1-6-2025; Ord. 2025-09, passed 1-6-
2025)
§ 154.036 WORD INTERPRETATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be interpreted as
stated.
   (A)   The present tense includes future tense and future tense includes the
present tense.
   (B)   The singular number includes the plural number and plural number
includes the singular number.
   (C)   The words “may” and “should” are permissive.
   (D)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory.
   (E)   The word “map” shall mean the official zoning map of the Town of
Plymouth adopted pursuant to this chapter.
   (F)   The word “chapter” shall mean the official zoning chapter of the Town
of Plymouth.
   (G)   The words “town” or “city” shall mean Plymouth, North Carolina, a
municipal corporation.
   (H)   The word “Board” shall mean the Planning Board of Plymouth, North
Carolina, unless otherwise noted.
   (I)   The words “Town Council” shall mean the Town Council of Plymouth,
North Carolina.
   (J)   The words “Board of Adjustment” shall mean the Town of Plymouth Board
of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 153.026) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
APPLICATION
§ 154.050 EQUITABILITY.
   The regulations contained in this chapter for each district shall be applied
in an equal and impartial manner to all property within each district
throughout the town and the extraterritorial planning districts.
(Prior Code, § 153.040) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.051 AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES.
   Agricultural activities will be allowed only within the extraterritorial
planning jurisdiction of the town. Livestock operations of more than ten
animals per acre will be prohibited, and all food animal operations shall
require a 100-foot vegetative buffer along property lines bordering non-
agricultural uses and natural or human-made waterways.
(Prior Code, § 153.041) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.052 AREAS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN.
   The following areas outlined in divisions (A) through (C) of this section
are those areas of environmental concern as defined in G.S. Chapter 113A
affected by the application of this chapter within the jurisdiction of the
town. The enforcement of this chapter within these designated areas or lands
affecting such areas should be wholly consistent with the development policies
and regulations prescribed in the Coastal Area Management Act of North
Carolina, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. All development standards and permits
required under the Act will take precedence over the standards and regulations
set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   Estuarine waters. Estuarine waters are defined in G.S. § 113A-113(b)
as all the water of the Atlantic Ocean within the boundary of North Carolina
and all the waters of the bays, sounds, rivers and tributaries thereto seaward
of the dividing line between coastal fishing waters and inland fishing waters,
as set forth in an agreement adopted by the Wildlife Resources Commission and
the Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources filed with the
Secretary of State, entitled Boundary Lines, North Carolina Commercial Fishing
Inland Fishing Waters, revised to March 1, 1965.
   (B)   Estuarine shorelines. Estuarine shorelines constitute those non-ocean
shorelines which are especially vulnerable to erosion, flooding or other
adverse effects of wind and water and are intimately connected to the estuary.
This area extends from the mean high water level or normal water level along
the estuaries, sounds, bays and brackish waters as set forth in an agreement
adopted by the Wildlife Resources Commission and the Department of Environment,
Health and Natural Resources for a distance of 75 feet landward.
   (C)   Public trust areas. Public trust areas are all waters of the Atlantic
Ocean and the lands thereunder from the mean high water mark to the seaward
limit of state jurisdiction; all natural bodies of water subject to measurable
lunar tides and lands thereunder to the mean high water mark; all navigable
natural bodies of water and lands thereunder to the mean high water level or
mean water level, as the case may be, except privately owned lakes to which the
public has no right of access; all water in artificially created bodies of
water containing significant public fishing resources or other public resources
which are accessible to the public by navigation; and all waters in
artificially created bodies of water in which the public has acquired rights by
prescription, custom, usage, dedication or any other means. In determining
whether the public has acquired rights in artificially created bodies of water,
the following factors shall be considered:
      (1)   Use of the body of water by the public;
      (2)   Length of time the public has used the area;
      (3)   Value of public resources in the body of water; and
      (4)   Whether the public resources in the body of water are mobile to the
extent that they can move into natural bodies of water.
(Prior Code, § 153.042) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.053 USES OF LAND AND STRUCTURES.
   The following regulations are applicable to all uses of land and structures
in the jurisdiction and shall be enforceable upon the effective date of this
chapter.
   (A)   Conforming use. Land and structures or the uses of land and
structures, which conform with to the regulations for the district in which it
is located, may be continued provided that any structural change or alteration
or change in use shall conform with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   New use of construction. All new construction or use of land shall
conform with to the use and dimensional requirements for the district in which
it is to be located.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses. Land or structures or uses of land, which would be
prohibited under the regulations for the district in which it is located, shall
be considered as conforming uses. Nonconforming uses or structures shall be
allowed to continue under the appropriate provisions spelled out in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.043) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.054 ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
   No lot shall be occupied by more than one principal building. No portion of
a yard, court or other open space provided about any building or structure for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included
as a part of a yard or other open space required under this chapter for another
building or structure. A residence shall always be considered the principal use
of a lot.
   (A)   Address numbers on primary structures. All primary structures shall
have affixed to their facade numbers that correspond to the E-911 address for
that structure. These numbers shall be a minimum of three inches high and a
maximum of five inches high. These should be placed at a conspicuous location
on the structure. In the case of a primary structure being divided into
subsections with separate entrances for each and a different address to each
subsection, each entrance shall have the individual address identified with the
affixed numbers as described above.
   (B)   Penalty for failure to affix address numbers on primary structures.
      (1)   The owner of any structure failing to bring the primary structure
into compliance with division (A) of this section shall be liable for a civil
penalty.
      (2)   With this penalty the town shall cause the appropriate numbers to
be affixed to the structure. Removal of these numbers once affixed shall cause
the structure to be out of compliance and subject to further civil penalty.
(Prior Code, § 153.044) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-9-1995; Ord.
passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.055 LOT REDUCTION.
   No yard or lot existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall be
permitted to be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.045) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.056 SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD.
   Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this chapter (or his
or her successor in title thereto) does not own sufficient land to enable him
or her to meet the minimum dimensional requirements of this chapter, such lot
may be used as a building site provided that the lot width and lot area are not
more than 20% below the minimum specified in this chapter or other dimensional
requirements cannot be met, the Board of Adjustment is thus authorized to
approve as a variance such dimensions as shall conform as closely as possible
to the applicable, required dimensions.
(Prior Code, § 153.046) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.057 ADJOINING/VACANT SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD.
   If two or more adjoining lots of record are in single ownership at any time
after the adoption of this chapter and the lots individually have less frontage
or area than the minimum requirements of the applicable district, the lots
shall be considered as a single lot or several lots which meet the minimum
requirements of the district in which the lots are located.
(Prior Code, § 153.047) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.058 NEWLY-INCORPORATED AREAS.
   (A)   All territory which may hereafter be included within the zoning
jurisdiction of town shall, within one year after formal designation by the
Town Council, be appropriately zoned by the Town Planning Board.
   (B)   Until such time, all property herein described shall be placed in the
R20 Residential District and those regulations governing that district shall
apply.
(Prior Code, § 153.048) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.059 FENCES AND WALLS.
   (A)   The setback requirements of these regulations shall not prohibit any
necessary retaining wall or prohibit any wall or fence.
   (B)   (1)   However, within or abutting any residential district, no wall or
fence shall exceed six feet in height within a front, side or rear yard.
      (2)   In any business or industrial district, no fence shall exceed eight
feet in height.
   (C)   Barbed or similar wire to be used for security shall be allowed in
industrial districts only.
(Prior Code, § 153.049) (Ord. 04-01, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 154.070 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this chapter to permit nonconformities to exist only
until such time as they are removed or cease to operate as uses. The
application of this chapter should in no way encourage their existence or
perpetuate them as nonconforming uses of land. In so doing, the expansion,
enlargement or extension of nonconforming uses will not be permitted. Also, the
existence of nonconforming uses should not be constructed as an allowance for
adding structures or uses or adding to other structure or uses prohibited or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Prior Code, § 153.055) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.071 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this chapter
or his or her successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable
him or her to conform to the dimensional requirements of this chapter, a
building permit may be granted, provided that the lot width and lot area are
not more than 20% below the minimum specified in this chapter as determined by
the local Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   If two or more adjoining and vacant lots of record are in single
ownership at any time after the adoption of this chapter and such lots
individually have less frontage or area than the minimum requirements of the
district in which the lots are located, such lots shall be considered as a
single lot or several lots which meet the minimum requirements of this chapter
for the district in which the lots are located.
(Prior Code, § 153.056) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.072 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where at the time of passage of this chapter, lawful use of land exists
which would not be permitted by the regulations and guidelines imposed by this
chapter for the district in which such lots are located, the use of land may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful provided:
   (A)   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, no extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
this chapter;
   (B)   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by the use at the
effective date of this chapter;
   (C)   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of time of more than 180 days, any subsequent use of the land shall
conform to the regulations specified for the district in which the land is
located; and
   (D)   (1)   Any nonconforming use of land may be changed to a conforming
use. (Uses cannot receive a variance from any board or council. Uses can only
be allowed by formally amending the ordinance to allow them.
      (2)   Only dimensional requirements or, in some cases, conditions placed
on special uses can receive a variance through the Board of Adjustment.)
(Prior Code, § 153.057) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.073 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the current terms of
this chapter by reason of restrictions on an area, lot coverage, height, yards,
its location on the lot or other requirements that may be included within this
chapter, the structure may be continued so long as it remains lawful subject to
the following provisions and conditions:
   (A)   No nonconforming structure can only be enhanced upon or altered if the
nature of the alteration does not increase the nonconformity of the structure;
   (B)   (1)   Should a nonconforming structure or a nonconforming portion of a
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent which exceeds 50% of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction as determined by the local Building
Inspector, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any replacement involving work equaling less than 50% of the cost
at time of destruction shall be completed within one year of that date.
      (3)   Should this replacement not take place within this time period, the
rights under this division (B) will not be valid and no building permit be
granted for purposes other than for activities in conformance with this
chapter;
   (C)   Should a structure (nonconforming or conforming) be moved for any
reason, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved;
   (D)   Normal maintenance and routine repair of a nonconforming structure
will be permitted as long as the maintenance or repair cannot be construed to
add, extend or intensify the nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion
(s); and
   (E)   Nonconforming mobile homes may be rebuilt, replaced or returned to the
lot after it is removed. Any mobile home that is damaged by any means greater
than 50% of its replacement cost shall be removed and shall not be rebuilt,
replaced or returned.
(Prior Code, § 153.058) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
ESTABLISHMENT, DELINEATION AND INTERPRETATION OF
ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
§ 154.085 SPECIFIED DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the town and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction are hereby divided into the following districts with appropriate
designation and zoning purpose for each:
C    Conservation District
R20  Single-Family Residential District (low density)
R20A Single-Family Residential District (low density with individual mobile
     homes)
R15  Single-Family Residential District (medium density)
R10  Single-Family Residential District (medium density with duplex units)
R7   Multi-Family Residential District (high density)
R7A  Multi-Family Residential District (mixed high density)
OI   Office and Institutional District
C1   Central Business District
C2   Highway Business District
RDO  Riverfront Development Overlay District
IL   Light Industrial District
IH   Heavy Industrial District
 
(Prior Code, § 153.065) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.086 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of the districts shown on the map are made a part of this
chapter (see Appendix A) and shown as the official zoning map posted for public
inspection at the Town Hall of Plymouth. The zoning map and all notations,
references, and amendments thereto are designated as the official instruments
for the implementation and application of all regulations governing the
districts above. Current and prior zoning maps shall be available for public
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 153.066) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.087 UPDATING OF MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts shown on the map are made all
necessary changes in the official zoning map no later than 30 days after
official amendments and/or other action is certified. All maps prepared for
public distribution will be updated on an annual basis as of January 1 of each
calendar year.
   (B)   For extension of the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction (ETJ), a
mailed notice shall be provided 30 days prior to an ETJ hearing. There may one
hearing (with a single mailed notice) regarding the ETJ and initial zoning
amendment.
(Prior Code, § 153.067) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
§ 154.088 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARY LINES.
   The following rules will apply in the interpretation of all district
boundary lines.
   (A)   Location. All boundary lines are intended to be along or parallel to
established property lines, lot lines, the centerline of streets, alleys,
railroad easements, geographic features (i.e., creeks, streams), or designated
rights-of-way.
   (B)   Responsibility of interpretation. Any discrepancy between a street or
property layout on the ground and the zoning map shall be interpreted by the
Board of Adjustment. All interpretations shall be consistent across district
boundary lines.
(Prior Code, § 153.068) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 154.100 C CONSERVATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this District is to retain those areas that
are least suitable for development on any scale. This designation is based upon
soil type, floodplain retention or other fragile features that threaten the
safety and well-being of any citizen who may wish to build a structure on such
property. Due to the soil types and general topography of the municipality, it
is essential that such designations be made and observed for good, sound
planning judgments. In so doing, the town will preserve certain natural
features which enhance the quality of life for all citizens.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is wholly compatible with such areas designated as conservation in the town
land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA),
being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the District should coincide
with that classification and be treated with similar intent.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Horticultural uses, inclusive of the retail sale of products on the
property where produced;
      (2)   Low intensity public and private recreational uses or facilities of
a noncommercial nature including boat access, open space park, ball fields,
bikeway and greenways; and
      (3)   Tree farming and other forestry related activities.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, the special
uses are:
      (1)   Golf courses; and
      (2)   Public utility facilities.
   (E)   Dimensional and structural requirements. The following will outline
the specifications under which structures will be permitted to be constructed.
      (1)   Barriers. No structures or barriers will be permitted which impede
the normal flow of water or adversely affect the water holding capacity of the
property.
      (2)   Enclosed structures. No enclosed structure will be permitted unless
required for the normal occurrence of permitted activities (such as public
restrooms, picnic shelters or storage facilities).
      (3)   Covered surface. Maximum lot coverage for placement of impervious
surfaces will be 30%.
      (4)   Land clearance. All clearance of vegetation will be held to a
minimum with only essential clearance permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.075) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.101 R20 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This District is intended to provide areas of low density
development for the purposes of higher property values or public health
concerns. Within the jurisdiction of this chapter, constraints may be placed on
residential and commercial development by soil limitations with respect to
percobility (capacity to absorb effluent). These are areas which are not
presently served by the municipal water and sewer system. In order to ensure a
healthful development pattern, any single-family dwelling in this District is
required to have a minimum of 20,000 square feet. Where conditions warrant, the
lot size should be larger to accommodate and protect health related needs of
the property and the surrounding residents. The size and approval of
residential development will be based upon documentation of favorable
percolation tests. These results must be provided by the County Sanitarian for
any residences located in this District. This test will be paid for by the
individual, builder or developer.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District provides for
low density development without provision of water and sewer service generally
limited to the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction. Wherever possible, the
District should coincide with those land classifications of rural and community
as set forth in the most current land use plan under the provisions of the
Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Residential accessory uses (such as garage, private workshop);
      (2)   Single-family residences excluding mobile homes on individual lots;
      (3)   Agricultural uses inclusive of tree farming and row crops;
      (4)   Horticultural uses inclusive of retail sales of products on the
property where produced (such as greenhouses/nurseries);
      (5)   Public and private recreational uses or facilities of a
noncommercial nature;
      (6)   Family care homes, as defined in §
154.035 of this chapter; and
      (7)   Short-term vacation rentals, partial and whole, subject to §
154.132.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Child care/day care/kindergarten;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Golf courses;
      (4)   Home occupations;
      (5)   Public or private school facilities; and
      (6)   Public utility facilities.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimensions.
 
Lot area                            20,000 square feet
Lot width at front setback line     100 feet
Lot depth                           150 feet
Side yard setback (each side)       15 feet
Side yard setback (abutting street) 20 feet
Front yard setback                  30 feet
Rear yard setback                   25 feet
 
      (2)   Structure/lot coverage.
 
Maximum residential coverage area (40%), inclusive of
carport, accessory buildings and any other impermeable 8,000 square feet
surface
 
      (3)   Height.
 
Maximum height of structures                    35 feet
Maximum height of auxiliary household equipment 55 feet
 
   (F)   Supplemental regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land use permitted within this
District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Corner visibility. No visual obstruction will be permitted within
five feet of either of two intersecting streets.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (4)   Accessory buildings. Permitted accessory buildings require a
minimum five-foot back yard setback and five-foot side yard setback.
      (5)   Accessory structures. Erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards is not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.076) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed 1-6-
2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.102 R20A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (LOW DENSITY WITH INDIVIDUAL
MOBILE HOMES).
   (A)   Purpose. This District will provide for the low-density development of
properties in areas not adjacent to entryway corridors for the town. Individual
mobile homes will be allowed provided all prevailing requirements of this
chapter and associated County Health Department regulations are complied with.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District provides for
low density development without provisions of water and sewer service generally
limited to the extraterritorial planning jurisdiction. Wherever possible, this
District should coincide with those land classifications of rural and community
as set forth in the most current town land use plan under the provisions of the
Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Residential accessory uses (such as garage, private workshop);
      (2)   Single-family residence including mobile homes on individual lots;
      (3)   Agricultural uses inclusive of tree farming and row crops;
      (4)   Horticultural uses inclusive of retail sales of products on the
property where produced (such as greenhouses/nurseries);
      (5)   Public and private recreational uses or facilities of a
noncommercial nature;
      (6)   Class A and B mobile homes on individual lots which meet applicable
standards;
      (7)   Family care homes, as defined in §
154.035 of this chapter; and
      (8)   Short-term vacation rentals, partial and whole, subject to §
154.132.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those uses
are:
      (1)   Child care/day care/kindergarten;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Cemeteries;
      (4)   Home occupations;
      (5)   Public or private school facilities;
      (6)   Public utility facilities;
      (7)   Home based businesses, §
154.188; and
      (8)   Corresponding revision in the Zoning District Schedule Appendix A.
   (E)   Dimensional and structural requirements. Same as for R20 Single-Family
Residential District in §
154.101(E).
   (F)   Supplementary regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land use permitted within this
District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Corner visibility. No visual obstruction will be permitted within
five feet of either of two intersecting streets.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (4)   Mobile homes. The required standards for individual mobile homes to
be placed in this District are provided in §
154.126.
      (5)   Accessory buildings. Permitted accessory buildings require a
minimum five-foot back yard setback and five-foot side yard setback.
      (6)   Accessory structures. Erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards is not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.077) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 2012-04, passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-
2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed 1-6-2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.103 R15 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (MEDIUM DENSITY).
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides for the orderly and rational growth of
a single-family residence at a medium density. The regulations surrounding this
District provide for the discouragement of any use which would be detrimental
to the nature of a residential district with regard to noise, smell or
conflicting activities.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District, providing for
medium density development with/without provision of water and sewer service,
is in general compatibility with community, developed and transition classes of
land as provided for in the most current town land use plan under the
provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq.
Wherever possible, the District should coincide with those land
classifications.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Residential accessory uses (such as garage, private workshop);
      (2)   Single-family residences excluding mobile homes on individual lots;
      (3)   Public and private recreational uses or facilities of a
noncommercial nature;
      (4)   Family care homes, as defined in §
154.035 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Short-term vacation rentals, partial and whole, subject to §
154.132.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Child care/day care/kindergarten;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Home occupations;
      (4)   Public or private school facilities;
      (5)   Public utility facilities; and
      (6)   Professional offices/agencies including, but not limited to,
chiropractic, osteopathic, dental, psychiatric, medical and the like.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimensions.
 
Lot area                            15,000 square feet
Lot width at front setback line     90 feet
Lot depth                           150 feet
Side yard setback (each side)       15 feet
Side yard setback (abutting street) 20 feet
Front yard setback                  30 feet
Rear yard setback                   25 feet
 
      (2)   Structure/lot coverage.
 
Maximum residential coverage area (30%) (inclusive of
carport, accessory buildings or any other impermeable 4,500 square feet
surface)
 
      (3)   Height.
 
Maximum height of structures 35 feet
 
   (F)   Supplemental regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land use permitted within this
District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Corner visibility. No visual obstruction will be permitted within
five feet of either of two intersecting streets.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (4)   Accessory buildings. Permitted accessory buildings require a
minimum five-foot back yard setback and five-foot side yard setback.
      (5)   Accessory structures. Erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards is not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.078) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 9-13-2004; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed 1-6-
2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.104 R10 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (MEDIUM DENSITY WITH DUPLEX
UNITS).
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides for the availability of residential
use at a denser level by allowing for conventional single and double (duplex)
dwelling units. The regulations provide for efficient and orderly development
for residents desiring small residences at a moderate density level. The
regulations are developed in a manner to discourage any use which would
interfere or detract from the residential nature of the District. This District
will only be applied in areas with community water and sewer service.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the
most current town land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area
Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the
delineation of this District should coincide with that classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Low intensity public and private recreational uses or facilities of
a noncommercial nature inclusive of a boat access, open space park, playground,
ball fields, bikeway, hiking trails and greenways;
      (2)   Single-family residences excluding mobile homes on individual lots;
      (3)   Two-unit dwellings;
      (4)   Residential accessory uses (such as garage, private workshop);
      (5)   Kindergartens and/or day nurseries with the following restrictions:
         (a)   Minimum of 200 square feet of play area for each child based on
capacity;
         (b)   Fence of four feet in height enclosing play area; and
         (c)   Parking spaces equaling one per three children.
      (6)   Family care homes as defined §
154.035 of this chapter; and
      (7)   Short-term vacation rentals, partial and whole, subject to §
154.132.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Churches;
      (2)   Home occupations;
      (3)   Public or private school facilities;
      (4)   Public utility facilities; and
      (5)   Rooming houses/tourist home/bed and breakfast.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimensions.
                                                                                10,000
Lot area (one unit dwelling)                                                    square
                                                                                feet
                                                                                16,000
Lot area (two unit dwelling)                                                    square
                                                                                feet
Lot width at front setback line                                                 75
                                                                                feet
Lot depth                                                                       150
                                                                                feet
Side yard setback (each side)
   Five additional feet to each side yard shall be added for each full story 15
structural height over one story                                                feet
Side yard setback (abutting street)                                             20
                                                                                feet
Front yard setback                                                              30
                                                                                feet
Rear yard setback                                                               20
                                                                                feet
 
      (2)   Structure/lot coverage.
 
Maximum residential coverage area (40%) (inclusive of
carport, accessory buildings and any other impermeable 4,000 square feet
surface)
 
      (3)   Height.
 
Maximum height of structures 35 feet
 
   (F)   Supplemental regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land use permitted within this
District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Corner visibility. No visual obstruction will be permitted within
five feet of either of two intersecting streets.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (4)   Accessory buildings. Permitted accessory buildings require a
minimum five-foot back yard setback and five-foot side yard setback.
      (5)   Accessory structures. Erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards is not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.079) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed 1-6-2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.105 R7 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (HIGH DENSITY).
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides an area for the highest density of
residential development on a single-, double- (duplex) or multi-family basis
without provision for mobile home units. It provides the most intensive use of
land that is served by a community water and sewer service. The regulations are
developed in such a manner that a mix of conventional housing can be developed
without interference from nonresidential uses.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the
most current town land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area
Management Act, being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the
delineation of this District should coincide with that classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Low intensity public and private recreational uses or facilities of
a noncommercial nature inclusive of a boat access, open space park, playground,
ball fields, bikeway, hiking trails and greenways;
      (2)   Single-family residences excluding mobile homes on individual lots;
      (3)   Two-unit dwellings;
      (4)   Residential accessory uses (such as garage, private workshop);
      (5)   Kindergartens and/or day nurseries with the following restrictions:
         (a)   Minimum 200 square feet play area for each child based on
capacity;
         (b)   Fence of four feet in height enclosing play area; and
         (c)   Parking space equaling one per three children.
      (6)   Multi-family residences;
      (7)   Family care homes as defined in §
154.035 of this chapter;
      (8)   Bed and breakfast inn; and
      (9)   Short-term vacation rentals, partial and whole, subject to §
154.132.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Churches;
      (2)   Home occupations;
      (3)   Library;
      (4)   Public or private school facilities;
      (5)   Public utility facilities; and
      (6)   Apparel sales.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimensions.
                                                                                7,000
Lot area (one unit dwelling)                                                    square
                                                                                feet
                                                                                12,000
Lot area (two unit dwelling)                                                    square
                                                                                feet
                                                                                4,000
Lot area (each additional unit)                                                 square
                                                                                feet
Lot width at front setback line                                                 60
                                                                                feet
Lot depth                                                                       125
                                                                                feet
Side yard setback (each side)
   Five additional feet to each side yard shall be added for each full story 10
structural height over one story                                                feet
Side yard setback (abutting street)                                             15
                                                                                feet
Front yard setback                                                              20
                                                                                feet
Rear yard setback                                                               20
                                                                                feet
 
      (2)   Structure/lot coverage.
 
Maximum residential coverage area (40%); inclusive of
carport, accessory buildings and any other impermeable 2,800 square feet
surface
 
      (3)   Height.
 
Maximum height of structures 35 feet
 
   (F)   Supplemental regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land permitted within this District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Corner visibility. No visual obstruction will be permitted within
five feet of either of two intersecting streets.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (4)   Multi-family. All regulations pertaining to multi-family
residential units are provided in §
154.172.
      (5)   Accessory buildings. Permitted accessory buildings require a
minimum of five-foot back yard setback and five-foot side yard setback.
      (6)   Accessory structures. Erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards is not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.080) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
05-04, passed 3-14-2005; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed
1-6-2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.106 R7A MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (MIXED HIGH DENSITY).
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides an area for the highest density of
residential development on a single-, double- (duplex) or multi-family basis
for both conventional housing and mobile homes. It provides for the most
intensive use of land that is served by community water and sewer service. The
regulations are developed in such a manner that a mix of housing types can be
developed without interference from nonresidential types.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the
town land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act,
being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the delineation of this
District should coincide with such classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Residential accessory (such as private garage, workshop);
      (2)   Single-family residences including mobile homes on individual lots;
      (3)   Two-unit dwellings;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (5)   Class A mobile homes on   individual lots;
      (6)   Mobile home parks (subject to the provisions of § 154.128);
      (7)   Family care homes, in compliance with G.S. § 160D-907; and
      (8)   Short-term vacation rentals, partial and whole. See §
154.125.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Rooming house/tourist home/bed and breakfast inn;
      (2)   Child care/day care/kindergarten;
      (3)   Churches;
      (4)   Home occupations;
      (5)   Public or private recreation facilities such as outdoor parks and
playgrounds;
      (6)   Public or private school facilities; and
      (7)   Public utility facilities.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimensions.
                                                                                7,000
Lot area (one-unit dwelling)                                                    square
                                                                                feet
                                                                                12,000
Lot area (two-unit dwelling)                                                    square
                                                                                feet
                                                                                4,000
Lot area (each additional unit)                                                 square
                                                                                feet
Lot width at front setback line                                                 60
                                                                                feet
Lot depth                                                                       125
                                                                                feet
Side yard setback (each side)
   Five additional feet to each side yard shall be added for each full story 10
structural height over one story                                                feet
Side yard setback (abutting street)                                             15
                                                                                feet
Front yard setback                                                              20
                                                                                feet
Rear yard setback                                                               20
                                                                                feet
 
      (2)   Structure/lot coverage.
 
Maximum residential coverage area (40%); (Inclusive of
carport, accessory buildings and any other impermeable 2,800 square feet
surface)
 
      (3)   Height.
 
Maximum height of structures                    35 feet
Maximum height of auxiliary household equipment 55 feet
 
   (F)   Supplementary regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land permitted within this District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Corner visibility. No visual obstruction will be permitted within
five feet of either of two intersecting streets.
      (3)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (4)   Multi-family. All regulations pertaining to multi-family
residential units are previously outlined are provided in §
154.172.
      (5)   Individual mobile homes. The required standards for individual
mobile homes and mobile home parks are provided in §
154.126.
      (6)   Accessory buildings. Permitted accessory buildings require a
minimum five-foot back yard setback and five-foot yard setback.
      (7)   Accessory structures. Erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards is not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.081) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed 1-6-2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.107 OI OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This District is developed to provide space for institutions
(public or private), office uses and certain commercial uses which have limited
or specialized contact with the general public. This is not inclusive
merchandising establishments (retail or wholesale). Due to the complementary
nature of these uses and the regulations governing their development,
residential uses are also permitted within the District.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the
town land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act,
being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the delineation of this
District should coincide with that classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family residential uses;
      (2)   Bed and breakfast inn;
      (3)   Business services:
         (a)   Advertising;
         (b)   Brokerage;
         (c)   Financial establishments (such as banks and savings and loans);
         (d)   Insurance;
         (e)   Real estate;
         (f)   Stenographic, telephone answering; and
         (g)   Studios (such as artists, sculptors or photographers).
      (3)   Public service:
         (a)   Charitable institutions;
         (b)   Chiropractic, osteopathic;
         (c)   Churches and parsonages;
         (d)   Community centers, civic   clubs, fraternal organizations;
         (e)   Convalescent or rest homes;
         (f)   Funeral home, mortuary;
         (g)   Governmental offices (not involving outside storage of material
and/or equipment);
         (h)   Hospitals;
         (i)   Libraries;
         (j)   Medical and dental clinics;
         (k)   Medical and dental services (individual basis); (*does not
include veterinarian services);
         (l)   Museums and art galleries;
         (m)   Nursing homes;
         (n)   Public and private schools;
         (o)   Recreational uses (parks, playgrounds, open space, low-density
recreational usage); and
         (p)   Sanitariums.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.284 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those uses
are:
      (1)   Child care/day care/kindergarten;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Home occupations;
      (4)   Other professional offices or agencies, not named above;
      (5)   Public utility facilities;
      (6)   Veterinary medicine clinic/animal hospital; and
      (7)   Barber and beauty shops.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Minimum lot dimensions.
                                                                                  7,000
Lot area (one-unit dwelling)                                                      square
                                                                                  feet
                                                                                  12,000
Lot area (two-unit dwelling)                                                      square
                                                                                  feet
                                                                                  2,500
Lot area (each additional unit)                                                   square
                                                                                  feet
Lot width at front setback line                                                   60
                                                                                  feet
Lot depth                                                                         125
                                                                                  feet
   Side yard setback (each side); five additional feet to each side yard shall 10
added for each full story of structural height over one story                     feet
Side yard setback (abutting street)                                               15
                                                                                  feet
Front yard                                                                        20
                                                                                  feet
Back yard                                                                         20
                                                                                  feet
 
      (2)   Structure/lot coverage.
 
Maximum residential coverage area (40%) (inclusive of
carport, accessory buildings and any other impermeable 2,800 square feet
surface)
 
      (3)   Height.
 
Maximum height of structures                   35 feet
Maximum height of auxiliary needs/requirements 55 feet
 
   (F)   (1)   Accessory regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land permitted within this District.
      (2)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
(Prior Code, § 153.082) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
04-02, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 11-01, passed 2-14-2010; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.108 C1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides for the retention of a downtown
business core catering to walk-in traffic on a concentrated basis and
activities to promote and support waterfront tourism. The regulations governing
this District provide a norm through which businesses are encouraged to
maintain some continuity as a retail shopping place for local and nearby
residents.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District designation is
generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the town
land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act, being
G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the delineation of this District
should coincide with that classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Retail sales (small merchandise).
         (a)   Art galleries and working studios (not including residence);
         (b)   Cameras;
         (c)   Candy;
         (d)   Clothing;
         (e)   Drugs;
         (f)   Flowers;
         (g)   Gifts;
         (h)   Hardware and hardware sales;
         (i)   Hobby and craft goods;
         (j)   Jewelry;
         (k)   Leather goods;
         (l)   Magazines and books;
         (m)   Musical instruments;
         (n)   Shoes;
         (o)   Sporting goods; and
         (p)   Toys.
      (2)   Retail sales (large merchandise).
         (a)   Antiques;
         (b)   Bicycles;
         (c)   Electrical supplies and fixtures;
         (d)   Furniture;
         (e)   Groceries;
         (f)   Plumbing supplies and fixtures; and
         (g)   Radio and television.
      (3)   Office and institutional services.
         (a)   Business;
         (b)   Financial establishments;
         (c)   Governmental offices;
         (d)   Medical supplies and services;
         (e)   Professional offices and agencies;
         (f)   Insurance offices and agencies; and
         (g)   Real estate offices and agencies.
      (4)   Personal and individual services.
         (a)   Bakery;
         (b)   Barber and beauty shops;
         (c)   Cafeterias;
         (d)   Hotels, motels and tourist homes;
         (e)   Laundromats;
         (f)   Parking lots;
         (g)   Commercial printing;
         (h)   Restaurants;
         (i)   Shoe repair;
         (j)   Taxi stands;
         (k)   Theaters;
         (l)   Upholstery and refinishing;
         (m)   Recreational goods rental; and
         (n)   Event venues.
      (5)   Single-family residential. Single-family residential uses are
permitted in this District on the second floor and above (using Water Street as
the first floor level), provided that the entire first floor is used for
permitted, commercial service or office use. See division (F)(3) of this
section for regulations concerning residential use in this District.
      (6)   Miniature golf courses. Miniature golf courses are permitted in
this District, subject to §
154.133.
   (D)   Special uses.
      (1)   Sections
154.280 through
154.283 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those uses
are:
         (a)   Dry cleaning/laundry;
         (b)   Firearms dealer;
         (c)   Fish and seafood markets;
         (d)   Fraternal lodge/hall;
         (e)   Indoor recreational facilities, public or commercial;
         (f)   Outdoor recreational uses;
         (g)   Psychiatric and mental health services;
         (h)   Public utility facilities; and
         (i)   Sports bar.
      (2)   (a)   Street vendors of small retail items using carts or mobile
kiosks may be allowed as a special use on public property between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. These activities will be limited to the sale of food
and beverages, newspapers and magazines.
         (b)   This activity will require a special license by the town and a
photograph or artistic rendering of the proposed cart/kiosk must be approved by
the Board of Adjustment for visual appropriateness. The town may waive this
requirement during special events.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
      (1)   Rear yard. Rear yard space is required only in cases where the rear
of the plot abuts a residential use. In those cases, a rear yard space of 20
feet will be required.
      (2)   Buffer. A buffer strip consisting of a fence or vegetation equaling
six feet in height shall be required adjacent to any adjoining residential use.
   (F)   Supplementary regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land use permitted within this
District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §
154.165 through
154.174. (Note: any residential building converted to commercial, office or
other nonresidential use after the effective date of this chapter shall comply
with the applicable parking requirements).
      (2)   Multi-family residential uses and first-floor residential uses.
Allowed in Riverfront Development Overlay. See division (F)(3) of this section
and §
154.109 for approval process and additional regulations.
      (3)   Regulations for residential use in CI District. The following are
specific guidelines related to residential use in the Central Business (CI)
District. All residential development in this District must comply with the
following guidelines.
         (a)   Primary access for all residential uses in the CI District is
required to be located to the rear of the building (alley-access) or on a side
street. If secondary access is provided to Water Street the access must be no
wider than five feet.
         (b)   1.   Screening (with an opaque buffer) of all outdoor storage
(i.e., trash cans), with the storage area not to exceed 36 square feet (six by
six).
            2.   The screening may be no taller than six feet. No outdoor
grills, child playground equipment or the like will be allowed to be unscreened
unless in use.
         (c)   No outdoor kennels for dogs or other animals will be allowed.
         (d)   Single-story and first-floor residences (using Water Street as
the first floor level).
            1.   Residential uses are prohibited in the basement level (only
accessible by the alley north of Water Street) of buildings located on the
river side of Water Street.
            2.   All single-story and first-floor residences must be a minimum
of 1,000 gross square feet in size, and must not consist of more than 50% of
the total square footage of the first floor of the building.
            3.   The primary access for any single-story and first-floor
residence shall not be on the Water Street side of the building. If a secondary
access is provided to Water Street, the access must be no wider than five feet,
with the net square footage of the access hall counting towards the square
footage of the residential space.
            4.   The Water Street frontage (front 50%) of buildings with
approved first-floor residences must be occupied by a nonresidential use
permitted in the underlying district both prior to and at all times during the
permitted residential use being occupied.
(Prior Code, § 153.083) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 10-9-2009; Ord. 2015-09, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 2015-10, passed 6-8-2015;
Ord. 2016-01, passed 4-11-2016; Ord. 2022-02, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2022-03,
passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-10, passed 1-6-2025) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.109 RDO RIVERFRONT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The Riverfront Development Overlay District is a zone which
overlays all land lying between the Roanoke River and Main Street, roughly from
Plywood Road on the east side to Martin County line on the west side of the
town. It is created to encourage responsible public and private investment
along the Roanoke River. The intent is to allow flexible but appropriate
development and redevelopment which will support tourism, enhance property
values, encourage public interaction with the estuarine environment and
simulate the local economy by capitalizing on the town’s most significant
natural resource.
      (1)   The Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA), being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et
seq., designates all navigable waters to be Public Trust areas and all land
within 75 feet of the normal high water mark as estuarine shorelines. Any
development which is to occur in these areas would be subject to CAMA review
and approval and must meet standards enforced by the state.
      (2)   Development allowed in this overlay is subject to site plan review
by the Planning Board to determine appropriateness of scale, appearance and
economic impact.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is compatible with the developed classification of the town’s most current CAMA
Land Use Plan.
   (C)   Uses. The following uses will be reviewed as special uses under this
overlay:
      (1)   Two-unit and multi-unit residences; all two-unit and multi-unit
(three or more individual units) residences will be reviewed, provided they are
located in the following underlying districts: Central Business (C1) District;
Office and Institutional (OI) District; R10 and R7 Districts. See regulations
for residential use in C1 in §
154.108(F)(3);
      (2)   Hotels, motels, tourist homes or other short-term overnight
accommodations, provided they are located in the following underlying
districts: Central Business (C1) District; Office and Institutional (OI)
District; R10 and R7 Districts;
      (3)   First-floor residences in C1 District (as determined by Water
Street frontage). See §
154.108(F)(3) for additional regulations;
      (4)   All permitted and special uses in the Conservation (C) District;
and
      (5)   All permitted and special uses in the Industrial (IL and IH)
Districts.
   (D)   District guidelines.
      (1)   The use must be generally compatible with existing permitted uses.
Mixed uses may occur only where there are no inherent conflicts between
proposed and permitted uses.
      (2)   Uses reliant on large volume vehicular traffic will not be
considered.
      (3)   Restaurants with drive-through windows will not be allowed within
this district.
      (4)   Adequate off-street parking must be demonstrated for all proposals.
      (5)   Noise, odor, smoke and vibration levels must be unobtrusive to
normally permitted uses.
      (6)   Health and safety risks to the surrounding area must be low or the
developer must demonstrate how these risks will be managed or mitigated.
      (7)   Waste products or by-products must be properly stored and removed
from the area in a timely manner.
      (8)   Storage areas must be screened by a contiguous visual buffer
adequate to completely shield waste from the public view.
      (9)   The public’s free access to enjoyment of the waters of the Roanoke
River will be a priority. Projects such as public piers, boardwalks, docks,
bulkheads, boat ramps, parks and the like which accommodate, promote or sponsor
such activities will be given priority.
      (10)   Projects providing overnight accommodations for tourists will be
considered as long as the small town, historic character of the waterfront
district is respected and local infrastructure has adequate capacity to serve.
      (11)   Condominium development will be considered if adequate character,
open space, circulation, parking, drainage and public services can be
demonstrated.
      (12)   Normal lot and dimensional requirements of the underlying district
will apply unless separate application is made for a variance and such variance
is granted by the Board of Adjustment.
      (13)   To the extent reasonably practicable, all waterfront development
projects should be designed in such a way as to respect and accommodate the
water-view vistas of adjoining properties.
      (14)   This division (D) shall not apply for property in this area
acquired or to be acquired by contract by the town.
   (E)   Review and approval process.
      (1)   A complete zoning application along with seven copies of the
proposed site plan must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator not less than
14 working days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the proposal will
be reviewed.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator will specify what materials need to be in
the zoning application package, and the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
may request additional information as needed.
      (3)   Incomplete applications will not be processed for review.
      (4)   The Planning Board will review each proposal and send their
recommendation to the Board of Adjustment for final approval at a regularly-
scheduled meeting. The approval will be for a special use permit, and either
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may place specific conditions on an
application.
(Prior Code, § 153.084) (Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. passed 10-9-2008; Ord.
2016-02, passed 4-11-2016; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.110 C2 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides a rational development pattern for
single, unattached uses along the major highway corridors serving the town. It
is essential that such development takes place in a manner to serve the
business needs of the community but protect the safety and liability of those
areas served directly or indirectly by highways.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the
town land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act,
being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the delineation of this
District should coincide with those classifications.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Agricultural supply sales;
      (2)   Alcoholic beverages control stores (**these are exempt from local
regulation);
      (3)   Apparel sales;
      (4)   Automobile parts sales;
      (5)   Automobile repair services;
      (6)   Automobile sales and service (new and used);
      (7)   Barber and beauty shops;
      (8)   Blueprinting services;
      (9)   Building supplies sales;
      (10)   Cabineting and woodworking shops;
      (11)   Chiropractic and osteopathic offices;
      (12)   Contractors (general construction, plumbing and heating,
electrical);
      (13)   Farm machinery sales and repairs;
      (14)   Financial establishments (banks, saving and loans);
      (15)   Fish and seafood retail sales;
      (16)   Florists;
      (17)   Fraternal lodges and/or halls;
      (18)   Funeral homes;
      (19)   Furniture sales;
      (20)   Groceries stores;
      (21)   Hardware sales;
      (22)   Home appliances sales and services;
      (23)   Laundromats and dry cleaners;
      (24)   Medical supplies   and   services;
      (25)   Mobile home sales;
      (26)   Motels;
      (27)   Motorcycles, motorbike sales;
      (28)   Nurseries (horticultural);
      (29)   Nursing home, rest home and sanitarium;
      (30)   Offices of a governmental, professional and personal services;
      (31)   Paint sales;
      (32)   Parking facilities (commercial);
      (33)   Pet shops;
      (34)   Pharmacies;
      (35)   Restaurants inclusive of fine dining, fast food, taverns, grills
or snack bars;
      (36)   Shoe repair and sales;
      (37)   Terminals (bus, taxi, rail, car/truck rental and commercial
trucking);
      (38)   Tire sales and services;
      (39)   Upholstering services; and
      (40)   Insurance sales and real estate sales, and corresponding revision
in the Zoning District Schedule Appendix A.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.283 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Shopping centers, subject to site plan review in §
154.283;
      (2)   Adult business uses, subject to the provisions in §§
154.280 through
154.283;
      (3)   Commercial recreational facilitates;
      (4)   Firearms dealer;
      (5)   Indoor recreational facilities;
      (6)   Kennels/pet boarding;
      (7)   Micro winery or boutique winery;
      (8)   Outdoor parks and playgrounds;
      (9)   Pool halls/billiard parlors;
      (10)   Psychiatric and mental health services;
      (11)   Public or private school facilities;
      (12)   Public utility facilitates;
      (13)   Sports bar;
      (14)   Veterinary medicine, animal hospital;
      (15)   Tavern/nightclub; and
      (16)   Service stations/gas stations and corresponding revision in the
Zoning District Schedule Appendix A.
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Lot area                                                     15,000 square feet
Lot width at front setback line                              100 feet
Side yard setback (each side)                                25 feet
Width of driveway                                            30 feet
Front yard setback (Note: no parking signs, gasoline pumps
or other structures shall be permitted within 30 feet of the 50 feet
front property line)
Rear yard                                                    25 feet
* Where abutting residential property or designated residential district, a
buffer strip or fence no less than six feet in height will be provided
 
   (F)   Supplementary regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land permitted within this District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (3)   Curb cut provisions. Those regulations dealing with curb cuts are
provided in §
154.173.
(Prior Code, § 153.085) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
01-03, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. 09-07, passed 6-8-2009; Ord. 09-09, passed 6-8-
2009; Ord. 2015 02, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 2015-09, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 2015-
10, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 2015-11, passed 6-8-2015; Ord. 2016-04, passed 4-11-
2016; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.111 IL LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This District provides space for industries and wholesaling
and warehouse facilities that operate in a clean, quiet manner that do not
place extreme demands on the sewer and/or water system. All uses permitted
under this jurisdiction must be determined to be inoffensive to nearby
residential areas.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of the District’s designation is
generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the town
land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act, being
G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the delineation of this District
should coincide with that classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The uses in this District shall be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Assembly and processing of farm and food products, including meat,
fish, poultry, vinegar and yeast;
      (2)   Automobile sales and service (new and used);
      (3)   Bag manufacturers (inclusive of other paper containers);
      (4)   Bakery products;
      (5)   Boat manufacturers;
      (6)   Bottling works;
      (7)   Building materials, storage and sales;
      (8)   Cabinetmaking and woodworking shops (inclusive of furniture
products);
      (9)   Circuses, carnivals and fairs (temporary basis not to exceed 30
days);
      (10)   Churches;
      (11)   Cold storage plants;
      (12)   Commercial recreation facilities (including concession stands);
      (13)   Contractors storage yards
      (14)   Dairy products processing;
      (15)   Dry cleaning and laundry plants;
      (16)   Electrical and industrial equipment (inclusive manufacturers,
assembly, repair and servicing);
      (17)   Farm machinery (inclusive of assembly, repair and sales);
      (18)   Garages/service stations/convenient stores;
      (19)   Grain elevators;
      (20)   Greenhouses and nurseries
      (21)   Grounds and facilities for open-air games and sports;
      (22)   Ice plants;
      (23)   Industrial research and educational facilities;
      (24)   Jewelry and clock manufacturing;
      (25)   Kennels and pet boarding;
      (26)   Laboratories for research and testing;
      (27)   Leather goods manufacturers;
      (28)   Lumber yards;
      (29)   Machine shops;
      (30)   Musical instrument manufacturers;
      (31)   Off-street parking facilities;
      (32)   Optical and scientific instruments;
      (33)   Pharmaceutical products manufacturers;
      (34)   Printing, publishing and reproduction establishments;
      (35)   Repair and servicing of office and household equipment;
      (36)   Sheet metal shops and tinsmith shops;
      (37)   Veterinary medicine and animal hospitals;
      (38)   Shirt manufacturers;
      (39)   Sign manufacturers (inclusive of printing and maintenance);
      (40)   Stone cutting, monument manufacturers (including sales);
      (41)   Storage warehouse yards;
      (42)   Venetian blind manufacturers, contractors and cleaning shops;
      (43)   Welding shops; and
      (44)   Wholesale and jobbing establishments (including incidental retail
outlets for only that merchandise handled at the wholesale establishment).
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.283 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
      (1)   Bulk fuel storage;
      (2)   Outdoor parks and playgrounds;
      (3)   Public utility facilities;
      (4)   Sanitary landfill; and
      (5)   Firearms dealer
   (E)   Dimensional, setback and structural requirements. The following will
outline specifications under which structures will be permitted to be
constructed.
 
Minimum Lot Dimensions
Lot area                                                    15,000 square feet
Lot width at front setback line; no parking signs, storage,
outdoor manufacturing, processing or assembling activity,   100 feet
nor any structure housing accessory uses shall be permitted
within 30 feet of the front property
* Side yard setback (each side)                             25 feet
Width of driveway                                           30 feet
Rear yard setback                                           25 feet
*Where a rear or side lot line abuts residential property, there shall be no
parking in the rear or side yard unless a thickly planted buffer strip four
feet in height or other fencing device, is installed to prevent dust, fumes,
noise, the glare of lights or other nuisances associated with parking from
interfering with the enjoyment of the adjacent property and affecting its
value
 
   (F)   Supplemental regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land permitted within this District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (3)   Curb cut provisions. Those regulations dealing with curb cuts are
provided in §
154.173.
(Prior Code, § 153.086) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 7-28-2014; Ord. 2015-04, passed 4-13-2015; Ord. 2015-12, passed 6-8-
2015; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.112 IH HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This District accommodates industries and other heavy
commercial activities from which noise, odor, smoke, vibrations and other
nuisance factors can be anticipated. Related development problems such as high
volume traffic flows must also be considered as factors in the placement of
this District. The wise location of this District can lessen, if not completely
eliminate, the detrimental effect of such operations. In addition, this
District is intended to accommodate heavy water uses and waste producers,
particularly those which produce waste that cannot be treated by the municipal
system.
   (B)   Land use compatibility. The character of this District’s designation
is generally compatible with the developed classification as set forth in the
town land use plan under the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act,
being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq. Wherever possible, the delineation of this
District should coincide with that classification.
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Uses permitted in an IL Light Industrial District; and
      (2)   In addition, the following uses are permitted:
         (a)   Airports;
         (b)   Bottled gas works;
         (c)   Bulk oil storage;
         (d)   Coal yards;
         (e)   Equipment manufacturers, repair and servicing;
         (f)   Fertilizer plants;
         (g)   Foundries;
         (h)   Incinerators;
         (i)   Machine tool manufacturers;
         (j)   Manufacturing, processing, assembling or fabricating operations;
         (k)   Meat packing, abattoir, stockyards;
         (l)   Railroad freight yards;
         (m)   Sanitary landfills;
         (n)   Sewage treatment plants;
         (o)   Textile manufacturers; and
         (p)   Water treatment plants.
   (D)   Special uses. Sections
154.280 through
154.283 and the Use Tables which follow describe uses which might be allowed in
each district, subject to certain conditions. For this District, those are:
firearms dealer.
   (E)   Dimensional and structural requirements. The following will outline
specifications under which structures will be permitted to be constructed.
      (1)   Setback.
         (a)   No building shall be less than 30 feet from any property line
except that when the use abuts a residential district, the building setback
line shall be 50 feet from the nearest residential property line.
         (b)   If the 30- or 50-foot setback is the front yard setback, it
shall be used from property line to property line only for pathways, driveways
and landscaping.
      (2)   Buffer. Side and rear yard setbacks may be used for parking and
storage provided that adjacent property zoned for residential uses is protected
from the noise, dust, glare of lights and other detrimental effects of the
storage and/or parking area by a thickly planted buffer strip or fence of at
least four feet in height.
   (E)   Supplemental regulations. The following represent special
considerations guiding the development of land permitted within this District.
      (1)   Off-street parking. The required off-street parking allowances are
provided in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Signs. All signs permitted in this District shall be in compliance
with §§
154.145 through
154.153.
      (3)   Curb-cut provisions. Those regulations dealing with curb cuts are
provided in §
154.173.
(Prior Code, § 153.087) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.125 SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTALS.
   (A)   Length of stay. The length of stay of guests shall be less than one
month.
   (B)   Noise. The amount of noise generated shall not disrupt the activities
of adjacent land uses.
   (C)   Minimum age of renter. The renter must be at least 21 years of age.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Short-term rentals, see §
154.131
§ 154.126 MOBILE HOMES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a mobile home and/or
place or maintain a mobile home used for living, sleeping, business or utility
purposes on any premises within the town and its extraterritorial limits other
than as expressly permitted. All permitted mobile homes will be in conformance
with the following requirements concerning placement.
   (A)   Mobile homes shall only be placed in districts which permit these
residences on a single basis or park basis.
   (B)   In districts in which individual mobile homes are allowed, there shall
be only one unit per lot and the dimensional requirements of the applicable
district shall be complied with.
   (C)   One travel trailer may be parked or stored in the rear yard of any lot
provided that no living quarters shall be maintained nor any business conducted
therein while the trailer is so parked or stored.
   (D)   Mobile homes or travel trailers may be parked in a sales lot for the
expressed purpose of inspection or sale within a district in which such use is
permitted provided that no living quarters shall be maintained in any of the
trailers so parked.
   (E)   Travel trailers or mobile homes used for temporary field offices may
be permitted by a special 30-day permit, obtainable from the Zoning
Administrator, renewable for a 30-day period.
   (F)   (1)   Trailers used in connection with and by employees of circuses,
fairs and carnivals duly authorized by the town and complying with the
requirements of this chapter may be permitted by obtaining a special 30-day
permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Such trailers, if located on the same lot as the circus, fair or
carnival, may be used temporarily for living quarters of the owners and/or
employees of such circus, fair or carnival. If the trailers are not located on
the same lot, then the trailers must be located within an established trailer
park.
   (G)   Any trailer used as temporary classrooms or offices to alleviate
crowded conditions of schools or institutions is permissible provided that all
requirements of the district are met. A standard zoning permit is required for
such additions.
   (H)   The Zoning Administrator may issue a temporary permit to allow no more
than two mobile homes, travel trailers or similar mobile living quarters be
domiciled on a lot during construction of any building or structure in excess
of $300,000 in value, such permit being renewable under the conditions of
division (E) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 153.095) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.127 MOBILE HOME PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to park or store a mobile home or trailer
within a mobile home park or subdivide property for the purpose of a mobile
home park within the jurisdiction of this chapter in compliance with the town
subdivision chapter (
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances) with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Minor facility improvements are being made which do not affect the
total number of mobile home sites;
   (B)   Mobile home spaces are rental and are not being transferred to
different ownership; and
   (C)   Mobile homes within mobile home parks shall not be excluded based on
age.
(Prior Code, § 153.096) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.128 MOBILE HOME PARK DESIGN.
   The following specifications will be applicable for the design and review of
mobile home parks by the Zoning Administrator under the jurisdiction of this
chapter.
   (A)   Size dimensions.
      (1)   Every mobile home park shall be located on a tract of land not less
than three acres in size and shall contain at least five mobile home spaces as
defined in division (A)(2) of this section.
      (2)   Every mobile home space shall consist of a minimum of 3,200 square
feet. Further, each mobile home space shall be clearly defined or delineated
and shall have a minimum width of 40 feet.
      (3)   Only one mobile home may be parked on any designated mobile home
space or per every 3,200 square feet.
      (4)   No mobile home space shall be located within 50 feet of a public
street right-of-way.
      (5)   No mobile home stand shall be located less than 30 feet from any
property or exterior park boundary.
      (6)   No mobile home shall be located less than 20 feet from another
mobile home, a mobile home addition or any other structure.
   (B)   Parking.
      (1)   Parking spaces shall provide a minimum area of ten feet by 20 feet
for each automobile.
      (2)   Off-street parking space sufficient to accommodate at least two
automobiles shall be constructed within each mobile home space.
      (3)   All parking spaces shall be paved or covered with crushed stone or
other suitable material.
   (C)   Access.
      (1)   Each mobile home park not located adjacent to a public right-of-way
shall have common driveways with an unobstructed right-of-way of at least 30
feet that directly abut all mobile home spaces.
      (2)   Minimum width of driveways shall be 18 feet.
      (3)   No on-street parking shall be permitted on driveways.
      (4)   On-street parking may be permitted when a minimum of 50-foot right-
of-way and a minimum of 34 feet width of pavement is provided.
      (5)   No mobile home space shall be more than 500 feet, measured along
connecting driveway centerlines, from a public street.
      (6)   All mobile home park driveways shall connect with a public street
or another driveway with a 30-foot (minimum) right-of-way and 18 feet pavement
(minimum).
      (7)   No individual mobile home space shall have direct vehicular access
to a state or federal primary street.
      (8)   Closed ends of dead-end streets shall be provided with an
adequately-paved vehicular turning circle of at least 50 feet in diameter.
      (9)   When the mobile home park has more than one direct access to a
public street, they shall not be less than 300 feet apart or less than 300 feet
from a public street intersection (unless topographical or site conditions
demand otherwise).
   (D)   Drainage.
      (1)   The mobile home park shall be located on ground not susceptible to
flooding. Underground drainage facilities with connections to the storm
drainage system shall be provided for the mobile home park (unless adjacent
streets do not have storm drainage pipes).
      (2)   Each mobile home stand and the mobile home space shall be graded to
provide adequate storm drainage away from the mobile home and such that there
will exist no more than two feet difference between the chassis of the mobile
home and the finished grade of the mobile home stand along the entire perimeter
of the mobile home proper. An area to provide proper drainage ditches and a
three to one back slope shall be provided along all public streets or private
driveways constructed with 18 feet or more of paving width.
   (E)   Mobile home park signs.
      (1)   One or not more than two signs with a total area of not more than
one half square foot for each mobile home space and in no case larger than 50
square feet located on private property but no closer than five feet to any
property line, shall be permitted.
      (2)   Only indirect non-flashing lighting may be used for illumination.
      (3)   All signs must be constructed in such a manner as to prevent a
direct view of the light source from any public street right-of-way.
   (F)   Supplemental regulations.
      (1)   All mobile homes within the town shall be connected to the
municipal water and sewer system.
      (2)   Mobile homes and mobile home parks located within the
extraterritorial area shall be connected to an approved water and sewer system
as required and approved by the County Board of Health.
      (3)   All mobile home parks with more than 12 residences shall provide
adequate and suitable recreational areas and facilities to serve the needs of
the residents of the park.
      (4)   Each refuse station shall be no less than one 30-gallon covered
container with tight-fitting cover for every two residences.
      (5)   Accessory structures: erection of animal shelters, animal cages or
animal pens in front yards or side yards are not permitted.
(Prior Code, § 153.097) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.129 MANUFACTURED STRUCTURES AS NONRESIDENTIAL USES.
   (A)   Manufactured structures used for office, business or nonresidential
institutional purposes must meet the requirements of the State Building Code,
since the HUD Code applies only to units designed for residential use.
Manufactured structures, or modular units, are required to satisfy the same
building code as site-built structures (evidenced by a sticker affixed at the
factory in the case of modular units). In addition to the requirements of the
State Building Code, manufactured structures must also meet the following
guidelines:
      (1)   The exterior siding consists predominantly of vinyl or aluminum
horizontal lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of gloss white
paint), wood or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability
to the exterior siding commonly used in standard construction;
      (2)   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry curtain wall,
unpierced except for required ventilation and access, is installed under the
perimeter of the manufactured structure;
      (3)   Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of
entrance and exit to and from the structure shall be attached firmly to the
primary structure and anchored securely to the ground; and
      (4)   The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have
been removed.
   (B)   It is the intent of these criteria to ensure that a manufactured
structure, when installed, shall have substantially the appearance of an on-
site, conveniently built structure.
(Prior Code, § 153.098) (Ord. passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.130 AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SERVICES/AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SERVICE/SERVICE
STATIONS.
   Automobile repair services, automobile sales and service, and service
stations, as defined in §
154.035, whether allowed as a permitted use or a conditional use, must meet the
following conditions and any additional conditions and safeguards deemed
appropriate by the Council:
   (A)   Vehicles before, during and after repair are to be stored inside the
building or behind an opaque fence which is a minimum of six feet in height and
does not exceed eight feet in height. The fence shall be constructed of
decorative wood, vinyl, natural or cultured stone, or other opaque materials
approved by the Zoning Administrator. A chain link or welded wire fence may be
used if a minimum nine-gauge fabric is installed and maintained around the
entire perimeter of the fence for the entire height of the fence. Barbed wire,
razor wire and other hazardous materials are prohibited;
   (B)   No outside storage of vehicles, supplies, parts, tires or remnants of
repairs;
   (C)   Service doors shall be closed except for entry and exit of
automobiles;
   (D)   Vehicles awaiting repair shall be stored for a period not to exceed 90
days;
   (E)   There shall be no dismantling of vehicles for salvage;
   (F)   Contaminants shall not be stored on site and shall be disposed of in
an environmentally approved manner; and
   (G)   A buffer strip consisting of both a fence and vegetation and plantings
shall be required adjacent to all adjoining parcels. The fence shall meet the
requirements outlined in division (A) of this section and be installed behind
the vegetative buffer. The vegetative buffer shall consist of evergreen trees
or evergreen bushes, planted no more than eight feet apart, which shall be at
least six feet tall at the time of planting and reach a minimum height of 15
feet within three years of planting. Vegetation should be installed according
to established planting techniques, including establishing a well-prepared
planting area prior to planting any trees or shrubs. The vegetative buffer must
be maintained, including keeping vegetation healthy, neat and orderly in
appearance, and free of litter and debris. Where adequate vegetative screening
exists on the parcel where the business is located, the existing vegetative
buffer may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, § 153.099) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.131 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARKS.
   Recreational vehicle (RV) parks, as defined in §
154.035, whether allowed as a permitted use or a conditional use, must meet the
following conditions and any additional conditions and safeguards deemed
appropriate by the Town Council.
   (A)   Each park shall comply with the design standards of this chapter and
shall contain the improvements specified which shall be installed and paid for
by the applicant.
      (1)   The design and development of a park shall preserve the natural
terrain, natural drainage, trees and natural vegetation to the maximum extent
possible.
      (2)   All parks shall contain at least two and one-half acres of
contiguous area. This two and one- half-acre minimum shall not include any
wetland areas.
      (3)   All parks shall have utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage
on each camping space.
      (4)   Each park shall have a central structure or structures that will
provide separate toilets and shower facilities for both sexes. Concession areas
with retail sales and laundry facilities may be provided in the park for park
guests.
      (5)   Garbage and trash collection shall be provided in such a manner and
at such locations so as to provide convenient access for patrons and provide
adequate ingress/egress in commercial campgrounds. Bear-proofing measures are
required.
      (6)   A pedestrian walk may be required to provide convenient access to a
public area such as a park or school, to a water area or to areas such as
shopping centers, religious or transportation facilities.
      (7)   Each camping space shall be a minimum of 1,500 square feet and
shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any property line of the overall
park boundaries.
      (8)   Each campsite shall be identified by a permanent numbering system
and be visibly displayed at each campsite.
      (9)   Each camping space shall be properly graded to obtain a reasonably
flat site and to provide adequate drainage away from the space. The park shall
be developed with proper drainage ditches. All banks shall be sloped and
seeded.
      (10)   No camping space shall have direct vehicular access to a public
road. When the park has more than one direct access to a public road, each
access shall not be less than 300 feet apart or closer than 300 feet to a
public road intersection unless topographical conditions or unusual site
conditions demand otherwise.
      (11)   The recreational vehicle park shall have a buffer strip adjacent
to the park boundary extending along the perimeter of the park. This buffer
shall consist of vegetation or solid fencing of wood or composite materials. If
vegetation is used, the planting strip shall not be a portion of any lot, road
or private drive. The buffer strip shall consist of a planted strip of land at
least five feet in width composed of indigenous deciduous and/or evergreen
trees, spaced not more than ten feet apart, and not less than one row of
indigenous dense shrubs, spaced not more than five feet apart and five feet or
more in height after one growing season, which shall be planted and maintained
in a healthy, growing condition by the property owner. If fencing is used, such
fencing shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Buffers shall be maintained
by the property owner. Buffers shall not be required to be adjacent to wetland
areas or along estuarine shorelines. The outside surface of any fence facing
the street, water or adjacent property shall be the finished surface of
fencing.
      (12)   The park shall provide all utilities required by this section.
      (13)   Each camping space shall be limited to a single-family RV. Stays
are limited to a 120-day nonrenewable consecutive-day stay. A 30-day wait
period before reapplying is required.
      (14)   Noise levels shall respect quiet hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. Use of generators is prohibited.
      (15)   Where electrical service is used, the installation and use of such
facilities shall conform with all applicable codes.
      (16)   It shall be unlawful for a RV park guest to occupy, park or store
a mobile home in a park.
      (17)   Residential structures, including RV vehicles and mobile homes,
may be located within the park for use as employee housing for an on-site park
manager and other employees. Employee housing units shall be located in a
designated area in the park and identified on the preliminary and final site
plan. The total number of employee housing units shall not exceed the overall
number of employees.
      (18)   Sales of recreational vehicles in a park on a commercial basis
shall be unlawful.
      (19)   Ownership of camping spaces shall be retained by the park owners
and sales of camping spaces shall be unlawful within a park.
      (20)   Animals traveling with guests shall be kept on a leash at all
times when outside recreational vehicles. Guests shall pick up and dispose of
all animal waste.
      (21)   The nonrenewable consecutive day state, as defined in division(M)
above, may be temporarily modified, in writing, by the Town Manager, if the
temporary modification is issued in response to a specifically declared state
of emergency. Such temporary modification may be implemented for the purpose of
housing emergency response personnel, emergency related construction and relief
workers, and/or private families needing temporary shelter.
   (B)   Recreational vehicle park site plans shall be subject to review by the
Planning Board.
      (1)   Submission. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board, at
least 15 days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board, ten
print copies and one digital copy of a site plan of the proposed park prepared
by a professional engineer or land surveyor currently licensed or registered by
the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors
containing the following information:
         (a)   A vicinity map of the proposed park showing its location in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways;
         (b)   The boundaries of the entire tract and the portion of the tract
to be developed;
         (c)   The total acreage to be developed;
         (d)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the park and
the existing uses of adjoining lands including names of owners of adjoining
lands;
         (e)   The proposed street layout with pavement and right-of-way width,
site layout and size of sites;
         (f)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner and, if
applicable, a written and acknowledged statement of the owner designating the
applicant or other person to act as his or her agent for the submission of
plats;
         (g)   The name of the proposed park;
         (h)   Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties;
         (i)   Title block containing:
            1.   Property designation;
            2.   Name of owners;
            3.   Location (including township, county and state);
            4.   Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared;
            5.   A scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words or
figures; and
            6.   Name, address, registration number and seal of the land
surveyor and/or professional engineer.
         (j)   Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines if on the
tract;
         (k)   The names, titles, firm association, addresses and telephone
numbers of all owners, developers, mortgagees, planners, architects, landscape
architects and engineers responsible for the park;
         (l)   North arrow and orientation;
         (m)   Boundary lines of the tract, fully dimensioned by lengths and
bearings and the location of existing boundary lines of adjoining lands;
         (n)   Minimum building setback lines, front, side and rear as applied
to the entire parcel;
         (o)   The zoning classifications of the tract and adjoining
properties;
         (p)   Existing buildings or other structures, water courses, bridges,
culverts, storm drains, both on the proposed park and adjoining lands;
         (q)   Proposed camping spaces and dimensions numbered consecutively
throughout the park;
         (r)   Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, mean high tide line, vegetation
line, primary and other dunes, ponds or lakes or streams or streambeds and any
other natural features affecting the site;
         (s)   Flood hazard, floodway and floodway fringe areas and regulatory
flood elevation data if available;
         (t)   The following data concerning streets:
            1.   Proposed streets;
            2.   Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in
the proposed park;
            3.   Rights-of-way, location and dimensions including width of the
proposed improved area;
            4.   Approximate grades and linear footage of roads;
            5.   Design engineering data for all corners and curves;
            6.   Typical street cross sections; and
            7.   Street names. Such names shall not conflict with other
existing street names in unincorporated town. Street name signs shall be
erected in the park by the park owner.
         (u)   The location and dimensions (if applicable) of all:
            1.   Utility and other easements;
            2.   Riding trails, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths;
            3.   Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated; and
            4.   Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use.
         (v)   The plans for utility layouts, including:
            1.   Wastewater systems;
            2.   Stormwater management systems or improvements;
            3.   Water distribution lines;
            4.   Electric, gas, telephone, cable or other utility services;
            5.   Illustrative connections to existing systems, line sizes, the
location of fire hydrants, blowoffs, manholes, force mains and gate valves and
the like; and
            6.   Plans for individual water supply and sewage disposal systems.
         (w)   Site calculations, including:
            1.   Acreage in total tract including any wetland areas;
            2.   Total number of camping spaces;
            3.   Size of the smallest space in the park;
            4.   The names and location of any property or buildings within the
proposed park or within any contiguous property that is located on the U.S.
Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic Places;
            5.   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce
on the ground every straight or curved lines, street line, lot lines, right-of-
way line, easement line and setback line, including dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles, radii, central angles and tangent distance for the center
line or curved property lines that are not the boundary line of curved streets.
All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all
angles to the nearest minute;
            6.   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments,
elevations, markers and control points;
            7.   Topographic map when it is determined by the planning board
that one is needed, with contour intervals and scale as determined by the
Planning Board; and
            8.   Boundaries of all Areas of Environmental Concern designated in
accordance with the Coastal Area Management Act of 1974.
         (x)   If the park is to be developed in phases, the boundaries of each
phase and the sequence in which each is to be developed; and
         (y)   An inventory and evaluation of the soil and water resources
within the proposed park.
      (2)   Review by Planning Board.
         (a)   After considering any report and/or recommendations received in
addition to any comments which the applicant may have, the Planning Board shall
approve or disapprove the preliminary site plan.
         (b)   If the Planning Board disapproves the preliminary site plan, the
reasons for such action shall be stated, and recommendations made on the basis
of which the proposed park could be approved.
         (c)   Once the Planning Board has approved the preliminary site plan,
work to install the infrastructure and other park improvements may begin. Any
necessary building permits shall be obtained through the town.
   (C)   Final approval.
      (1)   Preparation of final site plan and installation of improvements.
Prior to approval of a final site plan, the applicant shall install all the
improvements as approved on the preliminary site plan. No final site plan will
be accepted for review unless accompanied by a statement signed by the
applicant certifying that all of the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with and that all of the required improvements have been installed.
      (2)   Submission of the final site plan.
         (a)   Upon completion of all improvements, the applicant shall submit
the final site plan to the Town Planning Director for review.
         (b)   The final plat for the park shall be submitted not more than 12
months after the date on which the preliminary site plan was approved by the
town; otherwise approval of the preliminary site plan shall expire and be null
and void.
         (c)   The Planning Board may grant an additional 12 months for the
installation of improvements and submission of the final site plan if the park
owner applies for such extension in writing before the expiration of the
initial period and has begun to install the required improvements.
         (d)   Five copies of the final site plan shall be submitted to the
Town Planning Department for review and final approval.
         (e)   The final site plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor or
professional engineer currently licensed and registered in the state by the
State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.
         (f)   If the final site plan is disapproved by the Planning
Department, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing,
specifying the provisions of this chapter with which the final site plan does
not comply. If the final site plan is disapproved the applicant may make such
changes as will bring the final site plan into compliance and resubmit for
reconsideration by the Planning Director as if it were an original submission
of a final site plan. The Planning Director may recommend the final site plan
be submitted to the Planning Board for review and approval if the final site
plan is inconsistent with the approved preliminary site plan.
      (3)   Once the final site plan has been approved by the Planning
Department, the park may operate as approved by the town.
(Ord. 2025-03, passed 2-10-2025)
§ 154.132 SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   Short-term rentals, as defined in §
154.035, whether allowed as a permitted use or a conditional use, must meet the
following conditions and any additional conditions and safeguards deemed
appropriate by the Town Council.
   (A)   Zoning permits are required for each short-term vacation rental.
   (B)   The zoning permit number authorizing the short-term vacation rental
shall be conspicuously posted on all advertisements for short-term vacation
rentals as well as in the short-term vacation rental property.
   (C)   Short-term vacation rental operators shall maintain, for a period of
three years, a list of all short-term vacation rental lodgers staying on the
premises.
   (D)   Short-terms rental renters shall not utilize the short-term vacation
rental for holding special events or gatherings.
   (E)   The property owner shall provide trash receptacles, on the short-term
vacation rental site, and dispose of trash regularly.
   (F)   The property owner shall carry liability insurance on the short-term
vacation rental property.
   (G)   The property owner contact information shall be posted on premises
inside the short-term vacation rental.
   (H)   Trash disposal information and town’s Noise Ordinance shall be posted
on the premises inside the short-term vacation rental.
   (I)   The property owner shall reside within 30 miles of the short-term
vacation rental or have a property manager who resides within 30 miles of the
short-term vacation rental.
   (J)   Short-term vacation rentals must meet minimum parking requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located.
   (K)   Short-term rentals are limited to fewer than 30 consecutive days per
renter.
   (L)   No exterior advertising shall be allowed on short-term vacation
rentals.
   (M)   Short-term vacation rental operators shall comply with all applicable
state and local laws, including those relating to fire and building codes,
smoke-detectors and carbon monoxide-detecting equipment, housing codes and
payment of taxes to appropriate governmental entities, including occupancy
taxes.
(Ord. 2025-05, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 154.133 MINIATURE GOLF COURSES.
   Miniature golf courses as defined in §
154.035, whether allowed as a permitted use or a conditional use, must meet the
following conditions and any additional conditions and safeguards deemed
appropriate by the Town Council.
   (A)   The course shall be screened from any major thoroughfare so as not to
be a distraction to traffic or endanger the traffic with loose balls. A
landscaped parking lot shall separate the course from a major thoroughfare, but
if this is not possible, then buffering can be used to achieve this.
   (B)   Lighting will be pointed downward and away from the road.
   (C)   All music or other noise shall conform to town’s Noise Ordinance.
   (D)   As the C1 district is located within a floodplain area, all permanent
structures must have an engineer’s certification of compliance with safety as
it relates to surrounding properties and meet Division of Coastal Management
requirements and town’s Floodplain Ordinance requirements.
   (E)   A 10% construction cost bond shall be required. Should the owner/
operator use concrete as a method of designing the course and the course be
abandoned for a period longer than 180 days; the bond may be used to remove any
concrete and clean up any debris left from the vacated property.
   (F)   Trash receptacle(s) shall be located strategically throughout the park
as to provide adequate refuse collection.
   (G)   Landscaping shall be an integral part of the site plan to help the
walkways and greens blend in with the surrounding property and to serve as a
natural buffer, establishing a more garden-type setting.
   (H)   All outdoor storage shall be screened from public view.
(Ord. 2025-08, passed 1-6-2025)
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
§ 154.145 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for safe, rational
establishment of signs and outdoor advertisements within the jurisdiction of
this chapter. No sign or outdoor advertisement (billboard) of any type shall be
erected within the jurisdiction of this chapter without proper compliance with
the terms set forth in this section. Any sign or billboard not covered by the
terms of this section must be approved by the Planning Board and Town Council
prior to its erection.
   (B)   Note: regardless of exemptions stated herein, all outdoor advertising
signs on lots along U.S. Highway 64 are subject to the restrictions of the
State of North Carolina Department of Transportation in addition to local
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 153.105) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.146 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Owner responsibility. The owner of the property upon which any sign or
billboard is to be placed is responsible to apply to the Zoning Administrator
ensuring compliance with appropriate guidelines.
   (B)   Fee. A fee shall be paid to the town upon receipt of the application
by the Zoning Administrator. A fee schedule appears in §
154.207.
   (C)   Application. The application shall include scaled site plans or
drawings showing the exact location, dimensions, type of sign, and any
distinguishing characteristics of the sign (such as type of lighting, height
and so forth).
   (D)   Temporary signs.
      (1)   All off premises temporary sign permits are issued for a period of
14 days only. A fee schedule appears in §
154.207. The fee is waived for registered non-profit organizations and yard
sales, but a temporary sign permit must still be obtained.
      (2)   For all temporary signs, it shall be the responsibility of the
person erecting the sign to remove it within the time frame set forth, 14 days.
For all days exceeding the maximum allowed, the owner will be charged $1 per
day by the Zoning Administrator or the sign will be removed by the Chief of
Police or the Code Enforcement Officer.
      (3)   (a)   The permit number from the approved temporary sign permit
must be written on the sign to signify approval.
         (b)   Failure to write the permit number on the temporary sign could
result in the sign being removed without refund of the application fee.
(Prior Code, § 153.106) (Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.147 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM CHAPTER.
   (A)   No sign will be permitted which reduces corner visibility or is
erected within or projects into a public right-of-way. All signs are subject to
§
154.148(D). Permitted marquees, canopies and awnings are not included under
this provision.
   (B)   The following signs will be permitted within the jurisdiction and are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter not stated in this section:
      (1)   Regulatory or advisory signs of a public nature, such as traffic or
street signs, rest rooms, parking areas, freight entrances and the like;
      (2)   *Warnings or legal notices of a temporary nature;
      (3)   Flags, emblems or insignias not used as commercial advertising;
      (4)   *Other temporary, noncommercial signs not to exceed two square feet
in surface area and not to exceed 14 days during any quarter of the calendar
year;
      (5)   Any plaque, tablet or marker of a historical nature;
      (6)   Noncommercial signs posted for personal residence use in
conjunction with mailbox, doorbell, and entrance or exitways;
      (7)   Address signs not exceeding 72 square inches and showing only the
numerical designation of the premises;
      (8)   Any sign required by law to be posted (temporary or permanent);
      (9)   Signs of professional use or home office space approved under the
auspices of this chapter (note: this sign shall not be over two square feet in
surface area, shall not be illuminated, and must be mounted to the main wall of
the building);
      (10)   Temporary real estate signs not to exceed six square feet in
surface area (note: this sign must be displayed only on the property proposed
for rent or sale and shall not be closer than five feet from any property line
nor within any legal right-of-way);
      (11)   Signs for church, community or community activities not to exceed
25 square feet in surface area (note: these signs must be on private property
and not located within ten feet of any adjoining property line); and
      (13)   *Political campaign posters and signs not to exceed four square
feet in surface area.
   (C)   *For all temporary signs, it shall be the responsibility of the person
erecting the sign to remove it within the time frame set forth. For all days
exceeding the maximum allowed will be charged $1 per day by the Zoning
Administrator or the sign will be removed by the Chief of Police. In the case
of political campaign posters and signs, the candidate or political party named
on the poster/sign will be held responsible for removal of the signs within 14
days after the election.
(Prior Code, § 153.107) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.148 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Size and number.
      (1)   Only one sign or billboard per building, establishment or 150-foot
frontage or 15,000 square foot area (whichever is applicable); and
      (2)   Maximum size of any sign will be 250 square feet.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   No signs or billboards shall be located on or attached to a rooftop
or on any tower (such as a radio, home radio or television tower or the like).
      (2)   All signs associated with a permitted marquee will be attached flat
with no extension vertically above or below the marquee.
      (3)   No nonexempt signs or billboards or any part thereof will be
permitted within 50 feet of a residentially-zoned area (inclusive flashing,
temporary signs).
   (C)   Safety.
      (1)   No sign or billboard which obstructs, confuses or interferes with
any authorized traffic or directional sign provided for the general public
shall be allowed at any location.
      (2)   No lights which resemble in strength, color or the action of any
emergency light shall be permitted.
      (3)   No flashing lights connected with any sign shall be permitted
within 300 feet of a residentially-zoned area.
      (4)   All lights connected with the illumination of a sign will be placed
in such a manner as not to impair the vision of motorists.
      (5)   Floodlighting and display lighting (temporary or permanent) shall
be shielded in such a manner as not to impair the vision of motorists and shall
not be located within 50 feet of the highway right-of-way.
   (D)   Condition.
      (1)   Any sign or billboard allowed in the jurisdiction shall be kept in
good repair with proper security.
      (2)   Signs which have been abandoned, are no longer functioning, or are
in disrepair or unsafe condition, as determined by the Building Inspector,
shall be removed or relocated by the owner or at the owner’s expense within 90
days of dysfunction or abandonment or 30 days within determination of disrepair
or unsafe condition.
(Prior Code, § 153.108) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.149 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No signs or billboards will be permitted within any residential district
except as permitted by §
154.147 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.109) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.150 SIGNS IN OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Outdoor advertising signs and/or flashing signs or billboards
(temporary or permanent) shall not be allowed within an OI Office and
Institutional District.
   (B)   All signs associated with office and institutional uses shall not
exceed four square feet.
   (C)   Clustered uses of three or more office and institutional uses shall be
permitted with one sign not exceeding 25 square feet in total area (for the
purpose of serving the office and institutional uses only).
   (D)   Freestanding, non-advertisement signs shall be limited to ten feet in
height.
   (E)   All general requirements spelled out in §
154.148 shall be enforced where applicable.
(Prior Code, § 153.110) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.151 SIGNS IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   (A)   No freestanding signs shall be permitted.
   (B)   No outdoor advertising signs or billboards shall be permitted.
   (C)   No sign shall exceed 50 square feet or 10% of the square footage of
the facade of the building, whichever is less.
   (D)   All signs permitted shall be mounted flat against the building with
all attached letters and superscriptions applied thereon parallel with the
building’s facade.
   (E)   Only the name of the establishment or the address shall be allowed on
canopies in this District.
   (F)   No flashing or glittering materials are allowed in this District.
   (G)   No banner on pennant signs other than those promoting approved special
events will be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 153.111) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.152 SIGNS IN SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICTS.
   All requirements for the Central Business District and all general
requirements shall be enforced where applicable (§
154.151). (Note: a sign for the identification of a designated shopping center
shall be allowed with ten square feet permitted per business, not exceeding 25
square feet for any one sign.)
(Prior Code, § 153.112) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.153 SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   All general requirements spelled out in §
154.151 shall be enforced where applicable. (Note: outdoor advertising signs
and freestanding signs shall be allowed with no freestanding sign or billboard
exceeding 30 feet above ground level.)
(Prior Code, § 153.113) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
Penalty, see §
154.999
PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.165 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   The provision of adequate off-street parking is a vital part of the
functional design of any area. In addition, the aspect of safety for both
pedestrians and motorists is a primary consideration in the application of this
section. Specific requirements for the provision of off-street parking shall be
provided under this section.
(Prior Code, § 153.125) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.166 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The requirements will be enforceable at the time of the erection of
any building and/or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased
in capacity (through the addition of dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or
floor area).
   (B)   The requirements will be enforceable before the conversion from one
type of use and/or occupancy to another use or occupancy.
   (C)   All parking spaces required by this section shall be a minimum of 200
square feet in area with a minimum width of ten feet.
   (D)   Parking spaces may be provided in a parking garage or a properly-
graded open space.
   (E)   No spaces which are rented or are located on a public right-of-way may
be counted toward compliance with this section.
(Prior Code, § 153.126) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.167 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Central Business District. The requirements of this section are not
applicable to a C1 Central Business District, provided there is adequate off-
street or satellite parking available to accommodate all noncommercial uses.
   (B)   Residential districts. Where parking spaces for more than eight cars
are required in a residential district, the following shall be complied with:
      (1)   The lot may be used only for parking and not for any type of
loading, unloading, sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling, servicing or
recreation;
      (2)   All entrances, exits, barricades at sidewalks and drainage plans
shall be acceptable per the subdivision code of the town; and
      (3)   A strip five feet wide shall be reserved as open space adjoining
any street line or any lot zoned for residential use, and shall be guarded with
wheel bumpers and planted in grass and/or shrubs.
(Prior Code, § 153.127) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.168 CERTIFICATION.
   Each application for a zoning permit for a commercial, industrial,
institutional or multi-family residential unit submitted to the Zoning
Administrator shall identify the location and dimensions of off-street parking
spaces. The location and design of such spaces will be reviewed to verify
compliance with both number and size as called for by this section.
(Prior Code, § 153.128) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.169 COMBINATION OF REQUIRED PARKING SPACE.
   The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined
in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to
another use as provided in division (B) of this section. One-half of the
parking spaces required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak
attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will
be closed at night and on Sundays.
(Prior Code, § 153.129) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.170 REMOTE PARKING SPACE.
   (A)   If an off-street parking space required by this section cannot be
reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such
space may be provided on any land within 400 feet of the main entrance to such
principal use provided the land is in the same ownership as the principal use.
   (B)   Land described in division (A) of this section shall be used for no
other purpose.
   (C)   When adequate provisions for parking space (meeting the requirements
of this section) have been made for the principal use, the requirements of
divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be inapplicable. (Note: in such
cases, the applicant shall apply for a certificate of compliance for the
principal use.)
   (D)   In cases of new construction, an applicant shall submit (with his or
her application for a building permit) an instrument, duly executed and
acknowledged, which subjects the land to parking use in connection with the
principal use for which it is made available. (Note: the applicant shall
deposit the appropriate fee and upon the issuance of a zoning permit; the
Zoning Administrator shall cause the instrument to be registered in the Office
of the County Register of Deeds.)
(Prior Code, § 153.130) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.171 PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential and related use requirements.
Land Use Required Parking
Land Use                                                               Required
                                                                       Parking
                                                                       2 parking
Duplex dwelling unit                                                   spaces per
                                                                       dwelling
                                                                       unit
                                                                       3 parking
Home occupation use (nonprofessional)                                  spaces per
                                                                       unit
                                                                       3 parking
                                                                       spaces per
                                                                       professional
                                                                       housed in
                                                                       unit and 1
Home occupation use (professional) Includes doctors’ and dentists’ space per
offices                                                                other
                                                                       employee,
                                                                       plus
                                                                       applicable
                                                                       residential
                                                                       requirement
                                                                       1 parking
                                                                       space for
                                                                       each room to
                                                                       be rented
                                                                       and 1 space
                                                                       per 2
Motel/hotel (with restaurant or other group facilities)                employees
                                                                       plus
                                                                       requirements
                                                                       shown for
                                                                       any
                                                                       associated
                                                                       use
                                                                       1 parking
                                                                       space for
                                                                       each room to
Motel/hotel (without restaurant or other group facilities or motor     be rented
court)                                                                 and 1
                                                                       additional
                                                                       space per
                                                                       two
                                                                       employees
                                                                       2 parking
Multi-family dwelling unit                                             spaces per
                                                                       dwelling
                                                                       unit
                                                                       1 parking
                                                                       space for
                                                                       each 1 room
                                                                       to be
                                                                       rented, plus
                                                                       1 space for
Rooming, boarding house or bed and breakfast                           each 2
                                                                       employees,
                                                                       plus 2
                                                                       spaces where
                                                                       there are
                                                                       resident
                                                                       owners or
                                                                       operators
                                                                       2 parking
Single-family dwelling unit                                            spaces per
                                                                       dwelling
                                                                       unit
                                                                       1 space for
Short-term vacation rental                                             each bedroom
                                                                       to be rented
 
   (B)   Public use requirements.
Land Use Required Parking
Land Use                                Required Parking
Auditorium                              1 parking space for each 4 seats of
                                        capacity of the largest meeting room
                                        1 parking space for each 4 seats in the
Churches                                sanctuary plus 1 space for every 200
                                        square feet of space not used for
                                        services
Clinic or doctors’ or dentists’ offi1 space for every 150 square feet of
                                        gross floor area
Elementary school or junior high school 2 spaces per classroom
                                        2 parking spaces for each 2 beds
                                        intended for patient use, exclusive of
Hospital (public and semi-public)       bassinets or 1 space per 150 square
                                        feet of gross floor area, whichever is
                                        greater
Nursing home                            3 parking spaces for each 5 beds used
                                        for patient use
Public building                         2 parking spaces for each employee
Public or private club                  1 parking space per 300 square feet of
                                        gross floor space
                                        1 parking space for each 2 students
Senior high school                      administrative employees plus 5 spaces
                                        for each classroom and 1 space per each
                                        10 seats in the largest auditorium
Stadium, playfield or organized         1 parking space for each 4 spectator
recreation area                         seats
 
   (C)   Business uses requirements. Where specific business types are not
listed, discretion by the Zoning Administrator shall be used to determine the
closest applicable use.
 
Land Use                             Required Parking
Commercial or personal service       1 space for each 200 square feet of
establishments                       gross floor area
                                     1 space per 100 square feet of gross
                                     floor area plus 1 space for every 4
Drive in restaurant                  outside seats provided plus a reserve
                                     traffic lane with capacity for 5
                                     vehicles per drive-in window
                                     1 space for each employee, plus 1 space
Kindergarten/child care/nursery      per 500 square feet of building, plus 4
                                     spaces for loading and unloading
                                     children
Office, professional building or     1 space per 200 square feet of gross
similar use                          floor area
Restaurant or place dispensing food/ 1 space per 100 square feet of gross
drinks/refreshments (not drive-in)   floor area plus 1 space for every 4
                                     outside seats provided
Shopping center                      One space for every 200 square feet of
                                     gross floor area
 
   (D)   Wholesale uses and wholesale warehouse use requirements.
 
Land Use                              Required Parking
Wholesale use and wholesale warehouse 1 parking space for each employee on the
use                                   largest shift
 
   (E)   Industrial use requirements.
 
Land Use        Required Parking
                1 space for each 2 employees on the largest shift plus 1 space
Industrial uses for each 400 square feet gross floor area used for office or
                administrative purposes, plus 1 space for each vehicle used
                directly in the conduct of the business
 
(Prior Code, § 153.131) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.172 MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING.
   For the purpose of providing a harmonious blend between the intensive use of
multi-family housing and other land uses, the following will apply for all
structures which are occupied by three or more families.
   (A)   Application. A detailed site plan as provided for in the Subdivision
Code (
Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances) shall be submitted for review to the
Planning Board.
   (B)   Design.
      (1)   Parking. As provided for in §§
154.165 through
154.174.
      (2)   Buffer strip (screening).
         (a)   A buffer strip (fence or evergreen hedge) shall be provided
along any property line abutting single-family residences and commercial and/or
industrial uses.
         (b)   Such a buffer shall be at least four feet in height (projected
for hedge) with no more than four feet between plantings or sections of fence.
      (3)   Yard space. No less than five feet of yard space shall be provided
between the structure and any impermeable surface (such as parking spaces,
sidewalks and the like).
      (4)   Recreational/open space. For any multi-family development which
contains more than 20 units, common, open space equaling not less than 4,000
square feet shall be provided. All open space shall be grassed and landscaped.
      (5)   Building walls.
         (a)   Building walls having only window opening or only door opening
shall be located no closer than 25 feet to another building.
         (b)   Building walls having both window and door openings shall be
located no closer than 50 feet to another building.
(Prior Code, § 153.132) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.173 CURB CUTS.
   The following requirements are applicable to all districts.
   (A)   Commercial and residential districts.
      (1)   No portion of any entrance driveway leading from a public street
shall be closer than 20 feet to the corner of any intersection, measured along
the right-of-way line from the intersection of the rights- of-way of the two
streets.
      (2)   The width of any driveway leading from a public street shall not
exceed 30 feet at its intersection with the curb or street line.
      (3)   No two driveways on a single lot leading from a public street shall
be within 20 feet of each other measured along the right-of-way between the
approximate edges of such curb cuts.
   (B)   Industrial districts. Centerlines of driveways leading to and from the
same establishments shall not be closer than 50 feet.
(Prior Code, § 153.133) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.174 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   (A)   The number of off-street loading berths required by this section shall
be considered as the absolute minimum, and the developer should evaluate his or
her own needs to determine if they are greater than the minimum specified by
this section.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, an off-street loading berth shall have
minimum plan dimensions of 12 feet by 25 feet, and 14 feet clearance with
adequate means for ingress and egress.
      (1)   For a nonresidential structure containing not more than 25,000
square feet of gross floor area, one berth shall be required.
      (2)   For a nonresidential structure containing 25,000 or more square
feet of gross floor area, the number of berths specified in the table below
shall be provided.
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Number of Berths
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Number of Berths
25,000 to 79,999                2
80,000 to 127,999               3
128,000 to 191,999              4
192,000 to 255,999              5
256,000 to 319,999              6
320,000 to 400,000              7
Each 90,000 above 400,000       1
 
(Prior Code, § 153.134) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
HOME OCCUPATIONS
§ 154.185 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A) A home occupation as defined in §
154.035 is a permissible use and shall be governed by the following
requirements and conditions:
      (1)   The occupation is clearly incidental to or secondary to the
residential use of a dwelling unit and occupies not more than one-third of the
total floor area of such single-family dwelling unit, and in no event contains
more than 500 feet of floor area;
      (2)   Only one additional person other than those residing in the home
shall be engaged in the occupation;
      (3)   The home shall continue to be used principally as a dwelling;
      (4)   The occupation shall not include the retail sale of products;
      (5)   Home occupations shall be permitted only in single-family
dwellings; and
      (6)   Full compliance with all state and local sanitary and health
department rules and regulations, as written and hereafter amended.
   (B)   In connection with the operation of a home occupation, it shall not be
permitted:
      (1)   To have exterior displays, signs or a display of goods visible from
outside;
      (2)   To store materials or products outside of a principal or accessory
building or other structure;
      (3)   To make external structural alterations which are not customary in
residential buildings; and
      (4)   To produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare or other
objectionable effects.
   (C)   Home occupations may consist of personal services listed as follows:
      (1)   Accountant;
      (2)   Beauty shop;
      (3)   Drafting;
      (4)   Notary public;
      (5)   Addressing service;
      (6)   Barber shop;
      (7)   Insurance agent;
      (8)   Photographer;
      (9)   Typing service;
      (10)   Art teacher;
      (11)   Music teacher;
      (12)   Tax consultant; and
      (13)   Catering.
(Prior Code, § 153.145) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
11-03, passed 5-9-2011; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.186 SATELLITE RECEIVERS.
   A satellite receiver as defined in §
154.035 is permitted and shall be governed by the following requirements.
   (A)   A satellite receiver shall be permitted as an accessory use in all
Residential and OI Office and Institutional Districts.
   (B)   It shall be prohibited to temporarily or permanently place a satellite
receiver in the area between the building front setback line and the street in
any Residential or OI Office and Institutional Districts.
   (C)   Satellite receivers will be permitted to encroach into the required
rear and side yard setbacks of Residential or OI Office and Institutional
Districts to a point no closer than five feet from a property or lot line.
   (D)   Satellite receivers will be limited to the maximum lot coverage
requirements of the particular zone in which they are located.
   (E)   Satellite receivers will be permitted in all commercial and industrial
districts and will be governed by the applicable regulations of these
particular zones.
(Prior Code, § 153.146) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.187 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Facilities allowed. Telecommunications facilities, including cellular
antennas and wireless communications towers and facilities, are allowed,
subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Location. The proposed tower, antenna and accessory structure and
equipment shall be placed in a location and in a manner that will minimize the
visual impact on the surrounding area. Any tower, antenna or accessory
structure shall be approved by the Town Council for compliance with these
requirements. To ensure the safety of the public and other existing buildings,
the telecommunications site shall be a minimum of 350 feet from residentially
zoned property.
      (2)   Co-location. Approval for a proposed tower within a radius of
10,500 feet from an existing tower or other similar structure shall not be
issued unless the applicant certifies that the existing tower or structure does
not meet applicant’s structural specifications or technical design requirements
or that a co-location agreement could not be obtained at a reasonable market
rate and in a timely manner.
      (3)   Height.
         (a)   Subject to division (A)(3)(b) of this section, the height of the
tower shall not exceed 160 feet as measured from existing grade of the ground
at its base to the highest point of the tower or antennas. Up to an additional
120 feet of height may be approved if the tower is designed to accommodate
twice the applicant’s applicant’s antennas requirements.
         (b)   Telecommunications antennas or equipment mounted on a building
shall meet all height restrictions of the district within which the structure
is located and not exceed the maximum requirements.
      (4)   Setbacks. All freestanding transmission towers, including
television, radio, cellular or similar transmitting or receiving towers shall
have front, side and rear setbacks of 100 feet and shall be located such that
all supporting cables and anchors are contained within the property and all
towers and supporting cables and anchors shall be contained within a fence. Any
tower that is over 100 feet in height shall provide front, side and rear
setbacks equal to the height of the proposed tower. All monopole structures may
reduce the required setback factor by 25%.
      (5)   Existing towers. Existing towers may be replaced or modified
providing that the existing height is not exceeded by more than 20 feet and the
new or modified tower meets all of the requirements of this section except
setback provisions.
      (6)   Replacement of towers. Those nonconforming towers that are erected
and in use prior to May 14, 2012, can be replaced to their then current height
if completely destroyed by natural causes and only if the applicant presents
engineering data to the Town Council that the replacement tower poses no
substantial threat to the surrounding property owners.
      (7)   Nonconforming towers. All nonconforming transmission towers
existing as of the effective date of this section may be replaced if damaged by
no more than 50%. Those towers that are located prior to May 14, 2012 can be
replaced to their current height if completely destroyed by natural causes and
only if the applicant presents engineering data to the Town Council that the
replacement poses no threat to the surrounding property owners.
      (8)   Abandoned towers. Any tower, antenna, accessory structure or
equipment that is not used for communication purposes for more than 180
consecutive days shall be considered abandoned; and once considered abandoned,
the tower and all structures, buildings, fences, cables, anchors and wiring
shall be removed by the owner within 90 days.
      (9)   Removal of towers. Where removal of any tower, antenna, accessory
structure or equipment is planned or required herein, a performance bond in the
amount of the anticipated removal costs of all such structures, buildings,
fences, cables, anchors and wiring as determined by a state registered engineer
is required.
   (B)   Telecommunication facility plans. No telecommunications facility shall
be constructed or permitted without a set of facility plans bearing an
engineer’s seal that has been filed with and approved by the Zoning
Administrator and Building Inspector. Telecommunications facility plans shall
contain the following:
      (1)   Fee. A fee determined by the town’s fee schedule;
      (2)   Narrative. A written narrative of the development plan;
      (3)   Development impact statement. The impact on the environment (trees,
run-off, waste disposal, emissions, historic property impact and impact on
other properties);
      (4)   Co-location on existing towers. Documentation that co-location on
existing towers or structures within a radius of 10,500 feet was attempted by
the applicant, but found unfeasible by the applicant with reasons noted;
      (5)   Co-location on proposed tower. A notarized affidavit that states
the applicant’s willingness to allow co location on the proposed tower, at a
fair market price and in a timely manner, of any other service provided and
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC);
      (6)   Site plan. A site plan is required. The Zoning Administrator shall
uniformly determine the level of detail for the required site plans;
      (7)   Other permits. Copies of all county, state and federal permits with
the application building permit;
      (8)   Elevation drawings. Elevation drawings of all towers, antennas and
accessory structures and equipment, indicating height, design and colors;
      (9)   Landscape plan. If visible from any public road, a landscape plan
at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet shall indicate how the applicant proposes
to screen any service structure, accessory structure or equipment from view.
Indigenous vegetation shall be used in all plantings. A permanent maintenance
plan shall be provided for the plantings;
      (10)   FCC and FAA certifications. Certification that all antenna and
equipment comply with FCC regulations for radio frequency radiation and all
towers, antennas and equipment meet Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
aviation and navigation requirements;
      (11)   NEPA compliance. A copy of approved National Environmental Policy
Act of 1969 (NEPA), being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4321 et seq., compliance report for all
towers, antennas, accessory structures or equipment proposed for the proposed
site;
      (12)   Structural requirements. Documentation signed and sealed by a
North Carolina registered engineer that indicates any proposed tower,
structure, building, cables, anchors and wiring meets the structural and
support requirements of the Standard Building Code and the co-location
requirements of this section;
      (13)   Liability. The tower owner shall provide proof of liability
insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up to $1,000,000 in the
aggregate, which may arise from the erection and/or operation of the facility
during its life at no cost to the town, in a form approved by the Town
Attorney. The proof of insurance shall be provided to the town before the tower
is constructed and during each year of the tower’s existence, without regard to
its actual operation. Copies of any policy cancellation, revision or renewal
shall be provided to the town by the owner and or the insurer;
      (14)   Other approvals, certifications or recommendations. Appropriate
approvals, certifications or recommendations required to allow review of
approval criteria such as sight line analysis, aerial photographs or other such
tests as determined by the Zoning Administrator; and
      (15)   Special use. The allowance of telecommunication facilities shall
be a conditional special use and allowed in districts zoned Light Industry (IL)
or Heavy Industry (IH) in the town.
(Prior Code, § 153.147) (Ord. 12-04, passed 5-14-2012; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.188 HOME BASED BUSINESS.
   (A)   A home based business as defined in §
154.035 is allowed and shall be governed by the following requirements and
conditions:
      (1)   The occupation is clearly incidental to or secondary to the primary
residential use of the property. The home based business may be situated in a
detached accessory structure; however, the accessory structure must comply with
the terms of the North Carolina State Building Code and with all local zoning
and building codes and state/county/local mandated health and safety
regulations. Accessory structure may not be larger than the principle dwelling;
      (2)   Only two person other than those residing in the home shall be
engaged in the occupation;
      (3)   The home shall continue to be used principally as a dwelling;
      (4)   The occupation which may include the sale of products directly
associated with the allowed business activity, shall be conducted between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
      (5)   Home based businesses must be located more than 500 feet from the
nearest residential structure on any adjacent property; and
      (6)   The applicant must secure a special use permit from the town’s
Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   In connection with the operation of a home occupation, it shall not be
permitted:
      (1)   To have exterior displays, or a display of products visible from or
on the adjacent right-of-way;
      (2)   To store materials or products outside of a principal or accessory
building or other structure that is not screened with either a landscaped,
vegetative buffer or fencing; and
      (3)   To produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare or other
objectionable effects.
   (C)   Home based business may consist of services listed as follows:
      (1)   Screen printing;
      (2)   Woodworking;
      (3)   Storage for contractor services;
      (4)   Appliance repair;
      (5)   Those activities listed as home occupations under §
154.185; and
      (6)   Other home based businesses deemed comparable to those listed above
by the Board of Adjustment.
(Prior Code, § 153.148) (Ord. 2013-03, passed 2-11-2013; Ord. 2022-03, passed
4-11-2022)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.200 ENFORCING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her agent shall administer and enforce this
chapter.
   (B)   This individual shall be designated Zoning Administrator by the Town
Manager and shall accept the duties outlined in §
154.201.
(Prior Code, § 153.160) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.201 DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall act under the provisions of Zoning
Board of Adjustment law (G.S. § 160D-402), which provides for the decisions of
an administrative official charged with the enforcement of any ordinance
adopted pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Pursuant to this and other authorities set out in state law, the
Zoning Administrator will be responsible for the processing, review and
enforcement of all provisions adopted as part of this chapter. These activities
will consist of, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Receipt of applications for permits;
      (2)   Issuance or denial of permits;
      (3)   Documentation of reasons for denial of permits;
      (4)   Issuance of certificates of occupancy or compliance;
      (5)   Posting and/or mailing of notices;
      (6)   Issuance of stop orders pursuant to violations;
      (7)   Revocation of permits;
      (8)   Issuance of certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses;
      (9)   Receipt of notices of appeal;
      (10)   Maintain file of documentation of individual cases;
      (11)   Initiate all actions related to the above activities;
      (12)   Serve as staff to Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment;
and
      (13)   Explain the chapter requirements to the public.
   (C)   If inspecting, the Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Officer must
enter the premises during reasonable hours and upon presenting credentials;
must have consent of premises owner or an administrative search warrant to
inspect areas not open to the public.
   (D)   Must provide written notice of determination by personal delivery,
electronic mail or first-class mail to the property owner and party seeking
determination, if different from the owner.
(G.S. § 160D-403(b))
(Prior Code, § 153.161) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.202 ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Upon the finding of any inappropriate or illegal activities on the
part of any citizen which would violate the provisions of this chapter, a
written notice of violation shall be given to the holder of the development
approval and property owner and may also be given to the occupant or person
undertaking the work or activity on property. The person providing the notice
of violation shall certify to the local government that the notice was
provided.
   (B)   The notice of violation shall indicate the following:
      (1)   The nature of the violation;
      (2)   The action necessary to correct the violation;
      (3)   The date by which corrective action should be taken and completed;
      (4)   The action which will take place if such corrective action is not
taken;
      (5)   When such action has not been taken or is deemed inadequate based
upon division (B)(2) of this section, an order for the discontinuance of the
use or occupation of any land, building or structure or any illegal additions,
alterations or structural changes thereto may be issued;
      (6)   Any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance
with, or to prevent violation of, any provisions of this chapter; and
      (7)   Such actions may be appealed as provided in §
154.225.
(Prior Code, § 153.162) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.203 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered until a zoning permit shall have been issued, except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except after written order from
the Board of Adjustment. No building permit for the purpose of erection,
extension or alteration of any building shall be issued before an application
has been made and a zoning permit issued.
   (A)   A zoning permit is also required in advance of:
      (1)   A change in use of any building, land or renovation thereof; and
      (2)   Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered or moved.
   (B)   A zoning permit shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a
building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.163) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-9-1997; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.204 COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be accompanied
with the following before acceptance:
   (A)   Plans showing the dimensions and shape of the parcel to be built upon;
   (B)   The exact size, uses and location on the parcel of any existing
building;
   (C)   The exact size, uses and location on the parcel of any proposed
building;
   (D)   The total number of dwellings, commercial uses or industrial units if
more than one is located on the parcel; and
   (E)   Other information as may be necessary to determine conformance with
and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.164) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.205 PROCESSING OF APPLICATION; PLANS AND FEES.
   The following will be the minimum requirements set forth for processing and
review of an application:
   (A)   (1)   Two copies of the application shall be provided for the Zoning
Administrator;
      (2)   One copy shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning
Administrator, either approved or disapproved and attested to name by this
signature on such copy; and
      (3)   One copy, either approved or disapproved, and attested to same by
Zoning Administrator shall be retained on file by the town.
   (B)   A fee schedule appears in §
154.207; and
   (C)   (1)   A development approval shall be provided in writing and the
application must be made by the person with a property interest or a contract
to purchase the property or authorized agent of the landowner.
      (2)   Unless provided otherwise by law, all rights, privileges, benefits,
burdens and obligations created by development approvals made pursuant to G.S.
Chapter 160D attach to and run with the land.
(Prior Code, § 153.165) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.206 MISREPRESENTATIONS AND MISUNDERSTANDINGS.
   Any misunderstanding or misrepresentation, either verbal or written in any
form, such as a permit, conveyed by the town staff or anyone representing the
town shall be ultimately resolved by this chapter. If further doubt is still
present, the Board of Adjustment will resolve the issue. The appropriate
inspector may revoke and require the return of any permit by notifying the
permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall
be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans
or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of
any applicable state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in
violated of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked.
(Prior Code, § 153.166) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.207 FEE SCHEDULE.
Planning, Zoning and Land Use Regulation/Disturbance Fees
Description Fee
Planning, Zoning and Land Use Regulation/Disturbance Fees
Description                                               Fee
Zoning compliance certificate/permit                      $50
Sign permit                                               $25
Driveway permit fee (town streets only)                   $25
Rezoning request                                          $200—$350 + $10/AC
Board of Adjustment cases
   Variance                                            $200
   Appeals from Zoning Administrator Interpretation of $200
ordinance
Special use permits                                       $250
   Planned unit developments
   Town home type developments
   Multi-use (nonresidential) buildings
Zoning ordinance text amendment (only)                    $100
Zoning ordinance text and map amendment                   $100
Annexation petition (voluntary)                           $50
Sketch plan review                                        $100
Preliminary plat (subdivision)                            $200
Copy charges for maps and drawings maintained by the town
   Zoning map, ETJ and land use; color copies          $25
   Copies of maps on file; black and white copies      $10
   Copy charges for ordinances:
      Zoning                                        $25
      Subdivision                                   $25
 
(Prior Code, § 153.167) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2002 06, passed 11-12-2002; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 154.220 CREATION OF BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   There is created a Board of Adjustment, hereinafter referred to
as the Board, consisting of five regular members and two alternates.
      (2)   Four of the regular members and one alternate shall be appointed by
the Town Council. One regular member and one alternate shall be appointed by
the Washington County Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The members of the Board serving on the effective date of this
chapter, under the zoning chapter prior hereto, shall be considered as the five
members to be appointed by the Town Council, and each shall serve the balance
of the term to which he or she has been appointed.
   (C)   Those members so appointed by the Board of Commissioners shall also
extend their appointment through the remainder of their designated term. Such
members shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 153.175) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Board of Adjustment, see G. S. § 160D-302
§ 154.221 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The appointment of members to the Board shall comply with the following
procedures and the criteria set forth in §
154.222.
   (A)   Municipal members. In January of each year, the Town Council shall
review all appointments, making any necessary new appointment for a term
beginning on January 13 of the year of the appointment.
   (B)   Extraterritorial members. The ETJ population estimate must be updated
at least with each decennial census for proportional representation on the
Board.
   (C)   Duration of appointments. All appointments shall be for three-year
terms unless otherwise designated. Any appointment made to fill an unexpired
term shall extend to the original expiration date of such unexpired term.
Members may serve no more than two consecutive terms.
   (D)   Attendance.
      (1)   When in session the Board of Adjustment will maintain an accurate
attendance record and ensure that absent members’ names are included within the
proceedings minutes.
      (2)   BOA will be allowed two absences during a 12-consecutive month
period, upon a third absence this absence will be considered as a resignation
from the BOA.
   (E)   Vacancy. When a vacancy occurs (excluding an ETJ member), the senior
alternate will be considered for the vacancy by the Town Council at the next
scheduled Council meeting, and may be appointed to fill the remainder of the
term of the resigned member, or take any action the Town Council deems prudent.
   (F)   Oath. All members appointed shall, before entering their duties,
qualify by taking an oath of office.
(Prior Code, § 153.176) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Res.
11-05, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.222 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   The following represent the minimal requirements of appointed members to the
Board.
   (A)   Municipal members. These members shall have a permanent residence
within the corporate limits of the town and shall so reside during their term
of appointment.
   (B)   Extraterritorial members. These members shall have permanent residence
within the extraterritorial planning area of the town and shall so reside
during their term of appointment.
(Prior Code, § 153.177) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.223 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT MEETINGS.
   The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairperson and shall elect such
subordinate officers as authorized by the Town Council. The Board of Adjustment
will follow statutory procedures for all quasi-judicial development decisions,
including variances, special use permits and appeals of administrative
determinations. For decisions requiring a quasi-judicial process all mandatory
procedures outline in G.S. § 160D-406 will be followed. Meetings of the Board
shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the
majority of the Board may determine. Such Chairperson or, in his or her
absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
every question, or his or her absence or failure to vote, indicating such fact,
and also keep records of its examination and any other official action.
(Prior Code, § 153.178) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.224 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The responsibilities of the Board of Adjustment shall include the following
actions.
   (A)   Exceptions. The Board shall pass on exceptions to the zoning code
through the variance procedures outlined in §
154.227.
   (B)   Map. The Board may interpret any conflicts or questions arising from
the official zoning map.
   (C)   Boundaries. The Board may pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or
zoning district boundaries.
   (D)   Interpretation of ordinance. The Board shall provide for the
enforcement of this chapter and regulations prescribed in its adoption.
      (1)   The Board shall hold an evidentiary hearing to gather competent,
material and substantial evidence to establish the facts of the case; the
evidentiary hearing must have testimony under oath; must establish written
findings of fact and conclusions of law.
(G.S. § 160D-406)
      (2)   The Board Chair shall rule at the evidentiary hearing on objections
to inclusion or exclusion of administrative material; such ruling may be
appealed to the full Board.
(G.S. 160D-406(d))
      (3)   The Board shall allow parties with standing to participate fully in
the evidentiary hearing, including presenting evidence, cross-examining
witnesses, objecting to evidence and making legal arguments; may allow non-
parties to present competent, material and substantial evidence that is not
repetitive.
(G.S. § 160D-406(d))
   (E)   Administrative questions. The Board shall pass on administrative
questions and their modification based upon the enforcement of this chapter. In
so doing, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to
protect the continuing application of this chapter.
   (F)   Filing fee. To hear and decide any appeal or review any order,
requirement, decision or determination by the Zoning Administrator, a fee, as
stated in §
154.207, shall be paid to the town to cover advertising and administrative
expenses. In the case of an appeal that is subsequently decided in favor of the
applicant, the fee shall be returned to the applicant upon his or her request
within 30 days of the overturning decision. The applicant is responsible for
the burden of initiating the reimbursement.
   (G)   Due process. Members of the Board of Adjustment shall not participate
in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected
persons’ constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible
violations of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having a
fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change,
undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial, business or other
associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in
the outcome of the matter.
(Prior Code, § 153.179) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.225 APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   Generally. Any citizen may bring before the Board of Adjustment
an appeal concerning any action related to the enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   Administrative determination. An aggrieved individual shall have 30
days to file an appeal for an administrative determination. It will be presumed
that if the notice of determination was sent by mail, it was received on the
third business day after it was sent.
   (B)   Appeals procedure. Such appeals must adhere to the following
procedures:
      (1)   Provide written notice of an appeal to Zoning Administrator. The
official who made the decision (or his or her successor if the official is no
longer employed) is required to appear as a witness in the appeal;
(G.S. § 160D-406)
      (2)   The reasons and circumstances for the appeal;
      (3)   The corrective actions which are requested;
      (4)   The concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to reverse
any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator,
or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to
pass under the provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   Appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be to the
Superior Court of Washington County. By statute, review of BOA decisions is by
the court;
      (6)   All enforcement actions, including fines, shall be paused during
the appeal process; and
      (7)   Appeals of administrative decisions shall go directly to the Board
of Adjustment
(Prior Code, § 153.180) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.226 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon notification by the Zoning Administrator that the requirements of
§
154.225 have been fulfilled by the applicant, the case shall be addressed by
the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   The following procedures shall be observed by the Board of Adjustment:
      (1)   A reasonable time shall be fixed, not to exceed 30 days from
notification, for the hearing of such appeals;
      (2)   Appropriate public notice of the hearing shall be provided to the
appellant by the Board of Adjustment, with time, place and date of the hearing;
      (3)   Fifteen days’ notice shall be given adjoining property owners; and
      (4)   At the hearing, the Board shall make a determination as to the
appeal.
   (C)   The Town Council shall be informed of such action and the Zoning
Administrator shall enforce the ruling. All action shall be based upon a four-
fifths majority vote of the Board of Adjustment according to the general
statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 153.181) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.227 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Based upon the procedures outlined in §
154.226, a variance from the terms of this chapter may be granted.
   (B)   All of the following must be observed by the Board of Adjustment in
the granting of any variance:
      (1)   The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
      (2)   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure or building involved and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures or buildings in the same district;
      (3)   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter;
      (4)   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from
the actions of the applicant; and
      (5)   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other land,
structures or buildings in the same zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 153.182) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
§ 154.240 RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be responsibility of the Town Council to amend, supplement or
change the text, regulations and zoning map according to the procedures
outlined below:
   (A)   Shall refer request to the Planning Board (see §
154.242) outlining actions to be addressed;
   (B)   Shall provide the Planning Board with 35 days to render a
recommendation;
   (C)   Shall provide notice and public hearing pursuant to §
154.241 of this subchapter; and
   (D)   Shall act upon the request after the public hearing is conducted in
accordance with §
154.241 during any properly scheduled meeting and/or at the next regularly-
scheduled meeting following the public hearing process in accordance with §
154.241.
(Prior Code, § 153.190) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 7-28-2014; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.241 NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING.
   The following prescribe the requirement concerning timing and content of
notice for the purpose of public hearing.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   A notice of public hearing shall be given once a week for two
successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
      (2)   (Such notice shall be published the first time not less than ten
days nor more than 25 days prior to the date scheduled for such public hearing.
In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included but the
day of the hearing shall be included.)
   (B)   Contents. The notice shall contain all pertinent information related
to the change, indicating the area affected by recognizable landmarks and the
exact change being requested citing the sections of this chapter so affected.
   (C)   Zoning map amendment. The owners of affected parcels of land and the
owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land shall be mailed a
notice of the hearing on a proposed zoning map amendment by first class mail at
the last addresses listed for such owners on the county tax abstracts.
Properties are “abutting” even if separated by a street, railroad or other
transportation corridor.
      (1)   This notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten but not more
than 25 days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (2)   The town shall prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site
proposed for the amendment or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-
way. It shall be posted within the same time period specified for mailed
notices of the hearing.
      (3)   When multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map
amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the town
shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.
(Prior Code, § 153.191) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.242 PLANNING BOARD RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Planning Board (see § 154.244) shall be the Advisory Board to the Town
Council on the following matters related to the content of this chapter.
   (A)   Types of review. The Planning Board shall act on the following and
make appropriate recommendations to the Town Council concerning matters
outlined below.
      (1)   Every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or
appeal to this chapter shall be referred to the Planning Board for its
recommendation and comment on consistency with adopted plans.
      (2)   All requests for a change in the official zoning map shall include
a description of the property involved and the names and addresses of current
abutting property owners. (Note: all necessary fees to cover costs of
advertising as required by this chapter shall be collected.)
      (3)   Periodically review the district designations to ensure that land
development is taking place within the intent of this chapter and its parts.
   (B)   Meeting procedures. Minutes shall be kept of all proceedings.
(Prior Code, § 153.192) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.243 PLANNING BOARD COMPOSITION.
   The following will guide the appointment of Planning Board members:
   (A)   Responsibility of appointments.
      (1)   Municipal members: These four members shall be appointed by the
Town Council.
      (2)   Extraterritorial member: The one member shall be appointed by the
County Board of Commissioners. (Should the County Board of Commissioners fail
to make the appointment within 90 days of notice, the Town Council may make
such appointment.) ETJ population estimate must be updated at least with each
decennial census for proportional representation on the Board.
      (3)   All members appointed shall, before entering their duties, qualify
by taking an oath of office.
   (B)   Time of appointment.
      (1)   Date. In January of each year, the Town Council and the County
Board of Commissioners shall appoint new members to the Planning Board for a
term beginning on January thirteenth of the year of the appointment to last for
three years, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect
the term of any member incumbent on the effective date of this chapter.
      (2)   Terms. Planning Board members shall each serve three-year,
staggered terms with each member serving until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified, as defined in division (A)(3) above. Members are
allowed to miss three Planning Board meetings during any 12-month period. The
fourth absence shall constitute a voluntary resignation from the Planning
Board. Any appointment made to fill an unexpired term shall extend to the
original expiration date of such unexpired term. In accordance with G.S. §
160A-62, Planning Board members shall continue to hold office until their
successors are chosen and qualified.
      (3)   Vacancy. Any vacancy in the membership of the Planning Board other
than by reason of the expiration of term of office shall be filled when such
vacancy occurs for the unexpired term only. The vacancy shall be filled by the
most senior alternate board member, if possible.
(Prior Code, § 153.193) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
passed 6-10-2002; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-11a, passed 2-10-
2025)
§ 154.244 PLANNING BOARD APPOINTMENTS.
   The following will guide the appointment of the appropriate members as
outlined in this section.
   (A)   Responsibility of appointments.
      (1)   Municipal members. These four members shall be appointed by the
Town Council.
      (2)   Extraterritorial member. ETJ population estimate must be updated at
least with each decennial census for proportional representation on the Board.
      (3)   Oath. All members appointed shall, before entering their duties,
qualify by taking an oath of office.
   (B)   Time of appointment.
      (1)   Date. In January of each year, the Town Council and the County
Board of Commissioners shall appoint new members to the Planning Board for a
term beginning on January 13 of the year of the appointment to last for three
years, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the
term of any member incumbent on the effective date of this chapter. Each year
the Town Council may reaffirm members for up to nine years, or take any action
concerning membership the Town Council determines is appropriate.
      (2)   Terms. Planning Board members shall each serve three-year,
staggered terms with each member serving until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. Planning Board members may serve up to nine years.
Members are allowed to miss three Planning Board meetings during any 12-month
period. Upon the fourth absence this shall constitute a voluntary resignation
from the Planning Board.
      (3)   Vacancy. Any vacancy in the membership of the Planning Board other
than by reason of the expiration of term of office shall be filled when such
vacancy occurs for the unexpired term only. The vacancy shall be filled by the
most senior alternate Board member. The Town Council shall affirm the
appointment of the alternate to the Planning Board or take any action the Town
Council deems prudent at the next scheduled Town Council meeting.
(Prior Code, § 153.194) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Res.
11-06, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.245 CITIZEN COMMENT.
   If any resident or property owner in the town submits a written statement
regarding a proposed amendment, modification or repeal to a zoning regulation
(including a text or map amendment) ordinance to the Clerk to the Board at
least two business days prior to the proposed vote on such change, the Clerk to
the Board shall deliver such written statement to the Town Council. If the
proposed change is the subject of a quasi-judicial proceeding under G.S. §
160D-705 or any other statute, the Clerk shall provide only the names and
addresses of the individuals providing written comment, and the provision of
such names and addresses to all members of the Board shall not disqualify any
member of the Board from voting.
(Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.246 FINAL ACTION.
   (A)   Hearing. The Town Council shall hold a legislative hearing to consider
an amendment.
   (B)   Vote of Council. The Board shall permit the adoption of an amendment
on first reading by simple majority.
   (C)   Plan consistency. When adopting or rejecting any zoning text or map
amendment, the Town Council shall approve a brief statement describing whether
its action is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive plan or
land use plan. The requirement for a plan consistency statement may also be met
by a clear indication in the minutes of the Town Council that at the time of
action on the amendment the Town Council was aware of and considered the
Planning Board’s recommendations and any relevant portions of an adopted
comprehensive plan or land use plan.
   (D)   Statement of reasonableness. A statement of reasonableness shall be
provided by the Town Council for zoning map amendments. This statement may
consider factors specified in G.S. § 160D-605(b).
   (E)   Inconsistent map amendment. If a zoning map amendment is adopted and
the action is deemed inconsistent with the adopted plan, the zoning amendment
shall have the effect of also amending any future land-use map in the approved
plan, and no additional request or application for a plan amendment shall be
required.
   (F)   CAMA. For a future land use map that is deemed amended, if it is a
CAMA plan, then such amendment is not effective until it goes through the CAMA
plan-amendment process.
(G.S. 160D-501).
(Prior Code, § 153.196) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.247 THIRD-PARTY DOWN-ZONINGS PROHIBITED.
   No amendment to zoning regulations or a zoning map that down-zones property
shall be initiated nor is it enforceable without the written consent of all
property owners whose property is the subject of the down-zoning amendment,
unless the down-zoning amendment is initiated by the town or the landowner.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
STATUTORY VESTED RIGHT PROVISIONS
§ 154.260 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to implement the provisions of G.S. §
160D-108 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established upon
the approval of a site specific development plan.
(Prior Code, § 153.205) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.261 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Town Council, Board of Adjustment or other board or
official designated by ordinance or this chapter as being authorized to grant
the specific zoning or land use permit or approval that constitutes a site
specific development plan.
   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
      (1)   A plan of land development submitted to the town for purposes of
obtaining one of the following zoning or land use permits or approvals:
         (a)   A zoning permit (when filed in accordance with §
154.163);
         (b)   A special use permit (when filed in accordance with §§ 153.050
through 153.053);
         (c)   A variance (when filed in accordance with § 153.115); and
         (d)   Subdivision review procedures (when filed in accordance with §§
155.55 through 155.58 of this chapter).
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a variance, a sketch plan
nor any other document that fails to describe with reasonable certainty the
type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall
constitute a site specific development plan.
   ZONING VESTED RIGHT. A right pursuant to G.S. § 160D-108 to undertake and
complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of
an approved site specific development plan.
(Prior Code, § 153.206) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.262 ESTABLISHMENT OF A ZONING VESTED RIGHT.
   (A)   A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid
approval, or conditional approval, by the Town Council or Board of Adjustment,
as applicable, of a site specific development plan, following notice and
legislative or quasi-judicial hearing.
   (B)   The approving authority may approve a site specific development plan
upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) of this section, approval of a
site specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained
shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until the necessary variance
is obtained.
   (D)   A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the
effective date of the approval authority’s action or ordinance relating
thereto.
   (E)   The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude the
application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not
affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or regulations
that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land-
use regulation by the town, including, but not limited to, building, fire,
plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. Otherwise applicable new or amended
regulations shall become effective with respect to property that is subject to
a site specific development plan upon the expiration or termination of the
vested right in accordance with this chapter.
   (F)   A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to and
run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific development
plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise
such right while applicable.
(Prior Code, § 153.207) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.263 APPROVAL PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for site
specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the designated
approval authority for the specific type of zoning or land use permit or
approval for which application is made.
   (B)   In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of
a site specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of
application, on a form to be provided by the town, that a zoning vested right
is being sought.
   (C)   Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site specific
development plan shall contain the following notation: Approval of this plan
establishes a zoning vested right under G.S. § 160D-108. Unless terminated at
an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall be valid until (date).
   (D)   Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific
development plan, nothing in this chapter shall exempt such a plan from
subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals
are not inconsistent with the original approval.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the revocation of the original
approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms and
conditions of the approval or this chapter.
   (F)   The applicant shall not be made to wait for final action on a proposed
change before proceeding if the applicant elected determination under prior
rules.
(Prior Code, § 153.208) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.264 DURATION.
   (A)   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall
remain vested for a period of two years unless specifically and unambiguously
provided otherwise pursuant to division (B) of this section. This vesting shall
not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a site specific
development plan unless expressly provided by the approval authority at the
time the amendment or modification is approved.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, the
approval authority may provide that rights shall be vested for a period
exceeding two years but not exceeding five years where warranted in light of
all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size of the
development, the level of investment, the need for or desirability of the
development, economic cycles and market conditions. These determinations shall
be in the sound discretion approval authority at the time the site specific
development plan is approved. Multi-phase developments, which shall be defined
as long-term projects of at least 25 acres shall be vested up to seven years.
   (C)   Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of G.S.
§ 160D-111 and the revocation provisions of G.S. § 160D-1115 shall apply,
except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the
running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is outstanding.
   (D)   If a building permit is issued, that permit shall be valid for six
months after issuance unless work under the permit has commenced. Building
permits also expire is work is discontinued for a period of 12 months after
work has commenced.
(Prior Code, § 153.209) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.265 TERMINATION.
   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall
terminate:
   (A)   At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings
and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed;
   (B)   With the written consent of the affected landowner;
   (C)   Upon findings by the Town Council, by ordinance after notice and a
public hearing, that natural or human-made hazards on or in the immediate
vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare if the project were to proceed as
contemplated in the site specific development plan;
   (D)   (1)   Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all
costs, expenses and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not
limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural,
planning, marketing, legal and other consultant’s fees incurred after approval
by the town, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid.
      (2)   Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the
property which is caused by such action;
   (E)   Upon findings by the Town Council, by ordinance after notice and a
hearing, that the landowner or his or her representative intentionally supplied
inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a
difference in the approval by the approval authority of the site specific
development plan;
   (F)   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or
regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific, in
which case the approval authority may modify the affected provisions, upon a
finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the
plan, by ordinance after notice and a hearing; or
   (G)   All revocations of development approvals shall follow the same process
that was used for the approval.
(Prior Code, § 153.210) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.266 VOLUNTARY ANNEXATION.
   (A)   A petition for annexation filed with the town under G.S. § 160A-31 or
G.S. § 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not any
zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition has
been established under G. S. § 160D-108.
   (B)   A statement that declares that no zoning vested right has been
established under G.S. § 160D-108, or the failure to sign a statement declaring
whether or not a zoning vested right has been established, shall be binding on
the landowner and any such zoning vested right shall be terminated.
(Prior Code, § 153.211) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.267 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be deemed to create any vested
right other than those established pursuant to G. S. § 160D-108.
(Prior Code, § 153.212) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
§ 154.268 REPEALER.
   In the event that G. S. § 160D-108 is repealed, this subchapter shall be
deemed repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective.
(Prior Code, § 153.213) (Ord. 91-6, passed 8-12-1991; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-
11-2022)
SPECIAL USES
§ 154.280 APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   Special uses add flexibility to the zoning code by allowing uses which would
otherwise be undesirable to be established in designated districts under
conditions imposed by the Board of Adjustment. Applications for special use
permits shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall transmit the
application to the Board of Adjustment. After a evidentiary hearing, as
required by §§
154.220 through
154.227, the Board of Adjustment may grant permission to establish special uses
as permitted in the district regulations, if the Board of Adjustment finds
that:
   (A)   The proposed use does not affect adversely the general plans for the
physical development of the town as embodied in these regulations and in any
plan or portion thereof adopted by the Planning Board;
   (B)   The proposed use will not be contrary to the purposes stated for these
regulations;
   (C)   The proposed use will not affect adversely the health and safety of
residents and workers in the town;
   (D)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of
adjacent properties or other neighborhood uses;
   (E)   The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses;
   (F)   The proposed use will be placed on a lot of a sufficient size to
satisfy the space requirements of that use;
   (G)   The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of
the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement,
noise or fume generation, or type of physical activity;
   (H)   The standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may
be granted have been met;
   (I)   The Board of Adjustment will follow the quasi-judicial process as
outlined in G.S. § 160D-406 when reviewing special use permit applications and
will not impose conditions on the special use permits that are not within the
statutory authority to impose as stated in G.S. § 160D-705(c);
   (J)   The proposed use shall be subject to the minimum area, setback and
other locational requirements of the zoning district in which it would be
located;
   (K)   The proposed use shall be subject to the off-street parking and
service requirements of these regulations;
   (L)   Wherever the Board of Adjustment shall find, in the case of any permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms,
conditions or restrictions, upon which such permit was granted are not being
with, the Board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to
all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a evidentiary hearing;
and
   (M)   The Board shall obtain the applicant’s/landowner’s written consent to
conditions related to a special use approval to ensure enforceability.
(Prior Code, § 153.220) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.281 EFFECT UPON SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Those uses which existed prior to the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendments thereto, and permitted only as special uses in the district
in which they are located, or had received a special use permit from the Board
of Adjustment, shall be considered to be legally established special uses.
   (B)   Any expansion, addition or other change for which a zoning certificate
is required shall be heard, considered and approved or disapproved by the Board
of Adjustment in the same manner as an original application for special use
approval.
(Prior Code, § 153.221) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.282 REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN SPECIAL USES.
   The Board of Adjustment may grant permission for the establishment of the
following uses in specified districts, under the following suggested conditions
or any additional specific conditions set forth by the Board.
   (A)   Bulk fuel storage areas. Above-ground fuel tanks used for commercial
wholesale or retail purposes shall be enclosed with a fence at least six feet
high.
   (B)   Cemeteries.
      (1)   All cemeteries shall have a minimum area of 8,500 square feet.
      (2)   Cemeteries must be enclosed by a fence or wall.
      (3)   All burial plots shall be setback a minimum of:
         (a)   Fifteen feet from the front property line;
         (b)   Ten feet from the side property line;
         (c)   Fifteen feet from the rear property line;
         (d)   Fifty feet from any existing wells; and
         (e)   Fifty feet from the high-water mark of any spring, stream, lake
reservoir of other known source of water, and shall not be located in a special
flood hazard area.
      (4)   All cemeteries shall comply with all applicable local, state and
federal environmental and public health laws (including the requirements of
G.S. Chapter 65). Burials within a family cemetery must be supervised by a
licensed funeral director.
      (5)   Human remains shall be buried beneath the surface of the ground and
shall be indicated by a permanent visible marker or monument.
      (6)   The owner of any property which contains all or part of a cemetery
is responsible for maintaining the cemetery in compliance with the town’s,
Chapter 94, Garbage, Refuse and Weeds of this code of ordinances.
      (7)   Operators of all commercial cemeteries must be properly licensed
through the state’s Cemetery Commission.
   (C)   Dry cleaning, laundry. According to district requirements providing
the applicant shows adequate safe storage and disposal of chemicals, and
control of noise and heat to surrounding buildings.
   (D)   Elementary and middle schools/hospitals/emergency service ingress-
egress areas. The minimum distances between these uses and commercial or
manufacturing uses which generate heavy traffic flows or extensive congestion
shall be 300 feet.
   (E)   Home occupations. See §
154.185.
   (F)   Junk yards/salvage yards.
      (1)   The minimum front, side and rear yards shall be 50 feet.
      (2)   The storage area shall be screened by a continuous visual barrier
at least eight feet in height.
      (3)   Salvage auto parts shall not be allowed to collect water, which
provides a breeding ground for mosquitoes or other insects, nor harbor breeding
grounds for rats or other rodents.
   (G)   Kindergartens or day care. Kindergartens and day care facilities may
be permitted subject to the requirements of the district provided that:
      (1)   At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is supplied for each
child accommodated; and
      (2)   The entire play area is enclosed by a fence having a minimum height
of four feet, with child-proof gate latches, and constructed in such a manner
that ensures maximum safety of the children.
   (H)   Multi-family residential project. The development of any multi-family
residential project within either the C1 or OI Zoning Districts shall not
involve the demolition of any structure listed as historic with the State
Historic Preservation Office.
   (I)   Public utility facilities. All water treatment and sewage disposal
facilities, sanitary landfills, electric or telephone substations or other
utility facilities shall be subject to site plan review.
   (J)   Veterinary hospital/clinic/animal boarding/kennel. Subject to all
other related provisions of this chapter, this use should comply with the
following:
      (1)   Minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet;
      (2)   Minimum lot width of 100 feet;
      (3)   Minimum front yard setback of 50 feet;
      (4)   Maximum lot coverage of 50%;
      (5)   Visual buffers will be required when boarding space is provided
outside the principal structure; and
      (6)   This use could be allowed on a low intensity basis at the
discretion of the Board of Adjustment, provided all safety and nuisance
concerns are identified and addressed.
   (K)   Shopping centers. Shopping centers are allowed as conditional special
use in the C2 District after extensive site plan review and approval by the
Planning Board.
   (L)   Adult use business.
      (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this division (L), the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         ADULT USE. Any principal or accessory use which excludes minors by
reason of age. This definition does not apply to applicable alcoholic beverage
laws or voluntary restrictions of the motion picture industry.
      (2)   Conditions and requirements.
         (a)   No adult use business may be located closer than 1,000 feet to
the nearest:
            1.   Residential zone;
            2.   House of worship;
            3.   Day care center;
            4.   School;
            5.   Public park;
            6.   Public library;
            7.   Cemetery;
            8.   Motion picture theater regularly showing G or PG rated movies
to the public; and
            9.   Any other area where large numbers of minors regularly travel
or congregate
         (b)   All windows, doors, openings, entries and the like for all adult
uses shall be so located, covered, screened or otherwise treated so that views
into the interior of the establishment are not possible from any public or
semi-public area, street or way.
         (c)   The lot containing the adult use shall not be located within a
1,000 feet radius of another lot containing an adult use.
         (d)   All buildings used for permitted adult uses must be designed in
such a way as to prevent the escape of noise from the premises.
   (M)   Other special uses. Other special uses will be reviewed as to health,
safety and general nuisance risk and will be subject to conditions recommended
by staff and determined by the Board of Adjustment.
   (N)   Requirements. The requirements placed upon a special use applicant by
the Board of Adjustment shall specifically and in entirety be reduced to
written form. The requirements shall be written specifically enough as to
delineate precisely and unambiguously the requirements set forth by the Board
in the issuance of the special use permit. The written requirements are to be
signed by the Board of Adjustment Chairperson, Zoning Administrator and the
applicant prior to the issuance of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 153.222) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
11-01, passed 2-14-2010; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.283 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of site plan review is to protect and enhance
public health, safety and welfare, and aesthetic value of the built
environment. More specifically, the purpose of this review is to encourage site
planning in advance of construction so that issues of nuisance (such as noise,
glare of lights, odor, unsightly or unsafe buildings and parking areas, and the
like). Crime prevention, maintenance of property values, and aesthetic value
can be addressed through thoughtful site design.
   (B)   Where required. Site plan review and approval shall be required for
all new developments and expansion of existing developments on real property in
certain districts in accordance with the provisions of this section, and no
building permit or other authorization for development shall be issued prior to
such approval. Site plan review shall be required for all development proposals
in the Riverfront Development Overlay District, all special uses and for the
following uses, whether permitted or special use, in any district:
      (1)   Golf courses;
      (2)   Multi-function recreational facilities/amusements;
      (3)   Multi-family residential development;
      (4)   Multi-use or multi-unit development on a single lot;
      (5)   Shopping centers;
      (6)   Mobile home parks;
      (7)   Home occupations; and
      (8)   Parking lots.
   (C)   Plans required. Seven copies of a site plan or plans drawn to a scale
of one inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted to the town’s Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following:
      (1)   General. Name and address of applicant, graphic scale, date and
north arrow;
      (2)   Existing conditions. A map of the property and adjacent lands
showing contours with a two feet interval; location and direction of all
watercourses, floodplain and other hazard areas; natural features; names of all
platted streets, easements and utility rights-of-way; parks and other public
open spaces; structures and their uses; town boundaries; existing water mains,
sewer lines; culverts and other underground facilities and their exact
location;
      (3)   Proposed development. A map showing the following in addition to
other requirements which may be specified by the Zoning Administrator:
         (a)   Proposed land uses and densities;
         (b)   Building types and coverage;
         (c)   Circulation patterns for vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
         (d)   Parks, playgrounds, open spaces;
         (e)   Waster disposal facilities (sewage and trash);
         (f)   Lighting; and
         (g)   Water supply, community facilities (schools, libraries, fire
stations, shopping and the like).
   (D)   Standards. The following shall be required on all site plans and for
all development reviewed.
      (1)   A minimum of 10% of the lot area being developed shall be
landscaped, including a mix of vertical (trees) and horizontal (grass/ground
cover). Major remodeling of properties in already developed sections of town
shall require landscaping to the extent possible up to the 10% requirement.
Landscaping shall be visible in large part from public thoroughfares.
      (2)   Natural landscaping shall be retained where possible to meet the
landscaping requirements.
      (3)   Unnecessary grade changes shall be avoided. Retaining walls shall
be provided where needed.
      (4)   Drainage shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator according to
accepted engineering standards.
      (5)   Off-street parking shall be buffered from the street and from
adjacent residential zones by means of landscaping a low fence, but not to the
extent of restricting visibility necessary for safety and security.
      (6)   Sidewalks and curbs shall be provided in whole or in part in those
locations where such amenities exist on adjacent properties.
      (7)   Ingress and egress locations onto public thoroughfares shall be
located in the interest of public traffic safety.
      (8)   Parking spaces shall be designated in accordance with the
requirements of this zoning code.
      (9)   There shall be reasonable access for emergency services and
vehicles.
      (10)   Outdoor lighting shall be provided for security. Such lighting
shall illuminate appropriate areas with a minimum of glare and without creating
a nuisance for adjacent properties.
      (11)   Other specified site provisions may be required as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
   (E)   Required for site plans for multi-family dwellings. The following
shall be required on those site plans for multi-family dwellings and for all
such multiple family development.
      (1)   (a)   Outdoor play space shall be provided and shall constitute a
minimum of 10% of the lot area. This requirement is in addition to landscaping
requirements.
         (b)   Parking lots are not acceptable as play space.
         (c)   This requirement may be waived or reduced in any housing
development designed and maintained exclusively as adult housing.
      (2)   Private or semi-private outdoor space shall be included for each
unit. This may include such amenities as balconies, porches or fenced yards.
      (3)   The site plan shall be designed to minimize outdoor noise.
      (4)   (a)   Buffer yards shall be required on those site plans for
commercial and industrial uses according to the following guidelines:
Recommended Buffer Yards
Type of Use Adjacent Use Buffer Type
Recommended Buffer Yards
Type of Use         Adjacent Use Buffer Type
Industry, light     Residential  Opaque
                   OI           Broken
Industry, heavy     Residential  Opaque
                   Commercial   Semi-Opaque
                   OI           Opaque
Commercial, general Residential  Opaque
Shopping venter     Residential  Opaque
 
         (b)   While the above categories serve as general guidelines, the
Zoning Administrator may require a more intense buffer system where the type of
use results in the emittance of odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, heat and/or
vibration.
      (5)   For the purpose of this requirement, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         BROKEN BUFFER. A buffer composed of intermittent visual obstructions
from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet. The broken screen buffer is
intended to create the impression of a separation of spaces without necessarily
eliminating visual contact between the spaces. It may be composed of a wall,
fence, landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or existing vegetation.
Compliance of planted vegetative buffers or natural vegetation will be judged
on the basis of the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject
species, or field observation of existing vegetation. The buffer may contain
deciduous plants.
         OPAQUE BUFFER. A screen that is opaque from the ground to a height of
at least six feet, with intermittent visual obstructions from the opaque
portion to a height of at least 20 feet. An OPAQUE BUFFER is intended to
exclude all visual contact between uses and to create a strong impression of
spatial separation. The opaque screen is composed of a wall, fence, landscaped
earth berm, planted vegetation or existing vegetation. Compliance of planted
vegetative buffers or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of the
average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or field
observation of existing vegetation. The opaque portion of the screen must be
opaque in all seasons of the year. At maturity the portion of intermittent
visual obstructions should not contain any completely unobstructed openings of
more than ten feet. The portion of the intermittent visual obstructions may
contain deciduous plants.
         SEMI-OPAQUE BUFFER. A screen that is opaque from the ground to a
height of at least three feet, with intermittent visual obstructions from the
opaque portion to a height of at least 20 feet. The SEMI-OPAQUE BUFFER is
intended to partially block visual contact between uses and to create a strong
impression of separation of spaces.
               a.   The semi-opaque screen may be composed of a wall, fence,
landscaped earth berm, planted vegetation or existing vegetation. Compliance of
planted vegetative buffers or natural vegetation will be judged on the basis of
the average mature height and density of foliage of the subject species, or
field observation of existing vegetation.
               b.   At maturity the portion of intermittent visual obstructions
should not contain any completely unobstructed openings of more than ten feet.
The portion of the intermittent visual obstructions may contain deciduous
plants.
      (6)   Where building setback distances are limited due to small lot size
or existing development, the town may substitute other mitigating measures of
comparable effectiveness (fences, beams, walls and the like) in place of buffer
yards and vegetation.
   (F)   Building structures. Building structures shall be consistent with the
surrounding area and shall be aesthetically pleasing. All exterior surfaces of
structures shall present a finished appearance.
   (G)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall review plans to assure that standard
requirements are included. Plans shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and
approved by the Town Council.
      (2)   The Building Inspector shall not issue a building permit until all
improvements required by the site plan approval have been confirmed and
accepted by the town.
      (3)   If construction has not begun within one year of the date of site
plan approval, such approval shall expire unless a request for extension is
requested by the developer and granted by the town.
(Prior Code, § 153.223) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.284 VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this
chapter or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator, or any appropriate authority or any
adjacent, nearby, or neighboring property owner who would be affected by such
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction, mandamus
or other appropriate action for proceeding to prevent occupancy or use of such
building, structure or land.
   (B)   Any agreement or arrangement between adjacent property owners
concerning buildings, structures or land use shall not circumvent any
requirements set forth by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.998) (Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense by a
fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 153.999)
   (B)   The owner of any structure failing to bring the primary structure into
compliance with §
154.054(A) shall be liable for a civil penalty in the amount of $25.
(Prior Code, § 153.044)
(Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-9-1995; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord.
2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
APPENDIX A: ZONING DISTRICT SCHEDULE
 C R20 R20A R15A R10 R7 R7A OI C1 C2 IL IH
P = Permitted use            S = Special Use            Blank or Unlisted Activity =
Prohibited Use
                                      C R20 R20A R15A R10 R7 R7A OI C1 C2 IL IH
P = Permitted use            S = Special Use            Blank or Unlisted
Activity = Prohibited Use
Adult business                                                         P
Advertising agency                                               P
Agricultural uses (no intensive         P   P
livestock)
Agricultural supply sales                                              P
Airports                                                                     P
Antiques                                                            P
Apparel sales                                                       P  P
Art galleries and working studios                                   P
Assembly and processing (farm and                                         P  P
food products)
Automobile parts sales                                                 P
Automobile repair services                                             P
Automobile sales and services                                          P
Bag manufacturers                                                         P  P
Bakery                                                              P
Bakery products                                                           P  P
Barber and beauty shops                                             P  P
Bed and breakfast/rooming house/                      S   P  S   P
tourist home
Bicycles                                                            P
Blueprinting services                                                  P
Boat manufacturers                                                        P  P
Bottled gas works                                                            P
Bottling works                                                            P  P
Brokerage firm                                                   P
Building materials, storage, sales                                        P  P
Building supplies sales                                                P
Bulk fuel storage                                                         S  P
Business services                                                P  P
Cabinetmaking and woodworking shops                                    P  P  P
Cafeterias                                                          P
Camera sales                                                        P
Candy sales                                                         P
Charitable institutions                                          P
Child care/day care/ kindergarten       S   S    S    P*  P* S   S
Chiropractic and osteopathic offices                             P     P
Churches                                S   S    S    S   S  S   P
Circuses/carnival fairs*                                                  P  P
Clothing sales                                                      P  P
Coal yards                                                                   P
Cold storage plants                                                       P  P
Commercial printing                                                 P
Commercial recreational facilities                                     S  P  P
Community centers, civic clubs,                                  P  S  P
fraternal org.
Contractors (gen. const., plumbing,                                    P
heating and the like)
Contractors storage yards                                                 P  P
Convalescent or rest homes                                       P
Dairy products processing                                                 P  P
Drug stores                                                         P
Dry cleaning/laundry                                                S  P  P  P
Duplex residences                                     P   P  P
Electrical and industrial equipment                                       P  P
Embroidery, screen printing and                                  P  P  P  P  P
graphic art studio
Equipment manufacturers/ service/                                            P
repair
Event venues                                                        P
Family care homes                       P   P    P    P   P  P
Farm machinery manufacturers                                              P  P
Farm machinery sales and repairs                                       P
Fertilizer plants                                                            P
Financial establishments (banks,                             P   P  P
S&Ls)
Fish and seafood markets                                         S  P
Florists/flowers                                                 P  P
Founderies                                                                   P
Fraternal lodge/hall                                                   P
Funeral home or mortuary                                         P     P
Furniture manufacturers                                                   P  P
Furniture sales                                                     P  P
Garages/service stations/ convenient                                      P  P
stores
Gift shops                                                          P
Golf courses                          S S
Governmental offices                                             P* P  P
Grain elevators                                                           P  P
Green power production facility                                  S        P  P
Greenhouses/nurseries                 P P   P                          P  P  P
Groceries                                                           P  P
Grounds and facilities for open air                                       P  P
games and sports
Hardware and hardware sales                                         P  P
Hobby and craft goods                                               P
Home appliance sales and services                                      P
Home occupations                        S   S    S    S   S  S   S
Hospitals                                                        P
Hotels, motels and tourist homes                                    P  P
Ice plants                                                                P  P
Incinerators                                                                 P
Indoor rec. facilities (public or                                   S  S
commercial)
Industrial research and educational                                       P  P
facilities
Insurance offices and agencies                                   P  P
Jewelry and clock manufacturers                                           P  P
Jewelry sales                                                       P
Kennels/pet boarding                                                   S  P  P
Laboratories (research and testing)                                       P  P
Laundromats                                                         P  P
Leather goods (manufacturers)                                             P  P
Leather goods (sales)                                               P
Libraries                                                 P      P
Loan companies and pawn shops                                          P
Lumber yards                                                              P  P
Machine shops                                                             P  P
Machine tool manufacturers                                                   P
Magazine and book stores                                            P
Manufacturers/processing/ assembly/                                          P
fabricating op.
Meat packing/abbattoir/ stockyards                                           P
Medical supplies and services                                       P
Medical and dental clinics                                       P
Medical and dental services                                      P
Miniature golf courses                                              P
Mobile homes - Class A                      P                P
Mobile homes - Class B                      P
Mobile home parks                                            P
Mobile home sales                                                      P
Motorcycles, motorbike sales                                           P
Multi-family residences                                   P  P
Museum and art galleries                                         P
Musical instrument manufacturers                                          P  P
Musical instrument sales                                            P
Nursing homes                                                    P     P
Off-street parking facilities                                             P  P
Optical and scientific instruments                                        P  P
Outdoor recreational uses                                           S  S  S  S
Paint sales                                                            P
Parking facilities (commercial)                                        P
Parking lots                                                        P  P
Parsonages                                                       P
Personal services                                                      P
Pet shops                                                              P
Pharmacies                                                             P
Pharmaceutical product manufacturers                                      P  P
Plumbing supplies and fixtures                                      P
Pool halls/billiard parlors                                            S
Printing, publishing and reproduction                                     P  P
establishments
Professional offices and agencies                                S  P  P
Public and private schools              S   S    S    S   S  S   P     S
Public service offices                                           P
Public utility facilities             S S   S    S    S   S  S   S  S  S  P  P
Radio and television sales                                          P
Railroad freight yards                                                       P
Real estate agencies                                             P  P
Recreational goods rentals                                          P
Recreational uses and facilities      P P   P    P    P   P  S   P
Repair and servicing of office and                                        P  P
household equipment
Restaurants, grills, taverns, snack                                 P  P
bars
Sanatoriums                                                      P     P
Sanitary landfills                                                        S  P
Sewage treatment plants                                                      P
Sheet metal shops and tinsmith shops                                      P  P
Shirt manufacturers                                                       P  P
Shoe repairs                                                        P  P
Shoe stores                                                         P  P
Shopping centers                                                       S
Short-term vacation rentals, partial    P   P    P    P   P  P
and whole
Sign manufacturers                                                        P  P
Single-family houses                    P   P    P    P   P  P   P
Sporting goods                                                      P
Stenographic, telephone answering                                P
Stone cutting; monument manufacturers                                     P  P
and sales
Storage warehouse yards                                                   P  P
Street vendors                                                      S
Studios (artists, photographers and                              P
the like)
Taxi stands                                                         P
Textile manufacturers                                                        P
Theaters                                                            P
Tire sales and services                                                P
Toy stores                                                          P
Transportation terminals                                               P
Tree farming and forestry             P P   P
Upholstery and refinishing                                          P  P
Venetian blind manuf., contractors                                        P  P
and cleaning shops
Veterinary medicine clinic/ animal                               P     S  P  P
hospital
Video gaming arcade                                                    S  P  P
Water treatment plants                                                       P
Welding shops                                                             P  P
Wholesale and jobbing establishments                                      P  P
 
(Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. passed 6-26-2007; Ord. passed 11-8-2010; Ord.
2022-02, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022; Ord. 2025-07, passed
1-6-2025; Ord. 2025-10, passed 1-6- 2025)
APPENDIX B: DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
                        Lot              Side                          Coverage
         Square   Lot   Width at Front   Yard     Rear Yard Structural Allowed
District Feet Per Depth Front    Yard    Setback  Setback   Height     Percent
         Dwelling       Setback  Setback (each              (max.)     and Feet
                        Line             side)
                        Lot              Side                        Coverage
         Square   Lot   Width at Front   Yard     Rear    Structural Allowed
District Feet Per Depth Front    Yard    Setback  Yard    Height     Percent
         Dwelling       Setback  Setback (each    Setback (max.)     and Feet
                        Line             side)
C        NA       NA    NA       NA      NA       NA      NA         30%
R-20     20,000   150   100      30      15       25      35         40% 8,000
R-20A    20,000   150   100      30      15       25      35         40% 8,000
R-15     15,000   150   90       30      15       25      35         30% 4,500
         10,000
R-10     single   150   75       30      15       20      35         40% 4,000
         16,000
         duplex
         12,000
         duplex
         7,000
R-7      single   125   60       20      10       20      35         40% 2,800
         4,000/
         add.
         unit
         12,000
         duplex
         7,000
R-7A     single   125   60       20      10       20      35         40% 2,800
         4,000/
         add.
         unit
OI       7,000    120   75       20      10       20      NA         40% 2,800
C1       NA       NA    NA       NA      NA       201     NA         NA
C2       15,000   NA    100      100     25       25      NA         NA
1.   When abutting a residential use.
 
(Ord. passed 9-12-1983; Ord. passed 10-21-1996; Ord. 2022-03, passed 4-11-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord./Session Law Date Description
Ord./
Session Date Description
Law
1807
Session - -  Town incorporated.
Laws,   1807
CH 48
1903
Session 3-2- Setting corporate limits east of ACLR depot south then to river.
Laws,   1903
CH 213
1941    3-
Session 10-  Amending Charter of town, extending limits, Conaby Creek to Welch’s Creek.
Laws,   1941
CH 215
1947
Session 6-3- Extending town limits – Welch’s Creek around to Roanoke River.
Laws,   1947
CH 624
        10-
-       24-  Annexing tract east of town, Conaby Creek to Roanoke River.
        1967
1969    4-
Session 17-  Annexing Welch’s Creek to Pine Street to Conaby Creek to Roanoke River.
Laws,   1969
CH 250
        1-
-       29-  Annexing Eastwood Estates.
        1973
        8-
-       13-  Annexing lot at Pine and Wilson Streets.
        1973
        11-
-       30-  Annexing south side of U.S. 64, 27.765 acres at Liverman Heights.
        1978
        10-
-       13-  Annexing west side of Roosevelt Avenue extended.
        1980
        6-1- Annexing the following territory, beginning on the north edge of the right-
-       1981 of-way of the Norfolk Southern Railway and the eastern edge of Conaby Creek
             Swamp.
83-3    6-1- Annexing Liverman Heights, U.S. 64.
        1981
       2-7-  
        1983
        9-9- Annexing the Woodview Apartments, beginning at an iron marker on the east
-       1985 side of the old U.S. Highway 64 at the southwest corner of D.S. Armstrong’s
             Lot.
85-6    9-9- Annexing Woodview Apartments, Wilson Street.
        1985
86-10   9-2- Annexing U.S. 64 and hospital property.
        1986
        9-8- Annexing the following territory, beginning at an iron pipe which lies south
-       1986 82° 13' 20" E 252.70 feet from a D.O.T. R/O/W monument inscribed with the
             numbers 001.
        2-
90-1    12-  Annexing U.S. 64 and Northeast Drive.
        1990
        8-
-       14-  Correcting previous annexation ordinance.
        2000
            
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Session Law Date       Description
                            Establishing the conditions for awarding non-
-                11-14-1983 exclusive franchise for community antenna
                            television systems.
                            Granting a franchise to Cablesouth Inc. to
-                12-12-1983 construct and maintain a cable television system
                            within the incorporated areas of the town.
02-03            6-10-2002  Town franchise tax on electric power ordinance.
                           
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section                     Code Section
1A-1, Rule 6(a)                  10.14
Chapter 7A                       151.24
                                 10.99;
                                 51.085;
                                 51.203;
                                 70.99;
14-4                             72.99; 92.99;
                                 132.99;
                                 152.47;
                                 152.99;
                                 153.044
14-4(a)                          93.99
14-399 et seq.                   94.05
14-410—14-415                  93.50
15-11 et seq.                    74.05
15A-501                          33.057
Chapter 20                       70.02
20-4.01                          70.02
20-4.01(7)                       70.02
20-4.01(13)                      70.02
20-4.01(16)                      70.02
20-4.01(23)                      70.02
20-4.01(25)                      70.02
20-4.01(26)                      70.02
20-4.01(27)                      70.02
20-4.01(30)                      70.02
20-4.01(38)                      70.02
20-4.01(39)                      70.02
20-4.01(46)                      70.02
20-4.01(49)                      70.02
20-129(e)                        74.04
20-140.2                         70.11
20-141                           71.06
20-153                           70.44
20-158                           70.40
20-158(b)                        71.07
20-160(a)                        70.46
20-162                           72.03
20-168(b)                        70.04
20-169                           70.40
20-219.11                        73.09
20-401(7b)                       70.02
25-3                             51.200
Chapter 29                       153.026
44A-1                            73.11
47-30                            153.077;
                                 153.078
Chapter 55A                      154.035
58-80-5—58-80-60               33.021
58-80-15                         33.021
58-80-25                         33.021
Chapter 63                       91.99
63-34                            91.35
63-35                            91.99
Chapter 65                       154.282
90-86 et seq.                    130.11
Chapter 93B                      110.05
105-109                          110.19;
                                 110.99
105-249                          110.17
105-249.l                        110.17
105-349 et seq.                  31.25
113-274                          90.01
Chapter 113A                     154.052
113A-50                          153.095
                                 153.009;
113A-100 et seq.                 154.052;
                                 154.100—
                                 154.112
113A-110                         154.023
113A-113(b)                      154.052
121-5                            110.03;
                                 110.18
122C-3(11)b                      154.035
Chapter 130A, Article 9          151.02
130A-184 et seq.                 90.20
130A-185                         90.20
130A-290                         94.20
130A-290(a)(6)                   151.02
130A-290(a)(35)                  151.02
130A-290(a)(36)                  151.02
136-102.6                        153.096
136-141 et seq.                  73.14
136-143                          73.14
Chapter 143, Art.21, Part 6      151.01
Chapter 143, Article 33C         30.16
143-143.15                       151.36
143-149(6)                       154.035
143-215.6A—143-215.6C          50.09
159-9                            31.27
159-24                           31.26
159-25                           31.26
159-29                           31.01
Chapter 160A                     51.041;
                                 91.36
Chapter 160A, Article 10         152.46
Chapter 160A, Article 16         52.01
Chapter 160A, Article 19         152.01
Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3 151.01
Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 5 151.01
Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6 152.07
Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 8 151.01
160A-31                          154.266
160A-58.1                        154.266
160A-62                          154.243
160A-64                          34.01
160A-67                          31.20
160A-69                          30.19;
                                 31.20
160A-70                          31.19;
                                 31.21
160A-71                          30.16
160A-74                          30.18
160A-147                         31.22
160A-148                         31.22
160A-162                         34.01
160A-171                         31.23
160A-173                         31.24
                                 10.99;
160A-175                         50.10;
                                 72.99;
                                 91.36
160A-175(d)                      110.99
160A-188                         90.01
160A-207                         110.19
160A-281                         33.050
160A-282                         33.058
160A-284                         33.053
160A-285                         33.055
160A-286                         33.054
160A-288                         92.06
160A-296                         Ch. 75, Sch. I
160A-303(b1)                     73.01
160A-303(b2)                     73.01
160A-303.2                       73.01
160A-314                         51.026
160A-314(b)                      51.200
160A-319                         111.01;
                                 111.11
160A-360                         10.21
160A-365                         91.99
160A-388                         152.42
160A-426                         94.07
160A-426(b)                      94.07
160A-443(5)                      152.45
160A-443(6)                      152.46
160A-446(f)                      152.42;
                                 152.43
160A-446(g)                      152.41
160A-485                         10.23
                                 153.001;
Chapter 160D                     154.022;
                                 154.023;
                                 154.205
                                 154.260;
                                 154.261;
160D-108                         154.263;
                                 154.266—
                                 154.268
160D-111                         154.264
160D-201                         154.022
160D-202                         153.060;
                                 154.035
160D-402                         154.201
160D-403(b)                      154.201
                                 154.223;
160D-406                         154.225;
                                 154.280
160D-406(d)                      154.224
160D-501                         154.246
160D-601                         154.022
160D-605                         154.023
160D-605(b)                      154.246
160D-702                         154.002
160D-705                         154.245
160D-705(c)                      154.280
160D-802                         154.035
160D-802(a)(2)                   153.081
160D-803(c)                      153.081
160D-907                         154.106
160D-1115                        154.264
163-292                          32.01
160D-302                         154.220
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Code Section
Prior Code       Code Section
10.01            10.01
10.02            10.02
10.03            10.03
10.04            10.04
10.05            10.05
10.06            10.06
10.07            10.07
10.08            10.08
10.09            10.09
10.10            10.10
10.11            10.11
10.12            10.12
10.13            10.13
10.14            10.14
10.15            10.15
10.16            10.16
10.17            10.17
10.18            10.18
10.19            10.19
10.20            10.20
10.21            10.21
10.22            10.22
10.23            10.23
10.99            10.99
11.01            11.01
30.01            30.01
30.10            30.15
30.11            30.16
30.12            30.17
30.13            30.18
30.14            30.19
30.15            30.20
30.16            30.21
30.17            30.22
30.30            30.35
30.31            30.36
31.01            31.01
31.02            31.02
31.03            31.03
31.04            31.04
31.05            31.05
31.10            31.20
31.11            31.21
31.12            31.22
31.13            31.23
31.14            31.24
31.15            31.25
31.16            31.26
31.17            31.27
31.18            31.28
31.19            31.29
31.20            31.30
32.01            32.01
33.001           33.001
33.020           33.015
33.021           33.016
33.022           33.017
33.023           33.018
33.024           33.019
33.025           33.020
33.026           33.021
33.035           33.035
33.040           33.050
33.041           33.051
33.042           33.052
33.043           33.053
33.044           33.054
33.045           33.055
33.046           33.056
33.047           33.057
33.048           33.058
33.049           33.059
33.050           33.060
33.70            33.075
33.71            33.076
33.72            33.077
33.73            33.078
33.74            33.079
33.75            33.080
34.01            34.01
34.10            34.15
34.11            34.16
34.12            34.17
34.13            34.18
34.14            34.19
34.15            34.20
35.01            35.01
35.03            35.02
35.10            35.15
35.11            35.16
35.12            35.17
35.13            35.18
36.01            36.01
36.02            36.02
50.01            50.01
50.02            50.02
50.03            50.03
50.04            50.04
50.05            50.05
50.06            50.06
50.07            50.07
50.08            50.08
50.09            50.09
50.10            50.10
50.11            50.11
50.12            50.12
50.20            50.25
50.35            50.40
50.36            50.41
50.37            50.42
50.38            50.43
50.50            50.55
50.51            50.56
50.52            50.57
50.53            50.58
50.99            50.99
51.001           51.001
51.002           51.002
51.003           51.003
51.004           51.004
51.005           51.005
51.006           51.006
51.007           51.007
51.008           51.008
51.009           51.009
51.010           51.010
51.011           51.011
51.025           51.025
51.026           51.026
51.027           51.027
51.028           51.028
51.029           51.029
51.035           51.040
51.037           51.041
51.038           51.042
51.039           51.043
51.040           51.044
51.041           51.045
51.042           51.046
51.043           51.047
51.044           51.048
51.055           51.060
51.056           51.061
51.057           51.062
51.058           51.063
51.059           51.064
51.060           51.065
51.061           51.066
51.062           51.067
51.063           51.068
51.075           51.080
51.076           51.081
51.077           51.082
51.078           51.083
51.079           51.084
51.080           51.085
51.081           51.086
51.082           51.087
51.083           51.088
51.084           51.089
51.085           51.090
51.086           51.091
51.087           51.092
51.088           51.093
51.089           51.094
51.090           51.095
51.091           51.096
51.092           51.097
51.093           51.098
51.094           51.099
51.095           51.100
51.105           51.115
51.106           51.116
51.107           51.117
51.108           51.118
51.109           51.119
51.110           51.120
51.111           51.121
51.112           51.122
51.113           51.123
51.114           51.124
51.125           51.135
51.126           51.136
51.127           51.137
51.128           51.138
51.129           51.139
51.130           51.140
51.131           51.141
51.132           51.142
51.133           51.143
51.134           51.144
51.135           51.155
51.136           51.156
51.137           51.157
51.138           51.158
51.139           51.159
51.140           51.160
51.141           51.161
51.142           51.162
51.143           51.163
51.144           51.164
51.144A          51.165
51.144B          51.166
51.145           51.180
51.146           51.181
51.155           51.195
51.156           51.196
51.157           51.197
51.158           51.198
51.159           51.199
51.160           51.200
51.161           51.201
51.162           51.202
51.163           51.203
51.164           51.204
51.165           51.205
51.166           51.206
52.01            52.01
52.02            52.02
52.03            52.03
52.04            52.04
52.05            52.05
70.01            70.01
70.02            70.02
70.03            70.03
70.04            70.04
70.05            70.05
70.06            70.06
70.07            70.07
70.08            70.08
70.09            70.09
70.10            70.10
70.11            70.11
70.12            70.12
70.13            70.13
70.20            70.25
70.21            70.26
70.30            70.40
70.31            70.41
70.32            70.42
70.33            70.43
70.34            70.44
70.35            70.45
70.36            70.46
70.37            70.47
70.38            70.48
70.39            70.49
70.40            70.50
70.50            74.01
70.51            74.02
70.52            74.03
70.60            70.65;
                 70.99
70.99            70.99;
                 72.99
71.01            71.01
71.02            71.02
71.03            71.03
71.04            71.04
71.05            71.05
71.06            71.06
71.07            71.07
71.08            71.08
71.09            71.09
72.01            72.01
72.02            72.02
72.03            72.03
72.04            72.04
72.06            72.05
72.07            72.06
72.08            72.07
72.09            72.08
72.10            72.09
72.11            72.10
72.12            72.11
72.13            72.12
72.14            72.13
72.15            72.14
72.99            72.99
Ch. 73, Sch. I   Ch. 75, Sch. I
Ch. 73, Sch. II  Ch. 75, Sch. II
Ch. 73, Sch. III Ch. 75, Sch. III
Ch. 73, Sch. IV  Ch. 75, Sch. IV
Ch. 74, Sch. I   Ch. 76, Sch. I
80.01            91.01
80.02            91.02
80.03            91.03;
                 91.99
80.04            91.04
80.05            91.05
80.06            91.06
80.07            91.07
80.08            91.08
80.09            91.09
80.10            91.10
80.11            91.11
80.12            91.12
81.01            91.25
81.02            91.26
81.03            91.27
81.04            91.28
81.05            91.29
81.06            91.30
81.07            91.31
81.08            91.32
81.09            91.33
81.10            91.34
81.11            91.35
81.12            91.36
81.99            91.99
90.01            73.01
90.02            73.02
90.03            73.03
90.04            73.04
90.05            73.05
90.06            73.06
90.07            73.07
90.08            73.08
90.09            73.09
90.10            73.10
90.11            73.11
90.12            73.12
90.13            73.13
90.14            73.14
90.15            73.15
91.01            90.01
91.02            90.02
91.03            90.03
91.04            90.04
91.05            90.05
91.10            90.20
91.11            90.21
91.12            90.22
91.13            90.23
91.14            90.24
91.15            90.25;
                 90.99
91.16            90.26
91.25            90.40
92.01            92.01
92.02            92.02
92.03            92.03
92.04            92.04
92.05            92.05
92.06            92.06
92.07            92.07
93.01            93.01
93.02            93.02
93.03            93.03
93.04            93.04
93.05            93.05
93.06            93.06
93.07            93.07
93.08            93.08
93.20            93.20
93.21            93.21;
                 93.99
93.22            93.22
93.23            93.23
93.24            93.24
93.25            93.25
93.26            93.26
93.27            93.27
93.28            93.28
93.29            93.29
93.30            93.30
93.31            93.31
93.32            93.32
93.33            93.33
93.34            93.34
93.35            93.35
93.50            93.50
93.51            93.51
93.52            93.52
93.53            93.53
93.54            93.54
93.55            93.55
93.56            93.56
93.57            93.57
93.58            93.58
93.99            93.99
94.01            94.01
94.02            94.02
94.03            94.03
94.04            94.04
94.05            94.05;
                 94.99
94.06            94.06
94.07            94.07
94.20            94.20
94.21            94.21
94.22            94.22
94.99            94.99
95.01            95.01
95.02            95.02
96.01            96.01
96.02            96.02
96.03            96.03
96.04            96.04
96.05            96.05
97.01            150.01
97.02            150.02
97.03            150.03
97.04            150.04
97.05            150.05
97.06            150.06
97.07            150.07
97.15            150.20
97.16            150.21
97.17            150.22
97.30            150.35
97.31            150.36
97.32            150.37
97.33            150.38
98.01            74.04
98.02            74.05
99.01            132.01
99.02            132.02
99.03            132.03
99.04            132.04
99.05            132.05
99.99            132.99
110.01           110.01
110.02           110.02
110.03           110.03
110.04           110.04
110.05           110.05
110.06           110.06
110.07           110.07
110.08           110.08
110.09           110.09
110.10           110.10
110.11           110.11
110.12           110.12
110.13           110.13
110.14           110.14
110.15           110.15
110.16           110.16
110.17           110.17
110.18           110.18
110.19           110.19
110.20           110.20
110.21           110.21
110.99           110.99
111.01           111.01
111.02           111.02
111.03           111.03
111.04           111.04
111.05           111.05
111.06           111.06
111.07           111.07
111.08           111.08
111.09           111.09
111.10           111.10
111.11           111.11
111.12           111.1
111.13           111.13
111.14           111.14
111.15           111.15
111.16           111.16
111.17           111.17
111.18           111.18
111.19           111.19
111.20           111.20
111.21           111.21
111.22           111.22
111.23           111.23
111.24           111.24
111.25           111.25
111.26           111.26
111.27           111.27
111.28           111.28
111.29           111.29
111.30           111.30
111.31           111.31
111.32           111.32
111.33           111.33
111.34           111.34
111.99           111.99
130.01           130.01
130.02           130.02
130.03           130.03
130.04           130.04
130.05           130.05
130.06           130.06
130.07           130.07
130.08           130.08
130.09           130.09
130.10           130.10
130.11           130.11
130.13           130.12
131.01           131.01
131.02           131.02
131.03           131.03
131.04           131.04
131.05           131.05
131.06           131.06
131.07           131.07
131.08           131.08
151.01           151.01
151.02           151.02
151.03           151.03
151.04           151.04
151.05           151.05
151.06           151.06
151.07           151.07
151.08           151.08
151.09           151.09
151.35           151.20
151.36           151.21
151.37           151.22
151.38           151.23
151.39           151.24
151.50           151.35
151.51           151.36
151.52           151.37
151.53           151.38
151.54           151.39
151.70           151.50
151.71           151.51
151.99           151.99
152.01           152.01
152.02           152.02
152.03           152.03
152.04           152.04
152.05           152.05
152.06           152.06
152.07           152.07
152.15           152.20
152.16           152.21
152.17           152.22
152.18           152.23
152.19           152.24
152.20           152.25
152.21           152.26
152.22           152.27
152.30           152.40
152.31           152.41
152.32           152.42
152.33           152.43
152.34           152.44
152.35           152.45
152.36           152.46
152.37           152.47
152.99           152.99
153.001          154.001
153.002          154.002
153.003          154.003
153.004          154.004
153.005          154.005
153.006          154.006
153.015          154.020
153.016          154.021
153.017          154.022
153.025          154.035
153.026          154.036
153.040          154.050
153.041          154.051
153.042          154.052
153.043          154.053
153.044          154.054;
                 154.999
153.045          154.055
153.046          154.056
153.047          154.057
153.048          154.058
153.049          154.059
153.055          154.070
153.056          154.071
153.057          154.072
153.058          154.073
153.065          154.085
153.066          154.086
153.067          154.087
153.068          154.088
153.075          154.100
153.076          154.101
153.077          154.102
153.078          154.103
153.079          154.104
153.080          154.105
153.081          154.106
153.082          154.107
153.083          154.108
153.084          154.109
153.085          154.110
153.086          154.111
153.087          154.112
153.095          154.126
153.096          154.127
153.097          154.128
153.098          154.129
153.099          154.130
153.105          154.145
153.106          154.146
153.107          154.147
153.108          154.148
153.109          154.149
153.110          154.150
153.111          154.151
153.112          154.152
153.113          154.153
153.125          154.165
153.126          154.166
153.127          154.167
153.128          154.168
153.129          154.169
153.130          154.170
153.131          154.171
153.132          154.172
153.133          154.173
153.134          154.174
153.145          154.185
153.146          154.186
153.147          154.187
153.148          154.188
153.160          154.200
153.161          154.201
153.162          154.202
153.163          154.203
153.164          154.204
153.165          154.205
153.166          154.206
153.167          154.207
153.175          154.220
153.176          154.221
153.177          154.222
153.178          154.223
153.179          154.224
153.180          154.225
153.181          154.226
153.182          154.227
153.190          154.240
153.191          154.241
153.192          154.242
153.193          154.243
153.194          154.244
153.196          154.246
153.205          154.260
153.206          154.261
153.207          154.262
153.208          154.263
153.209          154.264
153.210          154.265
153.211          154.266
153.212          154.267
153.213          154.268
153.220          154.280
153.221          154.281
153.222          154.282
153.223          154.283
153.998          154.284
153.999          154.999
155.01           153.001
155.02           153.002
155.03           153.003
155.04           153.004
155.05           153.005
155.06           153.006
155.07           153.007
155.08           153.008
155.09           153.009
155.10           153.010
155.11           153.011
155.12           153.012
155.20           153.025
155.21           153.026
155.30           153.040
155.31           153.041
155.32           153.042
155.33           153.043
155.34           153.044
155.35           153.045
155.37           153.046
155.38           153.047
155.39           153.048
155.50           153.060
155.60           153.075
155.61           153.076
155.62           153.077
155.63           153.078
155.64           153.079
155.65           153.080
155.70           153.095
155.71           153.096
155.72           153.097
155.73           153.098
155.74           153.099
155.75           153.100
                 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     90.20;
95-9     10-9-1995   90.25;
                     90.99
-        9-13-2010   70.99
-        9-13-2010   71.06
-        9-13-2010   72.99
11-05    7-11-2011   154.221
11-06    7-11-2011   154.244
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         Charter
2013-05  - -         Ch. 75, Sch. II
-        - -         TSO I
-        1-29-1973   TSO I
-        8-13-1973   TSO I
-        11-12-1973  92.06
-        4-21-1975   10.21
-        7-12-1976   96.03
-        7-10-1978   34.15—
                     34.20
-        11-30-1978  TSO I
-        10-13-1980  TSO I
-        6-1-1981    TSO I
83-3     6-1-1981    TSO I
81-3     11-9-1981   131.05
-        2-7-1983    TSO I
-        2-13-1983   Ch. 75, Sch. I
-        3-14-1983   Ch. 75, Sch. I
-        5-9-1983    Ch. 75, Sch. I
-        7-11-1983   11.01
1        8-8-1983    Ch. 75, Sch. III
6        8-8-1983    Ch. 75, Sch. III
                     154.001—
                     154.004;
                     154.035;
                     154.052;
                     154.054—
                     154.058;
                     154.071—
                     154.073;
                     154.085;
                     154.100—
                     154.108;
                     154.110—
                     154.112;
                     154.126—
                     154.128;
-        9-12-1983   154.145—
                     154.153;
                     154.165—
                     154.174;
                     154.185;
                     154.186;
                     154.200—
                     154.207;
                     154.220—
                     154.227;
                     154.240—
                     154.246;
                     154.280—
                     154.284;
                     154.999;
                     Ch. 154, App. B
-        11-14-1983  111.01—
                     111.34
-        11-14-1983  TSO II
-        12-12-1983  TSO II
-        2-13-1984   Ch. 75, Sch. I
                     110.01—
-        6-18-1984   110.20;
                     110.99
-        10-8-1984   130.04
                     50.01—
89-2     8-19-1985   50.12;
                     50.99
-        9-9-1985    TSO I
85-6     9-9-1985    TSO I
86-9     8-11-1986   Ch. 75, Sch. II
86-10    9-2-1986    TSO I
-        9-8-1986    TSO I
90-1     2-12-1990   TSO I
90-2     4-9-1990    130.11
90-3     4-9-1990    73.01—
                     73.15
91-2     2-11-1991   131.06—
                     131.08
91-6     8-12-1991   154.260—
                     154.268
91-8     10-28-1991  33.075—
                     33.080
93-2     10-11-1993  36.01
-        6-13-1994   73.10
                     50.40—
95-1     3-13-1995   50.43;
                     50.55—
                     50.58
95-2     6-12-1995   95.01
95-5     9-11-1995   130.12
-        10-9-1995   154.054;
                     154.999
                     94.01—
                     94.06;
95-10    10-9-1995   94.20—
                     94.22;
                     94.99
96-2     1-8-1996    36.02
96-3     4-8-1996    33.060
96-4     8-12-1996   50.25
95-6     9-11-1996   130.11
                     154.001—
                     154.005;
                     154.020—
                     154.022;
                     154.035;
                     154.036;
                     154.050—
                     154.058;
                     154.070—
                     154.073;
                     154.085—
                     154.088;
                     154.100—
                     154.112;
                     154.126—
                     154.128;
-        10-21-1996  154.145;
                     154.147—
                     154.152;
                     154.165—
                     154.174;
                     154.185;
                     154.186;
                     154.200—
                     154.207;
                     154.220—
                     154.227;
                     154.240—
                     154.246;
                     154.280—
                     154.284;
                     154.999;
                     Ch. 154, App. A;
                     Ch. 154, App. B
97-2     3-10-1997   74.04;
                     74.05
97-3     4-14-1997   150.07
97-4     4-14-1997   94.04
                     154.001—
-        6-9-1997    154.004;
                     154.129;
                     154.203
97-5     7-29-1997   Ch. 76, Sch. I
                     152.01—
                     152.07;
-        8-11-1997   152.27;
                     152.40—
                     152.47;
                     152.99
-        1-1-1998    51.061;
                     51.082
                     51.001—
                     51.011;
                     51.025—
                     51.029;
                     51.040—
                     51.048;
                     51.060—
                     51.068;
                     51.080—
-        11-1-1998   51.100;
                     51.115—
                     51.124;
                     51.135—
                     51.144;
                     51.180;
                     51.181;
                     51.195—
                     51.204;
                     51.206
-        11-1-1998   152.20
-        7-10-2000   94.04
-        8-14-2000   31.24
-        8-14-2000   32.01
-        8-14-2000   Ch. 75, Sch. III
-        8-14-2000   TSO I
01-01    1-8-2001    154.022
01-03    3-12-2001   154.035;
                     154.110
-        6-11-2001   11.01
                     153.001—
                     153.012;
                     153.025;
                     153.026;
                     153.040—
-        7-9-2001    153.048;
                     153.060;
                     153.075—
                     153.080;
                     153.095—
                     153.100
-        6-10-2002   94.07;
                     94.99
-        6-10-2002   154.243
02-03    6-10-2002   TSO II
02-03    7-8-2002    95.01
                     132.01—
2002-05  9-9-2002    132.05;
                     132.99
2002 06  11-12-2002  154.207
                     91.01—
-        8-11-2003   91.12;
                     91.99
                     91.25—
-        9-8-2003    91.36;
                     91.99
-        6-14-2004   154.101;
                     154.102
-        9-13-2004   154.103
04-01    11-8-2004   154.035;
                     154.059
04-02    11-8-2004   154.107
04-03    11-8-2004   93.21;
                     93.99
05-04    3-14-2005   154.105
-        10-7-2006   151.09
-        4-9-2007    51.200
-        4-9-2007    52.01—
                     52.05
-        4-9-2007    93.21;
                     93.99
-        4-9-2007    94.06
-        5-14-2007   72.05;
                     72.99
-        6-26-2007   Ch. 154, App. A
-        8-13-2007   Ch. 75, Sch. III
                     151.01—
                     151.08;
                     151.20—
                     151.24;
-        9-10-2007   151.35—
                     151.39;
                     151.50;
                     151.51;
                     151.99
-        7-14-2008   Ch. 76, Sch. I
-        10-9-2008   154.109
09-06    1-12-2009   72.99
09-07    6-8-2009    154.110
09-09    6-8-2009    154.110
-        10-9-2009   154.108
11-01    2-14-2010   154.107;
                     154.282
-        11-8-2010   154.035;
                     Ch. 154, App. A
11-02    2-14-2011   154.035
11-03    5-9-2011    154.185
-        8-8-2011    93.21;
                     93.99
12-04    5-14-2012   154.187
2012-04  2-11-2013   154.102
2013-02  2-11-2013   Ch. 76, Sch. I
2013-03  2-11-2013   154.035;
                     154.188
2013-06  7-8-2013    73.02
2013-07  7-8-2013    73.02
2013-08  7-8-2013    Ch. 75, Sch. II
2013-09  10-16-2013  153.048
                     154.035;
-        7-28-2014   154.111;
                     154.240
2014-05  9-8-2014    51.155—
                     51.166
2015-02  3-9-2015    154.035;
                     154.110
2015-03  4-13-2015   154.035
2015-04  4-13-2015   154.111
2015-05  4-13-2015   Ch. 75, Sch. IV
2015-06  5-11-2015   154.035
2015-07  6-8-2015    154.035
2015-08  6-8-2015    154.035
2015-09  6-8-2015    154.108;
                     154.110
2015-10  6-8-2015    154.108;
                     154.110
2015-11  6-8-2015    154.110
2015-12  6-8-2015    154.111
2015-14  9-14-2015   31.26
2016-01  4-11-2016   154.108
2016-02  4-11-2016   154.109
2016-04  4-11-2016   51.197;
                     154.110
2016-11  4-11-2016   51.181
2016-12  4-11-2016   51.195
2016-13  4-11-2016   51.196
2016-15  4-11-2016   51.198
2016-16  4-11-2016   51.199
2016-17  4-11-2016   51.200
2016-18  4-11-2016   51.201
2016-07  5-9-2016    154.035
2016-09  9-12-2016   Ch. 75, Sch. III
2018-01  2-12-2018   94.07
2021-08  11-8-2021   11.01
2022-01  3-14-2022   Ch. 75, Sch. III
                     154.035;
2022-02  4-11-2022   154.108;
                     Ch. 154, App. A
                     153.001—
                     153.012;
                     153.025;
                     153.026;
                     153.040—
                     153.048;
                     153.060;
                     153.075—
                     153.078;
                     153.080;
                     153.081;
                     153.095—
                     153.100;
                     154.001—
                     154.006;
                     154.020—
                     154.023;
                     154.035;
                     154.036;
                     154.050—
                     154.059;
                     154.070—
                     154.073;
2022-03  4-11-2022   154.085—
                     154.088;
                     154.100—
                     154.112;
                     154.125—
                     154.130;
                     154.145—
                     154.153;
                     154.165—
                     154.174;
                     154.185—
                     154.188;
                     154.200—
                     154.207;
                     154.220—
                     154.227;
                     154.240—
                     154.247;
                     154.260—
                     154.268;
                     154.280—
                     154.284;
                     154.999;
                     Ch. 154, App. A;
                     Ch. 154, App. B
2024-04  10-14-2024  90.03
2025-05  1-6-2025    154.132
2025-06  1-6-2025    154.035
                     154.101—
2025-07  1-6-2025    154.106;
                     Ch. 154, App. A
2025-08  1-6-2025    153.133
2025-09  1-6-2025    154.035
2025-10  1-6-2025    154.108;
                     Ch. 154, App. A
2025-03  2-10-2025   154.131
2025-11a 2-10-2025   154.243
                    
 
