RUTHERFORD COLLEGE,
NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 Supplement S-10 contains:
Local legislation current through 12-2-2024, and
State legislation current through 2025 North Carolina
Legislative Service, Pamphlet No. 2
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
CHAPTER I:
Incorporation and Corporate Powers
Section 1.1. Incorporation.
   The inhabitants of the area described in
Chapter II of this act shall be and constitute a body politic and corporate
under the name of “Town of Rutherford College”, and shall have all of the
power, authority, rights, privileges and immunities conferred upon municipal
corporations by the Constitution and General Laws of North Carolina and
particularly Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
Sec. 1.2. Powers.
   The town shall have all the powers, duties, rights, privileges and
immunities now vested in the town and now or hereafter granted to municipal
corporations by the Constitution, by the General Laws of the State of North
Carolina, and by this charter. The town shall exercise and enjoy all other
powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to
promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare of the city and of its inhabitants, and all
implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted as fully
and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein.
Sec. 1.3. Noncontiguous annexation.
   Notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, the Town of Valdese may annex,
pursuant to Article 4 of G.S. 160A, areas not contiguous to its primary
corporate limits which are closer to the primary corporate limits of the Town
of Rutherford College than to the primary corporate limits of the Town of
Valdese. The Town of Rutherford College may not annex any area by any means
after receipt by the Town of Valdese of a petition from such area for
annexation unless the Town of Valdese fails to annex such area within 60 days
from receipt of such petition.
Sec. 1.4. Limits on annexation.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of the laws of North Carolina to the
contrary, the corporate limits of the Town of Rutherford College shall not be
altered by annexation by any means within the areas lying Best of Rural Paved
Road 1824 or Rural Paved Road 1001 before July 1, 1981; and the corporate
limits shall not be altered by annexation within the area lying West of the
center line of the aforesaid paved roads, by any means other than annexation as
provided by G.S. 160A-31 or its successor statute, before July 1, 1987.
CHAPTER II:
Corporate Boundaries
Sec. 2.1. Town boundaries.
   The corporate boundaries of the Town of Rutherford College, until changed in
accordance with law, are as follows:
   Lying and being in Burke County, North Carolina and as set out on a map
entitled ‘Boundary nap of the Town of Rutherford College’ which will be
maintained in the Office of the Town Clerk as required by G.S. 160A-22 and more
particularly as follows:
   This description of the Town of Rutherford College will begin on the north
side of Highway 64-70 and the southwest corner of Lot 1, Section 10, Map L13.
This point borders on Highway 64-70. The line would then progress in a
northerly direction with the property on the right being within the town. The
line will progress along the west side of Lot 1 and 10, Section 10. It would
then cross a small lane and then proceed northerly along the west side of Lot
1, Section 1, Map L13, crossing the terminus of a small lane and then along the
east side of Lot 1, Section 8 and Lot 1, Section 9. Approximately two-thirds
the distance along the west side of Lot 1, Section 9 the line will then
progress in a westerly direction along the south border of Lot 27B to its
southeast corner and will then progress northerly along the west side of Lots
27B, 27A, 10, 11 and 12, Section 9, Map L13, junctioning with SR 1554. The line
will then cross SR 1554 progressing northerly along the eastern side of Lot 1,
Section 1, Map L14, with the land to the right being within the town limits.
The line will then progress successively in a westward direction, southerly
direction, northerly direction along the western half of Lot 37J, Section 1,
Map L14. It progresses further along the western side of Lots 4A and 4, Section
2, Map L19. The line then junctions with SR 1558. The boundary then progresses
in a northwesterly direction along the southwest right-of-way of SR 1558 and a
small access road functioning with the south side of Lot 5, Section 1 near its
southwest corner. The line will then progress westwardly along the south
boundaries of Lot 6, 7 and 8, Section 1, Map L19 to the southwest corner of Lot
8. The line then progresses in a northerly direction along the west boundaries
of Lot 8, 9, 13G, and 13A, Section 1, with the property to the right being
within the town. The line then junctions with the southwest corner of Lot 9,
Section 1, Map L18. It then progresses in an easterly direction to the
southwest corner of the same lot and then northerly along the east boundary of
Lot 9, junctioning with SB 1546, along its south right-of-way. The line then
crosses SR 1546 to the southeast corner of Lot 8, Section 2, Map L18 and then
progresses along the northern right-of-way of SR 1546 to the southeast corner
of the same lot. It then progresses along the east border of Lot 8 in a
northerly direction to the south boundary of Lot 7, Section 2 approximately
midway between its southeast and southwest corner. The line then progresses
along the south border of Lot 7, Section 2, Map L18 to its southeast corner and
then in a northerly direction along the west boundaries of Lots 13, 12 and 14
of Section 2, Map L18. The line will then follow the western boundary of Lot 14
to its northwest corner at a point where it joins the northeast corner of Lot
1A. The line will then progress easterly along the north side of Lots 14 and
15, Section 2, Map L18, with the property to the right being within the town.
The line then progresses in an eastward direction across the north boundary of
Lot 1, Section l, Map L16 to the southeast corner of Lot 1, Map L17. From this
point the line progresses north ward along the west boundary of Lot 4 to its
northwest corner. It then progresses a short way eastward and thence
southeastward along the east border of Lots 4, 10, 5 and 6 to the southeastern
corner of Lot 6. The line then progresses in a northwesterly direction along
the west side of Lot 20, Section 1, Map L16 to its northwest corner. From this
point the line progresses eastward along the north borders of Lots 20 and 16
functioning with SR 1001.
   Proceeding east, the line crosses Highway SR 1001 coinciding with the
northern border of Lots No. 1 and 2 (Section 2 on L-16) and then in a southerly
direction, with all property on the right being within the town. The line will
coincide with the east boundaries of Lots No. 2 (Section 2) and Lots 1, 5, 4
(Section 3) to Abernethy Heirs line.
   The line then proceeds east along Abernethy Heirs line (Lot 4-21) to it’s
northeast corner and then south to its junction with the east line of Lot 2
(map L-8). The line then follows in a southerly direction the east line of Lot
2 to its junction with SR 1602, with property to the right being within the
town.
   The line then proceeds east along the north boundary of a 6.9 acre lot (not
numbered), and south along its east boundary, joining the northwest corner of
Lot No. 32 (map L-9, Section 4). The line then goes east along the north
boundary of Lot 32, junctioning with the waters of Island Creek.
   The boundary then follows Island Creek southward to a tributary known as
Lail’s Creek, then up Lail’s Creek to a point where it crosses under the
Southern Railroad tracks. The boundary then proceeds west along Southern’s Line
to the east boundary of Lot No. 9 (Section 7) Map L-12 (1963), proceeding north
along said boundary to the South boundary of Lot 8 and then west along south
boundary of Lot 8 to an unnumbered road and then north to Highway 64-70,
crossing to north side. The line coincides with the east boundaries of Lots No.
11, 11A, and a portion of 10.
   The boundary then proceeds west along right-of-way of Highway 64-70 to the
starting point.
   There is excluded from the above-described corporate limits of Rutherford
College the following described property belonging to Valdese General Hospital,
Inc.:
   BEGINNING on an iron pipe located in the intersection of State Road 1001 and
State Road 1604 and runs thence with State Road 1001, South 7 degrees 47 feet
East 159.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence South 0 degrees 53 feet East 634.00
feet to an iron pipe; thence South 7 degrees 36 feet West 524.73 feet to an
iron pipe, Lynn Corner; thence South 73 degrees 33 feet East 1190.56 feet to an
iron pipe, Stroupe corner; thence North 0 degrees 33 feet East 688.60 feet to
an iron pipe; thence South 77 degrees 41 feet East 379.00 feet to an iron pipe;
thence North 2 degrees 02 feet West 557.27 feet to an iron pipe; thence North
89 degrees 22 feet West 234.96 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 8 degrees 03
feet West 569.00 feet to an iron pipe; thence South 85 degrees 55 feet West
349.57 feet to an iron pipe; thence the same course, South 85 degrees 55 feet
West 800.00 feet (total distance 1149.57 feet) to an iron pipe, the point of
BEGINNING, the same containing a total of 43.75 acres, more or less.
   Provided that the property of Valdese General Hospital, Inc., or any part
thereof, may not hereafter be annexed to any municipality unless petitioned by
the Board of Trustees of Valdese General Hospital, Inc. requesting such
annexation, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 4A of Chapter 160A of the
General Statutes of North Carolina or any other statutes providing for the
extension of corporate limits of municipalities in the State of North Carolina.
Sec. 2.2. Electoral boundaries.
   Until modified in accordance with the law, the boundaries of the electoral
district of the Town of Rutherford College shall be as set forth in Section
2.1.
CHAPTER III.
Governing Body.
Sec. 3.1. Number of members.
   The governing body shall consist of six council members and the mayor.
Sec. 3.2. Manner of election of council.
   The qualified voters of the entire Town of Rutherford College shall elect
the members of the board.
Sec. 3.3. Term of office of the members of the board.
   Beginning with the regular municipal election to be held in 1977, the three
candidates for town council receiving the highest number of votes shall be
elected for a term of four years, and the three candidates receiving the next
highest number of votes shall be elected for a term of two years. Thereafter as
the terms of each member expire, their successors shall be elected for terns of
four years.
Sec. 3.4. Election of mayor - term of office.
   The qualified voters of the entire Town of Rutherford College shall elect
the mayor. He is elected for a four-year term of office.
CHAPTER IV.
Elections.
Sec. 4.1. Conduct of town elections.
   The town officers shall be elected on a nonpartisan basis, and the results
determined by plurality as provided in G.S. 163-292, and this includes the
election of the mayor.
Sec. 4.3.
   The officers elected under this act shall take office on the first Monday in
December following their election and qualify by taking the oath of office.
Council shall hold a regular meeting at least once a month and shall fix a time
and place of its regular meetings which shall be presided over by the mayor or
some official acting in his behalf.
Sec. 4.4. First election.
   The first election held pursuant to this act shall be paid for by the County
of Burke but the Town of Rutherford College shall reimburse the County of Burke
for the costs of the election as soon as the town treasury has funds sufficient
on hand.
Sec. 4.5. Temporary officers.
   Until a regular municipal election to be held in November, 1977, the
following six persons, W. Joe Jacumin, Claude Icard, Jr., Jimmy Huffman,
Richard Jenson, J.T. Kincaid and Robert W. Bigham, are hereby appointed to act
as the Council for the Town of Rutherford College and Zeb B. Malcolm is hereby
appointed to act as Mayor of Rutherford College, and each person shall possess
and may exercise the powers granted to the Town of Rutherford College until
their successors are elected and qualified.
CHAPTER V.
Administration.
Sec. 5.1.
   The Town of Rutherford College operates under the Mayor-Council Plan as
provided in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article VII, Part 3, and other statutes and
applicable law of North Carolina.
Sec. 5.2. Salaries.
   The town council and mayor shall receive no salary for services rendered.
Sec. 5.3. Municipal taxes.
   The fiscal affairs of the Town of Rutherford College shall be governed by
Chapter 159 of the General Statutes, and all other pertinent provisions of the
Constitution and General Laws of the State. The territory within the corporate
limits, its citizens and property shall be subject to municipal taxes levied by
the town for the fiscal year of 1978-1979, and subsequent years. The town shall
obtain from Burke County, and the county shall provide, upon request, a record
of the property within the corporate limits which were listed for taxation as
of January 1, 1978.”
APPENDIX: CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Section
   
1   Mayor/Council form of government
   
2   Council-Manager form of government
§ 1 MAYOR/COUNCIL FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The ordinance amended the Charter as follows.
      BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of RUTHERFORD COLLEGE:
         SECTION 1. Pursuant to General Statute 160A-102, the Charter of the
Town of Rutherford College as set forth in Chapter 452 of the 1977 Session Laws
of North Carolina, entitled: AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE TOWN OF RUTHERFORD
COLLEGE IN BURKE COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA, as amended is hereby further amended
to provide that the Town shall operate under the MAYOR/COUNCIL Form of
Government in accordance with General Statute, 160A-101(9)(a), and any Charter
provisions not in conflict therewith.
         SECTION 2. Subject to any referendum Petitioned for and conducted
pursuant to General Statute 160A-103, this Ordinance shall be in full force and
effect from and after the 3rd day of May, 1993.
(1979 Code, § O-1) (Ord. passed 5-3-1993)
§ 2 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The ordinance amended the Charter as follows.
      BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Rutherford College:
         Section 1. Pursuant to G.S. 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the
Town of Rutherford College, as set forth in Chapter 452 of the 1977 Session
Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to provide that
the Town of Rutherford College shall operate under the council-manager form of
government in accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of G.S. Chapter 160A and any
charter provisions not in conflict therewith.
         Section 2. The Town Clerk shall cause a notice to be duly published,
stating that an Ordinance amending the Charter to adopt the council-manager
form of government has been adopted. Subject to any referendum petitioned for
and conducted pursuant to G.S. 160A-103, this ordinance shall be in full force
and effect from and after August 8, 2011.
(Ord. passed 8-8-2011)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   ORDINANCES; PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION;
GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references
   
10.19   Damaging ordinances prohibited
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Rutherford College
shall be designated as the Code of Rutherford College, North Carolina, and may
be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina.
      CLERK. The Clerk of the Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The Manager and Council of the Town of Rutherford College, North
Carolina.
      COUNTY. The County of Burke, North Carolina.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MANAGER or TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager of the Town of Rutherford
College, North Carolina.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this town.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. An easement for public use, obtained either by condemnation
or purchase, except as hereinafter provided.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      TOWN. The Town of Rutherford College, in the County of Burke, North
Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. One designated by the Council.
(1979 Code, § A-1)
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or public way in
the town;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
town; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina, is hereby
amended as follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina, is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be
specifically repealed by section, chapter or provision number, as the case may
be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and any and all amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-
1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-
1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the 1979 code of ordinances
of the town, the 1979 code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(1979 Code, §       ).” The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.19 DAMAGING ORDINANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall tear or deface any of the town ordinances.
(1979 Code, § A-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $50, and each day that any of the provisions of
this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(G.S. § 14-4(a)) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
CHAPTER 11: ORDINANCES; PROCEDURE
Section
   
11.01   Procedure; form; publication
   
11.02   Ordinances confined to one subject
   
11.03   Official copy
   
11.04   Amending
   
11.05   Adding to; title
   
11.06   Repeal or ordainment of chapters, subchapters or sections
   
11.07   Effective date
§ 11.01 PROCEDURE; FORM; PUBLICATION.
   (A)   Every ordinance amending or repeating any ordinance and every new
ordinance shall be proposed in writing and shall be approved as to form by the
Town Attorney.
   (B)   Ordinances shall have ordinance and section captions.
   (C)   Every ordinance shall be posted in Town Hall for one week following
passage.
(1979 Code, § B-1)
§ 11.02 ORDINANCES CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.
   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject, except appropriation
ordinances, which shall be confined to the subject of appropriations only.
(1979 Code, § B-2)
§ 11.03 OFFICIAL COPY.
   (A)   A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by the
Council, signed by the Manager and attested to by the Clerk, shall be known as
an official copy of an ordinance of the town.
   (B)   All ordinances or a true copy thereof shall be inserted in this code
in the proper chapter.
(1979 Code, § B-3)
§ 11.04 AMENDING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for members of the Council to annul, abridge,
modify or in any way change any ordinance of the Council, except at a regular
or special meeting of the Council.
   (B)   Any consent obtained relative to the amendment of an ordinance except
in such manner shall in all cases be inoperative and void.
(1979 Code, § B-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 11.05 ADDING TO; TITLE.
   (A)   An ordinance proposed to add to or replace provisions of a current
ordinance of the town shall set out:
      (1)   Each paragraph to be amended as it stands;
      (2)   The words proposed to be stricken out and those to be inserted; and
      (3)   The paragraph as it would stand if so amended.
   (B)   The title of the new ordinance shall contain the entire title of the
ordinance amended thereby.
   (C)   The requirements of this section can be waived by the Town Council.
(1979 Code, § B-5)
§ 11.06 REPEAL OR ORDAINMENT OF CHAPTERS, SUBCHAPTERS OR SECTIONS.
   Whenever a chapter, subchapter or section of this code is repealed, the
Clerk shall make a notation of such repeal in the official copy of this code.
Whenever a new chapter, subchapter or section of this code is ordained, the
Clerk shall make a notation of such new ordinance in the official copy of this
code. Such ordinances shall be printed in the format of this code and inserted
in the appropriate places therein.
(1979 Code, § B-6)
§ 11.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof, except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinances required by state
law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.
(1979 Code, § B-7)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   [RESERVED]
      
31.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
32.   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 30: [RESERVED]
CHAPTER 31: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Security of records
§ 31.01 SECURITY OF RECORDS.
   The Town Council is desirous of protecting the Town Clerk’s position and
rights, the security of town records and the integrity of the Town Council, and
now, further agree that anyone found abusing this policy, if a Council member
or committee member, will be requested to resign, and if he or she refuses, the
incident will be reported and handled as a misdemeanor through court action.
(1979 Code, § Q-1) (Ord. passed 6-27-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 32: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
   
32.01   Workplace smoking and tobacco use policy
   
32.02   Drug-free workplace policy
§ 32.01 WORKPLACE SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE POLICY.
   (A)   The town is dedicated to providing a healthful, comfortable and
productive work environment for its employees.
   (B)   The United States Surgeon General, in his 1980 report, Reducing the
Health Consequences of Smoking, concluded that:
      (1)   Involuntary smoking is a cause of disease, including lung cancer in
healthy non-smokers; and
      (2)   The simple separation of smokers and non-smokers within the same
air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of non-smokers to
environmental tobacco smoke.
   (C)   In light of these findings, the offices and workplaces of the town
shall be entirely smoke-free and tobacco-free, effective February 1, 1993.
Smoking and other uses of tobacco will be prohibited within town owned and
operated buildings, including offices, hallways, meeting rooms, waiting rooms
and restrooms. This policy applies to all employees, citizens, contractors and
visitors.
   (D)   Breaks will be granted to all employees in accordance with the town’s
personnel policies, and smoking and other use of tobacco should be confined to
these breaks and will take place outside the town owned and operated buildings.
   (D)   Copies of this policy shall be distributed to all employees. “No
Smoking” signs shall be posted at all building entrances and throughout the
buildings.
   (E)   The success of this policy will depend upon the thoughtfulness,
consideration and cooperation of smokers and non-smokers. All employees share
in the responsibility for adhering to and enforcing the policy.
      (1)   Any problems should be brought to the attention of the Manager and
handled through the normal chain of command.
      (2)   Employees who violate this policy will be subject to the same
disciplinary actions that accompany violation of other personnel policies.
   (F)   This policy has been adopted by the Town Council and is enforced
February 1, 1993.
(1979 Code, § N-1) (Ord. passed 2-1-1993
§ 32.02 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY.
   (A)   In accordance with the requirements of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of
1988 being 41 U.S.C. 8101 et seq., the following policy relating to all staff
and the premises of the town is established.
   (B)   The town has a legitimate interest in providing a drug-free and
alcohol-free work environment. Substance abuse by employees of the town while
on the job could interfere with the organizational performance and jeopardize
the safety and welfare of other employees, as well as that of the public.
   (C)   In order to confirm instances of substance abuse by employees, the
town may demand a specimen of urine and/or breath and/or blood from an employee
or town official on the basis of reasonable suspicious of such abuse.
Reasonable suspicion is defined as a belief, based on objective facts and/or a
report observation, that an employee has taken drugs or consumed alcohol while
on the job or recently before the start of work, or whose work appears to be
impaired as from the influence of drugs.
   (D)   Breath analysis shall be performed by the State Highway Patrol at the
employer’s/town’s expense. Urine and/or blood specimens shall be collected by
an authorized health care professional and be analyzed at a laboratory
designated by the town, at the employer’s/town’s expense. The specimen will be
tested for, but not limited to, amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines,
cannabinoids, cocaine, methaqualone, opiates, phencyclidine or any drugs or
controlled substances which are not prescribed by a licensed medical doctor, or
prescription drugs used in a manner not consistent with recognized medical
procedures.
   (E)   Custody and security of specimen samples will be thoroughly documented
by the town and the independent testing laboratory.
   (F)   Refusal to submit a specimen sample that is required within the
parameters of this policy may subject the employee or elected official to
disciplinary action.
   (G)   In addition, the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation,
possession or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in the town
workplace. Any employee found in violation of this policy will be subject to
action authorized by the existing state and federal statutes relating to this
criminal offense. Further, as a condition of employment and/or continued
employment, such employee will:
      (1)   Notify the employer of any criminal drug statute conviction for a
violation occurring in the workplace no later than five days after such
conviction; and
      (2)   As deemed appropriate by the Manager, an employee found to be in
violation of this policy may be required to seek appropriate, prescribed
professional services at the employee’s expense.
(1979 Code, § P-1) (Ord. passed 8-2-1993)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE; COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
      
51.   SEWER USE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE;
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
   
50.01   Dumping on town property prohibited
   
50.02   Definitions
   
50.03   Littering prohibited
   
50.04   Dumping or burying in town prohibited
   
50.05   Accumulation, removal of weeds, trash, refuse, other material
§ 50.01 DUMPING ON TOWN PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall unload or dump any trash, garbage, refuse, waste or
any other substance on any property owned by the town.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to regular employees of the town working
under orders and directions of the Manager or Council and to persons having
permits from the town.
(1979 Code, § C-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The refuse from fires in houses, schools, stores and the like, and
includes at times small quantities of glass, crockery, sweepings, dust, brick,
metal and other inorganic materials.
   GARBAGE. The organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, from houses,
kitchen, restaurants, hotels, hospitals and the like, comprised chiefly of
waste food, and does not include liquids that may be drained into the sewer.
   REFUSE. Includes tin cans, dirty rags, old clothes, waste and other
materials not otherwise designated herein.
(1979 Code, § C-2)
§ 50.03 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, leave or cause to be
placed or left, temporarily or permanently, any trash, refuse, garbage, cans,
cartons or bottles on the public streets or sidewalks of the town, or onto
private property, except that which is placed in a lawful container for pickup
by the Sanitation Department.
(1979 Code, § C-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 DUMPING OR BURYING IN TOWN PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or bury any garbage,
trash or other refuse on any lot or space in the town, that is owned by the
municipality.
(1979 Code, § C-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 ACCUMULATION, REMOVAL OF WEEDS, TRASH, REFUSE, OTHER MATERIAL.
   (A)   Every person who is the owner of land lying and situated within the
town or who occupies, rents or leases any such land, shall keep such land and
all appurtenances thereto free and clear of all trash, rubbish, garbage, weeds,
grass or other objects that cause such land and/or appurtenances to become a
nuisance or menace to the health and welfare of the citizens who live adjacent
or near thereto.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or tenant of such land to
keep the weeds, bushes, grass and any other vegetation cut and removed from
said land to the extent that the same will not afford a breeding place for
flies, mosquitoes, rats or any other rodents, to the extent that the same is a
menace to the health and welfare of the people living on or near such land, or
to the extent that such land shall not become a fire hazard that will endanger
the life or property of others.
   (C)   In the event the owner, occupant or tenant of such land shall fail to
remove such weeds, trash, garbage, grass of other objects that cause such land
to be a nuisance in the town, the town shall have the authority to enter onto
such land and clean the same; and to charge the cost or expense of such action
against the owner, occupant and/or tenant. In such event, such charge or
expense shall be and constitute a lien against said property, which such lien
may be collected in the same manner as the collection of a tax lien.
(1979 Code, § C-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 51: SEWER USE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Purpose and policy
   
51.002   Definitions
   
51.003   Abbreviations
   
51.004   Conflict
Regulations
   
51.020   General discharge prohibitions
   
51.021   Federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
51.022   Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
51.023   Specific pollutant limitations
   
51.024   State requirements
   
51.025   Town’s right of revision
   
51.026   Excessive discharge
   
51.027   Accidental discharges
   
51.028   Private wastewater disposal
   
51.029   Building sewers and connections
Fees
   
51.040   Purpose
   
51.041   Charges and fees
Administration
   
51.055   Wastewater dischargers
   
51.056   Wastewater contribution permits
   
51.057   Reporting requirements for permittee
   
51.058   Monitoring facilities
   
51.059   Inspection and sampling
   
51.060   Pretreatment
   
51.061   Confidential information
Enforcement
   
51.075   Harmful contributions
   
51.076   Revocation of permit
   
51.077   Notification of violation
   
51.078   Show cause hearing
   
51.079   Legal action
 
   
51.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the town,
and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment
regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403).
   (B)   The objective of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipality
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of municipal
wastewater system
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements
for other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting, assumes that existing customer’s capacity will not be
preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution
of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (D)   This chapter shall apply to the town and to persons outside the town
who are, by contract or agreement with the town, users of the town POTW. Except
as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent of the town POTW shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § R-1-1) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director in an NPDES state with an approved state
pretreatment program and the Administrator of the DPA in a non-NPDES state or
NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER. An authorized representative
of an industrial user may be: a principal executive officer of at least the
level of Vice President, if the industrial user is a corporation; a general
partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively; or a duly authorized representative of the
individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to
the POTW.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Approval Authority, as defined hereinabove; or the
Superintendent, if the town has an approved pretreatment program under the
provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.11.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the State of North Carolina.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a
“discharge of pollutants” under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment or
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of
the town’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or
more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA applicable to the method
of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) and the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies
to a specific category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OF NPDES PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD.
Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40
C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NEW SOURCE. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed regulations prescribing a § 307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
Categorical Pretreatment Standard which will be applicable to such source, if
such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the
Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later that 120 days after
proposal, a NEW SOURCE means any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the date of promulgation of the standard.
   PERSON.
      (1)   Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
      (2)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall
include the plural where indicated by the context.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharge into
water.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provided treatment
to wastewater.
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.
      (1)   The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of
the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a
POTW.
      (2)   The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical
or biological processes or process changes by other means, except as prohibited
by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an
industrial user.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).
      (1)   A treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292)
which is owned in this instance by the town.
      (2)   This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the
POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances
not connected to a facility providing treatment.
      (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, POTW shall also include any
sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the town who
are, by contract or agreement with the town, users of the town’s POTW.
   SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the town’s wastewater
disposal system who: has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
work day; has a flow greater that 5% of the flow in the town’s wastewater
treatment system; or has in his or her wastes toxic pollutants as defined
pursuant to § 307 of the Act of state statutes and rules; or is found by the
town, State Control Agency or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to
have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of
sludge, the system’s effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the town to supervise the operation
of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   TOWN. The Town of Rutherford College or the Town Council of Rutherford
College.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provision of CWA § 307(a) or other Acts.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into town’s POTW.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes form
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be
present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted
to enter the POTW.
   WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT. As set forth in §
51.056.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(1979 Code, § R-1-2) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
   l. Liter.
   mg. Milligrams.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.
   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
   SIC. Standard Industrial Classification.
   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
   U.S.C. United States Code.
   TSS. Total suspended solids.
(1979 Code, § R-1-3) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.004 CONFLICT.
   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or conflict.
(1979 Code, § R-8) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
REGULATIONS
§ 51.020 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the POTW.
   (B)   These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether
or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards of
any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (C)   A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature of
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or to be injurious in any other way to
the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time, shall two successive
readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the
system (or at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading
over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials
to include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naptha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other
substances with the town, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire
hazard or a hazard to the system;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics,
gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH less that 5.0, unless the POTW is
specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and/or personnel of the POTW;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified
pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case,
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
§ 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use
or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act being 42 USC
6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act being 42 USC 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances
Control Act being 15 USC 2601 et seq. or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used;
      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in Interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds
40°C (104°F) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such
temperature;
      (10)   Any wastewater having pollutants in excess of the limit
established below:
 
Pollutant        Concentration
BOD5             300 mg/l
Suspended solids 250 mg/l
NH3-N            16 mg/l
Phosphorous      12 mg/l
COD              1,200 mg/l
 
      (11) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; or
      (12) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
         (a)   When the Superintendent determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such
amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the Superintendent
shall: advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution of the POTW; and
develop effluent limitations) for such user to correct the interference with
the POTW.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
or under the jurisdiction of the town, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
         (d)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the
corporate limits of the town, and whose property line is located within 200
feet from a public sanitary sewer of the town, shall do one of the following:
            1.   At his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect the facilities to the proper sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date of the official
notice to do so; or
            2.   Shall pay the administrative billing charge, which would be
chargeable against such parties if they were tapped on the sewer.
(1979 Code, § R-2-1) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
chapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
(1979 Code, § R-2-2) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.022 MODIFICATION OF FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Where the town’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of
pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the town may apply to the
Approval Authority for modification of specific limits in the federal
pretreatment standards. CONSISTENT REMOVAL shall mean reduction in the amount
of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is
achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured according to
the procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 403, § 403.7(c)(2), titled “General
Pretreatment Regulation for Existing and New Sources of Pollution” promulgated
pursuant to the Act. The town may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the
Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 C.F.R. §
403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the Approval Authority is obtained.
(1979 Code, § R-2-3) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.023 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
   No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
   (A)   0.10 mg/l arsenic;
   (B)   0.20 mg/l cadmium;
   (C)   0.50 mg/l copper;
   (D)   0.34 mg/l cyanide;
   (E)   0.10 mg/l lead;
   (F)   0.10 mg/l mercury;
   (G)   0.25 mg/l nickel;
   (H)   0.03 mg/l silver;
   (I)   0.50 mg/l total chromium;
   (J)   0.50 mg/l zinc;
   (K)   0.10 mg/l total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons; or
   (L)   0.20 mg/l phenolic compounds which cannot be removed by the town’s
wastewater treatment processes
(1979 Code, § R-2-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.024 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(1979 Code, § R-2-5) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.025 TOWN’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The town reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
51.001.
(1979 Code, § R-2-6) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.026 EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal
categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the town or state. (Comment: dilution may be an
acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in §
51.020, e.g., the pH prohibition.)
(1979 Code, § R-2-7) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.027 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter.
   (B)   Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense.
   (C)   Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be
approved by the town before construction of the facility.
   (D)   All existing users shall complete such a plan of June 30, 1985. No
user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this
chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until
accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the town.
   (E)   Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of
the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume and corrective actions.
      (1)   Written notice.
         (a)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user
shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences.
         (b)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense,
loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; not shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
      (2)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call
in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(1979 Code, § R-2-8) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.028 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system, complying with
State Department of Human Resources, Division of Environmental Management and
the County Health Department requirements.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit form the county
inspection office. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
town. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the county inspection office
at the time the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the county
inspection office. Inspection shall be allowed by the owner at any stage of
construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
county inspection office when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered.
   (D)   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater
disposal system in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.
   (E)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere
with the authority and regulations of the State Department of Human Resources,
the State Division of Environmental Management or the County Health Department.
   (F)   Upon notification by the town that a public sewer is available, the
owner shall apply for a connection permit within 30 days.
      (1)   The owner shall have the connection completed and approved within
90 days of the notification.
      (2)   The private wastewater disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge
and filled with gravel.
(1979 Code, § R-2-9) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.029 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first a written permit from the county building inspection office, and
the town.
   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastewaters.
   (C)   In either case, the owner, or his or her agent, shall make application
for connection on a special form furnished by the town.
      (1)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent to the judgement of
the town.
      (2)   A permit and inspection fee for a residential, commercial or
industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the county building
inspection office at the time the application is filed.
   (D)   Within 30 days of receipt of the application for a building sewer and
for a connection permit, the county inspection office shall advise the
applicant as to whether sewer service will be available. If sewer service will
not be available, the full fee filed with the application will be refunded. If
sewer service is to be available, the applicant or owner may proceed with the
construction of the building sewer in accordance with the procedures defined
herein.
   (E)   All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found acceptable by the county building inspection office.
   (G)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations or the
town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof the
materials and procedures set forth in the State Building Code, Volume II,
Plumbing, latest edition, and appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and
W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
   (H)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town or the procedures set forth in the
State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing, latest edition, and appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the town before
installation.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the county
building inspection office when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of a representative form the county building inspection office.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.
   (L)   When trenches are opened for the laying of building sewers, such
trenches shall be inspected by the county inspection office before the trenches
are filled, and the plumber performing such work shall notify the county
inspection office when the laying of building sewer is completed. The filling
of a trench before inspection is made will subject the owner, to whom a permit
is issued, to a penalty for each offense. Payment of the penalty shall not
constitute acceptance. The work shall be uncovered for actual inspection at the
owner’s expense.
   (M)   The maximum allowable infiltration allowance of new service lines is
200 gallons per day/inch-diameter/mile. The town may require repairs or
replacement of the existing service lines in order to meet the same
infiltration allowance requirements as specified for new service lines and
connections. In such cases, all work shall be performed by or under the
provision of the licensed plumber and in accordance with the applicable
plumbing code and at the expense of the owner/user. The town may repair or
replace the existing connections at the expense of the owner/user or may permit
the owner to have such repairs under the town’s supervision by a licensed
plumber at the expense of the owner/user.
   (N)   Sewer service lines extended to the main shall be maintained and kept
free from stoppage by the owner/user to the owner’s property lines. Relocation
and/or replacement of any service line connection for individual improvement or
development shall be made by the town at the expense of the owner/user.
(1979 Code, § R-2-10) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
FEES
§ 51.040 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The town shall adopt, at least annually, an adequate schedule of user
charges and surcharges, and tap fees to defray the cost of administering,
operating and maintaining the sewerage system. The costs to be used as a basis
for determining the charges shall include, but are not necessarily limited to,
administration, direct operation and maintenance, collection and billing of
charges, bond redemption, studies and reports, professional fees, user charges,
surcharges and tap fees are to be used only for the purpose of administering,
operating and maintaining the sewerage system and shall be published on a form
for public distribution and notice.
   (B)   The Authority may allow users to discharge industrial wastes whose
waste exceeds the limitations of §
51.020(C)(10), provided that the user discharging such waste shall agree to the
payment of a surcharge to offset the entire cost incurred by the town in
treating wastes containing five-day BOD, suspended solids or other waste
constituents in excess of allowable limits. This surcharge shall be imposed in
addition to any other charges made for sewer service.
(1979 Code, § R-3-1) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.041 CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The town may adopt charges and fees which may include:
      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
town’s pretreatment program;
      (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
      (3)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
      (4)   Fees for permit applications;
      (5)   Fees for filing appeals;
      (6)   Fees for consistent removal (by the town) of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards; and
      (7)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
   (B)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the town.
(1979 Code, § R-3-2) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 51.055 WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge without a town permit to any natural
outlet within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town,
and/or to the POTW any wastewater, except as authorized by the Superintendent
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § R-4-1) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.056 WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMITS.
   (A)   General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or to
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users
connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution
permit within 180 (optional) days after the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution
permit shall complete and file with the town, an application in the form
prescribed by the town, and accompanied by a fee set by Council.
      (1)   Existing users shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit
within 30 (optional) days after the effective date of this chapter, and
proposed new owners shall apply at least 90 (optional) days prior to connecting
to or contributing to the POTW.
      (2)   In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and location, (if different from the address);
         (b)   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
         (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in §§
51.020 through
51.029 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures stabled by the EPA pursuant to
§ 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 as amended;
         (d)   Time and duration of contribution;
         (e)   Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations of any;
         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation;
         (g)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
         (h)   Where know, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any town, state or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
         (i)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule.
            1.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction and the
like).
            2.   No increment referred to in division (B)(2)(i)1. above shall
exceed nine months.
            3.   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
         (j)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
         (k)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (l)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; and
         (m)   Any other information as may be deemed by the town to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
      (3)   The town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the town may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.
   (C)   Permit modifications.
      (1)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to
such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within
the time frame prescribed by such standard.
      (2)   Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment
standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater
contribution permit as required by division (B) above, the user shall apply for
a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.
      (3)   In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution
permit shall submit to the Superintendent within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the
information required by divisions (B)(2)(h) and (B)(2)(i) above.
   (D)   Permit conditions.
      (1)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the town.
      (2)   Permits may contain the following:
         (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
         (b)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
         (c)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
         (d)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
         (e)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for
tests and reporting schedule;
         (f)   Compliance schedules;
         (g)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see division (C) above);
         (h)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town, and affording town
access thereto;
         (i)   Requirements for notification of the town and any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;
         (j)   Requirements for notification of sludge discharges as per §
51.076; and
         (k)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   Permits; duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (optional) years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user
shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the
expiration of the users existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit
may be subject to modification by the town during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in §§
51.020 through
51.029 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of
any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior to the
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
   (F)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises
or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any succeeding
owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing
permit.
(1979 Code, § R-4-2) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.057 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.
   (A)   Compliance date report.
      (1)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a
report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the
discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment
standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these
process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment
standards or requirements.
      (2)   The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements.
      (3)   This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of
the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional.
   (B)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new pretreatment
standard after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the
Superintendent during the months of June and December, unless required more
frequently in pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent, a report
indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which
are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall
include a record of all daily flows which during the report period exceeded the
average daily flow reported in division (B)(3) of this section. At the
discretion of the Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like, the
Superintendent may agree to alter the months which the above repots are to be
submitted.
      (2)   The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such
cases, the report required by division (B)(1) above shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass where requested by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
Administrator pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part
136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the Administrator.
      (3)   (Comment: Where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not include a sampling or
analytical technique for the pollutant in question sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA
publications, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with
any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the Administrator.
(1979 Code, § R-4-3) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.058 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The town shall require to be provided and operated at the user’s own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the
town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the town’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days written
notification by the town.
(1979 Code, § R-4-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.059 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   The town shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether
the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being
complied with.
   (B)   Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the town or its representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties.
   (C)   The town, Approval Authority and (where the NPDES state is the
Approval Authority), the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
   (D)   Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the town, the Approval
Authority and the EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(1979 Code, § R-4-5) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.060 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations.
      (1)   Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the town shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s
expense.
      (2)   Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be acceptable
to the town before construction of the facility.
      (3)   The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility a necessary
to produce an effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this
chapter.
      (4)   Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the town prior to the
user’s initiation of the changes.
   (B)   The town shall annually publish in the News Herald newspaper a list of
the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or
standards at lease once during the 12 previous months. The notification shall
also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users(s) during the
same 12 months.
   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall
be made available to officials of the EPA or Approval Authority upon request.
(1979 Code, § R-4-6) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.061 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets from the user.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written
request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system
permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions
of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (C)   Information accepted by the town as confidential, shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the town
until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
(1979 Code, § R-4-7) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.075 HARMFUL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The town may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the town, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge with
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health
or welfare of person, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or
causes the town to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
   (B)   Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution.
      (1)   In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the town shall take such steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals.
      (2)   The town shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or
the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge.
      (3)   A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the town within 15 days of the date of
occurrence.
(1979 Code, § R-5-1) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.076 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter, or
applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his or her
permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this subchapter:
   (A)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his or her discharge;
   (B)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
   (C)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring; or
   (D)   Violation of conditions of the permit.
(1979 Code, § R-5-2) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.077 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the town find that any user has violated or is violating this
chapter, wastewater contribution permit or any prohibition, limitation of
requirements contained herein, the town may serve upon such person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the
notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to
the town by the user.
(1979 Code, § R-5-3) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.078 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (A)   The town may order any user who causes or allows an authorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Town Council why the
proposed enforcement should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Town Council
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the
Town Council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing, service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
   (B)   The Town Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence,
or may designate any of its member or any officer or employee of the assigned
department to:
      (1)   Issue in the name of the Town Council notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
      (2)   Take the evidence; and/or
      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Town
Council for action thereon.
   (C)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges thereof.
   (D)   After the Town Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are
necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(1979 Code, § R-5-4) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.079 LEGAL ACTION.
   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
town’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the town, the Town
Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief
in the Circuit Court of the county.
(1979 Code, § R-5-5) (Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Town Council
or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, and the order, rule, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall
be fined in an amount set by Council from time to time, for each offense.
      (2)   Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, the town may recover
reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to
have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
(1979 Code, § R-6-1)
   (B)   Falsifying information. Any person who does either of the following
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine in an amount set by Council from
time to time, or by imprisonment of not more than six months, or by both:
      (1)   Knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed,
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater
contribution permit; or
      (2)   Falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this chapter.
(1979 Code, § R-6-2)
(Ord. passed 11-19-1984)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
[Reserved]   
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   PUBLIC NUISANCES; GENERALLY
      
93.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 90: PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Permit required
   
90.03   Exceptions
   
90.04   Application
   
90.05   Standards for issuance
   
90.06   Certain activities prohibited
   
90.07   Holder of permit
   
90.08   Revocation of permit
   
90.09   Interference prohibited
   
90.10   Appeal procedure
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROUP DEMONSTRATION.  Any assembly together or concert of action between or
among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or for
making known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of
any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting
attention to such assembly.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any
kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public
grounds or places.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other
organization, whether formal or informal.
   PICKET LINE. Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of such persons, or of or on behalf of
any organization or class of persons.
(1979 Code, § I-1) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in
any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place within the town, unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § I-2) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   Section 90.03 does not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities where such activity is under the immediate supervision
and direction of proper school authorities; or
   (C)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(1979 Code, § I-3) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief Executive Officer of the town on forms provided by such officer.
      (1)   Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed
with the Chief Execution Officer not less than three days nor more than 60 days
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
      (2)   Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
         (b)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or
by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters
of the organization, and the authorized and responsible heads of such
organizations;
         (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the Parade Chairperson, and who will be responsible for its conduct;
         (d)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
         (e)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
         (f)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the
vehicles;
         (g)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
         (h)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
         (i)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
         (j)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
         (k)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade;
         (l)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or
for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Chief Executive Officer a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant to apply for the
permit on his or her behalf;
         (m)   Whether or not minors below the age of 18 years will be
permitted to participate; and
         (n)   Any additional information which the Chief Executive Officer
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should be issued.
      (3)   Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for
a parade a permit fee of an amount set by Council from time to time.
   (B)   Additionally, if the applicant for the parade permit is not a resident
of the town, the applicant shall pay to or reimburse the town all expenses
incurred by the town in providing police protection, fire protection, traffic
control, emergency services or other town services.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Chief Executive Officer
shall provide an itemized statement of expenses incurred or to be incurred by
the town.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall deposit
with the town cash, or an acceptable bond or other surety, sufficient to defray
the expenses involved.
      (3)   Any excess funds collected hereunder which are not used for
providing town services for the benefit of the applicant shall be returned to
the applicant within ten days after the parade ends.
(1979 Code, § I-4) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.05 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Chief Executive Officer, or in his or her absence, a designated
agent, shall subject to division (B) below, issue a permit as provided for
hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
      (2)   The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulance as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions
of the town, other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and
areas contiguous thereto;
      (3)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly
areas;
      (4)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
      (5)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
      (6)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its
point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
      (7)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising
any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit; and
      (8)   The conduct of such parade will not be detrimental to or endanger
the health, safety or welfare of such minors who are involved or will not
interfere with their education.
   (B)   The Chief Executive Officer or his or her designated agent may issue a
permit which amends or alters the terms of the application, if in his or her
discretion, security, traffic control or emergency services cannot otherwise be
adequately provided.
(1979 Code, § I-5) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.06 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:
   (A)   The carrying on or about the person, or on or about any vehicle, any
firearm;
   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal, whether
leashed or un-leashed;
   (C)   For any minor below the age of 18 years to participate or be allowed
to participate in any parade, picket line or group demonstration unless a
permit therefor has been issued;
   (D)   For any person to lead, guide, participate in or in any way support or
encourage such parade, picket line or group demonstration when a minor below
the age of 18 years is participating therein, unless a permit for participation
by such minor has been issued;
   (E)   For any parent to knowingly permit any minor child of such parent
under 18 years to participate in such parade, picket line or group
demonstration, unless a permit for participation by such minor has been issued;
   (F)   To cause, participate in, lead or encourage any parade, picket line or
group demonstration to deviate in any manner from the authority therefor
specified in the permit;
   (G)   The carrying of any banner, poster, sign or other similar devise which
is made from or has a component part made from a club, police baton, night
stick, sharp object or other dangerous weapon or could be used as such. In
applying this section, the Chief Executive Officer shall have authority to
restrict the size and shape of all supports for signs, banners, posters or
other similar items; and
   (H)   The carrying of any other dangerous device or weapon.
(1979 Code, § I-6) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 HOLDER OF PERMIT.
   The permit issued hereunder is not transferable and the applicant for the
permit shall maintain the issued permit in his or her possession at all times
on the day of the parade march or demonstration and shall display the permit to
any law enforcement officer upon request.
(1979 Code, § I-7) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.08 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Chief Executive officer shall revoke any permit granted for a parade,
picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
   (A)   The violation by any participant of §§
90.06 or
90.07; and/or
   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
(1979 Code, § I-8) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.09 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade,
picket line or group demonstration being conducted under the authority of a
permit duly issued by the Chief Executive Officer.
(1979 Code, § I-9) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit, as herein provided, shall
have a right to appeal to the Council, but such appeal notice must be given in
five days thereafter, and the appeal upon such notice will be heard by the
Council at its regular meeting or at any special meeting the Council may set.
(1979 Code, § I-10) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding an amount set
by Council from time to time or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days as provided
in G.S. § 14-4.
(1979 Code, § I-11) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Street Provisions
   
91.01   Street lights
Sidewalk Regulations
   
91.15   Policy established
   
91.16   Permit to dig in streets or sidewalks
   
91.17   Application for permit; fee
   
91.18   Municipal liability
   
91.19   Supervision and control
   
91.20   Disposition of fees
   
91.21   Street repair
   
91.22   Excavations; leaving unprotected
   
91.23   Sidewalk construction
   
91.24   Damage to municipal property
   
91.25   Permit to mix building materials
   
91.26   Driveways; permit required
   
91.27   Driveway permit application
   
91.28   Permit standards
   
91.29   Speed limit
 
   
91.99   Penalty
STREET PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 STREET LIGHTS.
   Street lights shall be installed and maintained by the town in other than
business sections, street intersections or terminations, and at such other
locations that will best improve and enhance the general public’s safety and
well being within the corporate limits.
(1979 Code, § X-1)
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
§ 91.15 POLICY ESTABLISHED.
   It shall be the policy of the Town Council to regulate, promote, protect,
maintain and safeguard all public sidewalks within the corporate limits of the
town, in the best interest of the citizens and residents of the town.
(1979 Code, § J-1)
§ 91.16 PERMIT TO DIG IN STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench,
tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public
place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires or poles or
for any other purposes unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the
Chief Executive Officer of the town vested with such authority; provided, that
a permit shall not be required where such work is performed under a contract
with the town, but in the event such work requires a sidewalk or street to be
wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the Clerk, at least two
hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden
emergency.
(1979 Code, § J-2) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   All persons desiring a permit to make an opening in any street or
sidewalk, as set forth in §
91.16, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show
the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate
number of square yards of surface to be cut.
   (B)   Such application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the Council.
(1979 Code, § J-3) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.18 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in §§
91.16 and
91.17 herein agrees as a condition of the issuance of said permit, to indemnify
and hold harmless the town against any claims of expenses, including attorney’s
fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising
out of the person’s operations, excluding only the liability of the town for
its sole negligence, except in connection with general supervision of work
performed, by said person.
(1979 Code, § J-4) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   All excavation and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places in
the town shall be under the supervision of the Chief Executive Officer, whose
duty it shall be to inspect the same from time to time during the progress
thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he or she shall make a final inspection
and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a condition as
good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and
that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed therefrom. Any
person refusing of failing to comply with any provision of this section shall
be guilty of a violation thereof, and where such failure or refusal is
continued after notice from the Chief Executive Officer, every day’s
continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1979 Code, § J-5) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into
the General Fund.
(1979 Code, § J-6)
§ 91.21 STREET REPAIR.
   (A)   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of
the town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making such
excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling such excavation or
opening, and such refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and
specifications issued by the Chief Executive Officer or his or her duly
authorized representative.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation neglecting, refusing or failing to
comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation
thereof; and where such neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice
from the Chief Executive Officer or his or her authorized representative, every
day’s continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1979 Code, § J-7) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 EXCAVATIONS; LEAVING UNPROTECTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a
permit under the sections of this subchapter to do any excavation of any kind
which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place of the town without placing and maintaining proper
guard rails three feet from the ground and signal lights or other warnings at,
in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation or
work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account
of same.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to cut drains or ditches across the sidewalks or
streets unless boxing be used and the same covered on a level with the
sidewalk.
(1979 Code, § J-8) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.23 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or
corporation of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from
the town.
(1979 Code, § J-10) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.24 DAMAGE TO MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint upon or deface any
bridge, culvert, ditch and drain, sign, sign post, street light, traffic
signal, bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and
sidewalks or elsewhere, except employees of the town in the performance of
their duties.
(1979 Code, § J-11) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.25 PERMIT TO MIX BUILDING MATERIALS.
   (A)   No person shall mix any building materials on any street, sidewalk or
other public place, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the
Clerk or some other officer of the town vested with such authority.
   (B)   All persons desiring a permit to mix building materials shall make
written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the
proposed mixing and the kind and approximate amounts of materials to be mixed.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the Council.
(1979 Code, § J-12) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.26 DRIVEWAYS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any
driveway on the public streets, unless a written permit therefor has been
issued by the Chief Executive Officer.
(1979 Code, § J-13) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.27 DRIVEWAY PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   All persons desiring a driveway permit shall make application
therefor, which application shall show:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or agent in charge of the
property abutting and proposed work area;
      (2)   The name and address of the party doing the work;
      (3)   The location of the work area;
      (4)   Attached plans showing detail of the proposed alteration;
      (5)   The estimated cost of the alteration; and
      (6)   Such other information as the issuing officer shall find reasonably
necessary to the determination of whether a permit should issue hereunder.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the Council.
(1979 Code, § J-14)
§ 91.28 PERMIT STANDARDS.
   The officer shall issue a permit hereunder when he or she finds:
   (A)   The plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the Chief
Executive Officer to whom they shall be forwarded by the officer within a
reasonable time after receipt thereof;
   (B)   The work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the
town for public work of like character;
   (C)   The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means
of egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; and
   (D)   The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably
impaired.
(1979 Code, § J-15)
§ 91.29 SPEED LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on any town-maintained
street which is not part of the NCDOT Highway System at a speed in excess of 25
mph, unless otherwise posted.
(Ord. 12052022, passed 12-5-2022)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   All persons found guilty of violation of §§
91.15 through
91.28 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount set by
Council from time to time or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(1979 Code, § J-9)
CHAPTER 92: PUBLIC NUISANCES; GENERALLY
Section
   
92.01   Enforcement
   
92.02   Nuisances declared
   
92.03   Maintenance of exterior of premises required
   
92.04   Notification of property owner
   
92.05   Remedy of violation; penalty
Cross-references:
   Littering, see
Chapter 132
   Noises prohibited, see §
131.02
   Nuisances generally, see § 131.18
§ 92.01 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Town Manager shall appoint an individual as enforcement officer for this
chapter. The individual so appointed shall have the duty of full enforcement of
this chapter, and any enforcement officer shall be clothed with full power and
authority imposed by this chapter, and is hereby authorized and directed to
proceed to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § F-3-1)
§ 92.02 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   (A)   The following enumerated and described conditions are hereby found,
deemed and declared to constitute a detriment, danger and hazard to the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and are
found, deemed and declared to be public nuisances wherever the same may exist,
and the creation, maintenance or failure to abate the nuisances is hereby
declared unlawful:
      (1)   Any condition which is a breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes
or a breeding ground or harbor for rats or other pests;
      (2)   A place of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height. This shall include the area between a property line and
the edge of pavement of any abutting street, and to the centerline of any
abutting alleyway.
         (a)   Property that is used for agricultural purposes shall be exempt
from vegetation height requirements. These lots are reviewed and determined as
such by the Town Manager;
      (3)   An open place of collection of water where insects tend to breed;
      (4)   An open place of concentration of combustible items such as
mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash, refuse,
brush, old clothes, rags or any other combustible materials or objects of a
like nature;
      (5)   An open place of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste or
any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (6)   Any furniture, appliance or other metal product of any kind or
nature openly kept, which has jagged edges of metal or glass, or areas of
confinement;
      (7)   Any improper or inadequate drainage on private property which
causes flooding, interferes with the use of or endangers in any way the
streets, sidewalks, parks or other town owned property of any kind, provided
that the notices required and powers conferred by this chapter by and on the
enforcement officer in abating the nuisances defined by this division shall be
given and exercised by the Town Manager;
      (8)   Any condition which blocks, hinders or obstructs, in any way, the
natural flow of branches, streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches or drains,
to the extent that lots or properties are not free from standing water;
      (9)   Rotten, damaged or dilapidated sheds, outbuildings, garages or
other uninhabited structures which have collapsed or partially collapsed or
pose a danger of fire or pose a risk to neighborhood children or to adjacent
property and property owners; and
      (10)   A collection or storage place for old, worn-out, broken or
discarded machinery, car parts, junk, furniture, stoves, refrigerators and
appliances, cans or containers, household goods or plumbing and electrical
fixtures or other similar materials.
      (11)   An animal or group of animals shall be considered a nuisance if it
damages, soils, or defiles private or public property, interferes with,
molests, or attacks persons or other animals, is repeatedly at large, fouls the
air by odors, chases, snaps at, harasses or impedes pedestrians, bicyclists, or
vehicles, is diseased or dangerous to the public health. When practical the
town may classify an entire group of animals as a nuisance instead of
individuals within the group. This item shall apply to livestock and fowl but
not dogs and cats.
      (12)   On town property or in a street. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of an animal (pet) to permit the animal (pet) to leave its feces on town
property, in a town street or on private property. When the identity and
contact information of the violator can be reasonably ascertained by the town,
then the town may issue a notice of violation and take enforcement action
against the violator sending all notices and invoices required by §§
92.04 and
92.05(A) - (C) to the violator. A violation of this section shall constitute a
nuisance, which nuisance shall be abated in accordance with §
92.05(D)(3).
      (13)   Any other condition not enumerated in items (1) - (11) above may
be specifically declared to be a danger to the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and a public nuisance by the
Town Council, which proceeding may be initiated by the enforcement officer
before the Town Council after giving written notice in conformity with §
92.04, which notice will state the condition existing, the location and that
the Town Council will be requested on a day certain, after a public hearing at
which the person notified may appear and be heard, to declare that the
conditions existing constitute a danger to the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and a public nuisance and
that, after the declaration by the Town Council in the form of an ordinance,
the condition will be remedied or penalized as provided for in §
92.05, provided that no appeal shall lie from a proceeding initiated by the
enforcement officer before the Board of Adjustment as provided in §
92.05.
(1979 Code, § F-3-2) (Ord. passed 5-5-2014; Ord. passed 12-2-2024)
§ 92.03 MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIOR OF PREMISES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on his or her front porch
furniture designed for interior use, waste, lumber, junk, trash, debris,
abandoned objects, bedding, packing boxes, cans, containers, accumulation of
substantial quantities of loose earth, rocks, pieces of concrete or cement or
pieces of metal, appliances, automotive machine parts or any collection of
materials that can be considered combustible or that can harbor rats or other
pests. After notice of violation of this section, it shall be unlawful to allow
the items to remain on the porch of the occupant or owner for a period longer
than ten days.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have on his or her premises
material that creates a littered condition, such as dilapidated furniture,
discarded appliances, broken machinery, dilapidated building materials,
discarded automotive parts, tires or any other similar items which are not
completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. After notice of violation of
this section, it shall be unlawful to allow the items to remain on the property
of the occupant or owner for a period longer than ten days. This shall not
apply to authorized junk dealers or establishments licensed to engage in
repair, rebuilding, reconditioning or salvaging of equipment.
(1979 Code, § F-3-3)
§ 92.04 NOTIFICATION OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   When any public nuisance is found to exist on any property within the town,
the enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the premises where the
nuisance is located that conditions exist which constitute a public nuisance
and that, unless the condition is abated within 15 days from the mailing of the
notice, which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, the
conditions constituting a nuisance may be abated, and the cost of abatement
shall constitute a lien against the premises. The town may also issue civil
penalties or injunctions to penalize or remedy violations of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § F-3-4) (Ord. passed 5-5-2014)
§ 92.05 REMEDY OF VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby given full power and authority
to enter upon the premises involved for the purpose of abating any nuisance
found to exist as set out in this chapter.
   (B)   Within the 15-day period mentioned in §
92.04, the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the
findings of the enforcement officer made pursuant to this chapter to the Board
of Adjustment by giving written notice of appeal to the enforcement officer,
the appeal to stay the abatement of the nuisances by the enforcement officer
until a final determination by the Board of Adjustment. In the event no appeal
is taken, the enforcement officer may proceed to remedy the violation or charge
penalty.
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment, in the event an appeal is taken as provided
in division (B) above, may, after hearing all interested persons and reviewing
the findings of the enforcement officer, reverse the finding made pursuant to
this chapter, but if the Board of Adjustment shall determine that the findings
of the enforcement officer made pursuant to the section are correct and proper,
it shall declare the condition existing on the property to be a danger and
hazard to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of
the town and a public nuisance, and directing the enforcement officer to cause
the conditions to be remedied or penalized.
(1979 Code, § F-3-5)
   (D)   The Code Enforcement Officer may choose one of three methods to
correct a violation: criminal penalty, injunction, or abatement. Not more than
one method may be utilized per pending case file. After a violation comes into
compliance, the Officer may choose a different method of enforcement for a
subsequent violation.
      (1)   Criminal penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply
with same, shall, upon conviction be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and
subject to a fine not to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and
each day that any of the provisions of this code of ordinances are violated
shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Injunction. The town may obtain a court order to stop illegal
activity on site.
      (3)   Abatement. When a property owner fails to abate a nuisance within a
given amount of time, the town may abate the nuisance. After the abatement of
any nuisance as provided in this chapter, the cost of the abatement shall be a
charge against the owner and a lien on the premises upon confirmation of the
cost thereof by the Town Council, which confirmation shall take place only
after ten days’ written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance
existed of the proposed confirmation. Upon confirmation, the cost of abatement
shall be a lien against the premises from which the nuisance was abated, the
same to be recorded as provided in G.S. §§ 160A-193 et seq., and to be
collected as unpaid taxes.
(1979 Code, § F-3-6)
      (4)   Chronic violation. An owner of real property whereupon, in the
previous calendar year, the village gave notice of violation at least two times
during the previous calendar year to abate a nuisance pursuant to this chapter,
shall be deemed a chronic violator. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-200.1, a
chronic violator as defined herein shall be notified by the Village Manager
and/or their designee(s) if property owned by the chronic violator is
determined to be in violation of this chapter, and the village may take action
to remedy the violation without further notice during the calendar year in
which annual notice is given and the expense of such action including any
administrative fees shall become a lien upon the property and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes. The initial annual notice required herein shall be
served by registered or certified mail and shall be complete upon delivery or
deposit of the notice along with the appropriate fees under the care of the
United States Postal Service.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2014; Ord. 92.05(D)(4), passed 11-6-2023)
CHAPTER 93: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
93.01   Intent
   
93.02   Administration
   
93.03   Abandoned motor vehicles unlawful
   
93.04   Removal of abandoned motor vehicles authorized
   
93.05   Nuisance motor vehicles unlawful
   
93.06   Removal of nuisance motor vehicles authorized
   
93.07   Junked motor vehicles regulated
   
93.08   Removal of junked motor vehicles authorized
   
93.09   Notice of removal; prior
   
93.10   Notice of removal; post
   
93.11   Exceptions to notice requirements
   
93.12   Circumstances that threaten public health, safety and welfare
   
93.13   Conditions on removal of vehicles
   
93.14   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
   
93.15   Process for the sale or final disposition of vehicle
   
93.16   Protection against criminal or civil liability
§ 93.01 INTENT.
   (A)   Abandoned and junked motor vehicles left in public areas or other
visible areas lessen the attractive appearance of this community.
   (B)   Often, such vehicles cause dangerous traffic conditions which threaten
the safety of the citizens of the town. In a similar manner, abandoned and
junked vehicles left on private property also adversely affect community
appearance and many times become a collection place for trash and refuse and a
breeding place for rodents and other pests.
   (C)   Many such vehicles become a nuisance even if the vehicle has not been
abandoned in the technical sense or become a junked motor vehicle as strictly
defined in this chapter.
   (D)   It is the policy of the Town Council that vehicles which are
abandoned, junked or otherwise a nuisance ought to be prohibited in the town.
   (E)   Further, such vehicles and the conditions which surround such vehicles
shall not be allowed to present a danger to the citizens of the town,
especially small children who may be attracted to such vehicles.
   (F)   Unless specifically allowed by this chapter, or by some other state
law which supersedes this chapter, abandoned, nuisance and junked motor
vehicles on both public and private property shall be removed.
   (G)   The town will take an active role in furthering this policy and the
policy set forth in G.S. §§ 160A-193, 160A-303 and 160A-303.2. In those
instances when the owner of the vehicle or the property owner refuses to take
corrective action, the town will take an active role in having vehicles which
violate this chapter removed.
(1979 Code, § F-2-1)
§ 93.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Town Administrator and the Planner are primarily responsible for
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. From time
to time, the Town Administrator may designate or authorize other officials to
administer and enforce this chapter.
   (B)   The town, on an annual basis, may contract with private tow truck
operators or towing and vehicle storage businesses to remove, store and dispose
of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked vehicles in compliance with
this chapter and applicable state laws.
(1979 Code, § F-2-2)
§ 93.03 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle and for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave, allow or suffer the
vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared an abandoned motor
vehicle.
   (B)   A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE for
the purposes of this chapter in the following circumstances: any vehicle that
is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance
prohibiting parking; on a public street or highway for longer than seven days;
on property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours without
written consent from the Town Administrator or his or her designee; or on
private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof,
for longer than 24 hours.
(1979 Code, § F-2-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.
   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may determine
that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(1979 Code, § F-2-4)
§ 93.05 NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle and for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave, allow or suffer the
vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance
vehicle.
   (B)   A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLE for the
purposes of this chapter in the following circumstances: a vehicle on public or
private property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety
hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground, nest or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects,
rats or other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be opened or
operated from the inside area of confinement, such as trunks, hoods and the
like;
      (6)   One so situated or located that there is a danger of it falling,
dislodging or turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of refuse, trash, garbage, food
waste, animal waste or any other rotten or decaying matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal, plastic or glass; or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Town Council.
(1979 Code, § F-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.06 REMOVAL OF NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle, as defined herein, and order the vehicle removed.
   (B)   Notice of the determinations made by the official may be combined with
any other notices required under this chapter, or other town ordinances, and
provided to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the motor
vehicle and/or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property in the same
manner set forth in §§
93.09 and
93.10.
(1979 Code, § F-2-6)
§ 93.07 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES REGULATED.
   (A)   A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE for the
purposes of this chapter in the following circumstances: a vehicle that does
not display a current license plate lawfully upon the vehicle and that: is
partially dismantled or wrecked; cannot be self-propelled or moved in the
manner in which it was originally intended to move; or is more than five years
old and appears to be worth less than an amount set by Council from time to
time.
   (B)   With the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property, a single junked motor vehicle may be located, placed or stored on a
property, but only upon strict compliance with the following requirements.
      (1)   The vehicle can not be dismantled or in parts.
      (2)   The vehicle must be entirely concealed from the public view from a
public street and from adjacent premises by an acceptable covering. A canvas or
vinyl covering shall be deemed acceptable. Tattered, torn coverings or
coverings in a state of disrepair shall not be an acceptable covering.
      (3)   The vehicle may not be located on the premises for longer than six
months, except that upon showing a hardship, the official may allow the vehicle
to remain for a period up to an additional six months. Under no circumstances
shall the vehicle remain on the premises for a period of time longer than one
year.
   (C)   All other junked vehicles shall be kept in a garage or building
structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicles
cannot be seen from a public street or from adjacent property. For the purposes
of this chapter, a GARAGE OR BUILDING STRUCTURE means either a lawful,
nonconforming use, or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to the
lawful issuance of a zoning permit and building permit and which has been
constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations. A
carport shall not be treated as an acceptable garage or enclosure under this
section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the registered person or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle to place, store, leave or allow it to
remain on any property in violation of this chapter or to allow it to remain on
any property after the vehicle has been ordered removed from that property.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to permit, leave, allow
or suffer it to remain on the property in violation of the ordinance after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.
(1979 Code, § F-2-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.08 REMOVAL OF JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, the official may order the removal of a junked
motor vehicle after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing
the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed upon the private property owner.
   (B)   Such findings shall be based upon a balancing of the monetary loss of
the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or
enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance.
(1979 Code, § F-2-8)
§ 93.09 NOTICE OF REMOVAL; PRIOR.
   (A)   Except as provided for in §
93.11, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be
towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle.
   (B)   In the case of a nuisance or junked vehicle, if the names and mailing
addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the
vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the
vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
the notice shall be given by first class mail.
   (C)   A written record of the mailing, including the date mailed, shall be
retained. If such name and address cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to
be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on
the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice
indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specific date no
sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
   (D)   This notice shall be the responsibility of the Planner.
   (E)   The notice will also state that the property owner is allowed seven
days to file an appeal in writing to the Planner.
   (F)   At the time that an appeal is filed, all enforcement actions will be
stayed and the Planner will notify the Clerk to the Town Council that an appeal
has been filed.
   (G)   The commissioners will hear the appeal at the next available regularly
scheduled meeting.
   (H)   The Town Council will then decide if the property in question is in
violation of this chapter and determine if the vehicles should be removed by
the town.
   (I)   If no appeal is filed, then the decision of the Planner to order the
vehicles removed shall stand.
(1979 Code, § F-2-9)
§ 93.10 NOTICE OF REMOVAL; POST.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed, may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or by the
tow truck operator or towing business contracted by the town to perform towing
and storage of the vehicles. The authorized town official shall immediately
notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such notice to include:
vehicle description, location of storage, any applicable violation, the
procedure to redeem the vehicle and the procedure to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall provide notification by written notice to the last
known address of the vehicle owner. If the removed vehicle does not have a
valid registration or registration plates, the town shall make reasonable
efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the
last known registered owner of the vehicle.
(1979 Code, § F-2-10)
§ 93.11 EXCEPTIONS TO NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   In those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to
eliminate traffic obstructions or to other maintain and protect the public
safety and welfare, the authorized official may order the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle without prior notice. Findings
justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice shall be made in
writing.
(1979 Code, § F-2-11)
§ 93.12 CIRCUMSTANCES THAT THREATEN PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.
   (A)   For vehicles abandoned on the public streets and highways:
      (1)   Vehicles obstructing traffic;
      (2)   Vehicles parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking;
      (3)   Vehicles parked in a no stopping or standing zone;
      (4)   Vehicles parked in loading zones;
      (5)   Vehicles parked in bus zones;
      (6)   Vehicles parked in designated fire lanes; or
      (7)   Vehicles parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions
lawfully imposed under this code.
   (B)   For abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town owned property other
than the streets and highways and on private property:
      (1)   Vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress and egress to businesses
and residences;
      (2)   Vehicles parked in a manner or in a location which creates a
traffic hazard;
      (3)   Vehicles causing damage to public or private property; or
      (4)   Vehicles likely to cause personal harm or injury, especially to
children.
(1979 Code, § F-2-12)
§ 93.13 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
   (A)   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property has the means to
remove the vehicle under applicable state law procedures.
   (B)   In no case shall a vehicle be removed by the town from private
property without a written request from the owner, occupant or lessee, except
in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance or junked vehicle which has been
ordered removed by an authorized official of the town.
   (C)   The town may require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from a private property to
indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of
the removal, storage or sale thereof.
(1979 Code, § F-2-13)
§ 93.14 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing,
impoundment fees and violation fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such
fees, have been paid.
(1979 Code, § F-2-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.15 PROCESS FOR THE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.
   Upon exhaustion of administrative remedies set forth in this chapter,
Chapter 92, and
Chapters 130 and
131, any abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the town or
by the tow truck company having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such a
vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in accordance
with G.S. § 44A-1.
(1979 Code, § F-2-15)
§ 93.16 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
(1979 Code, § F-2-16)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   AMUSEMENTS
      
111.   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
      
112.   GARAGE SALES
      
113.   JUNK DEALERS
      
114.   SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL BUSINESSES
      
115.   TAXICAB LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
      
116.   BEGGING AND SOLICITING REGULATIONS
      
117.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      Cross-references:
         Miscellaneous offenses, see
Chapter 131
         Posting bills, other advertising, see §
131.04
CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   When license refused
   
110.03   Application for license
   
110.04   Form and content of license
   
110.05   Certain prohibitions to be observed by licensee and employees
   
110.06   Rules for operation
   
110.07   Licensee responsible
   
110.08   Revocation of licenses
Cross-references:
   Garage sales, see
Chapter 112
   Secondhand precious metal businesses, see
Chapter 114
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain an amusement center for which a charge is made,
either directly or indirectly, unless he or she shall first have secured a
license form the town to do so. Such license shall expire on June 30 each year,
and shall not be transferable.
(1979 Code, § D-2-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 WHEN LICENSE REFUSED.
   The Council shall not issue such license to any person:
   (A)   Who has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or
narcotic drugs; or
   (B)   Who has been convicted of three misdemeanors or felonies during the
five years next preceding the date of his or her application, excluding minor
traffic violations.
(1979 Code, § D-2-2)
§ 110.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for such license shall be made upon forms provided by the Tax
Collector.
(1979 Code, § D-2-3)
§ 110.04 FORM AND CONTENT OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify the
premises for which it is issued, the number of tables or alleys to be operated
thereunder, the name of the owner or operator, and the dates upon which the
license begins and shall expire.
   (B)   Such license shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises at
all times.
(1979 Code, § D-2-4)
§ 110.05 CERTAIN PROHIBITIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY LICENSEE AND EMPLOYEES.
   Licensees under this chapter shall not, and neither shall their employees:
   (A)   Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time;
nor the sale or use of any racing, football or other parlay cards or gambling
boards;
   (B)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to be come disorderly; or
permit any profane, obscene or indecent language thereon;
   (C)   Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to be sold
or kept or consumed on the licensed premises;
   (D)   Suffer or permit any person under age of 16 years to enter or remain
on the licensed premises, unless such person be accompanied by his or her
parent or guardian;
   (E)   Employ in carrying on the business any person who has been convicted
of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; or
   (F)   Suffer or permit any keeley board, keno board or any other such board
or devise to be attached to or placed upon any tables.
(1979 Code, § D-2-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 RULES FOR OPERATION.
   The following rules shall be observed by all operators of amusement centers
within the town.
   (A)   All amusement centers shall close at 1:00 a.m. each morning Monday
through Friday and 12:00 midnight on Saturdays, and no person other than the
owner, operator or employees shall be permitted on the premises from that hour
until 7:00 a.m. the following morning.
   (B)   No play on any table shall be allowed during the times when amusement
centers are required by this chapter to remain closed.
   (C)   Amusement centers shall remain closed on Sundays.
   (D)   All amusement centers shall be operated only on the ground floor of a
building, and plate glass windows shall be in those parts of the building
facing any street, so that a clear view inside may be had from the street.
   (E)   No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions shall
be placed between the entrance to the room where pool is played and the rear
wall of such room. A clear view of the interior from the entrance to the rear
of the room must be maintained at all times.
   (F)   No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures where the
public congregates shall be permitted; provided, this shall not be construed so
as to prohibit the maintenance of closets used exclusively for storage
purposes, or of toilets.
   (G)   There shall not be permitted or maintained any open or secret
connections through doors, windows, trap doors, hidden doors, panels, stairways
or other devices with any place where gambling is conducted or where persons
meet or congregate for immoral purposes.
(1979 Code, § D-2-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.07 LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE.
   The act and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the
conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the
licensee.
(1979 Code, § D-2-7)
§ 110.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   A second conviction of a licensee, or his or her agent or employee for any
violation of any provision of this chapter shall by operation of law constitute
an automatic revocation of the license of such license. In addition, the
Council may at any time for cause, and after a hearing of which licensee shall
be given such reasonable notice as the Council may direct, revoke any license
issued pursuant to this chapter.
(1979 Code, § D-2-8)
CHAPTER 111: COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Section
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Franchise required
   
111.04   Franchise acceptance; indemnification; effective date
   
111.05   Duration of franchise, termination; transfer
   
111.06   Authority granted by and duties thereunder
   
111.07   Use of streets
   
111.08   Permits; installation and service
   
111.09   Operational requirements
   
111.10   Remuneration to the town
   
111.11   Rights reserved to the town
   
111.12   Violations
   
111.13   Services presently provided
   
111.14   Miscellaneous provisions
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   For the better protection of the public interest, health, safety, welfare
and convenience, and pursuant to G.S.§ 160A-319, and other applicable laws, the
following rules and regulations are hereby adopted setting forth the
conditions, requirements and limitations under which a person may construct,
have constructed for him or her, operate and maintain a community antenna
television system, and engage in the business of providing a community antenna
television service in the town.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   CATV. Community antenna television.
   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SERVICE (CATV SERVICE). The business of
furnishing any system, service or facility that, by means of a master antenna
and wires or cables alone, receives, amplifies, modifies, transmits or
distributes any television, radio or electronic signal, audio or video or both,
to subscribing members of the public for compensation. It does not include
providing master antenna services only to property owned or leased by the same
person, firm or corporation, nor communication services rendered to a community
antenna television service by a public utility that is regulated by the North
Carolina Utilities Commission or the Federal Communications Commission in
providing those services.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FRANCHISE. Includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of
franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct or have
constructed, operate and maintain a CATV system in the town.
   FRANCHISE AREAS. The total area of which a franchise is awarded by the Town
Council.
   GRANTEE. The person, firm or corporation to whom or which a franchise,
hereinabove defined, is granted by the Town Council under this chapter, and the
lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm or corporation.
   GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES. Includes regular basic subscriber service fees,
installation fees received by the grantee as a result of the franchise granted
hereunder with no deductions whatsoever and excluding any taxes imposed
directly on any subscriber or user by and remitted to a governmental agency.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization of any kind.
   POTENTIAL SUBSCRIBERS. The households, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments within 200 feet from the cable where service could
be provided for them. Any household which is not located within the 200-foot
minimum distance shall be expected to share in any additional cost incurred by
the CATV industry to run such lines.
   PROPERTY OF GRANTEE. All property owned and installed or used by a grantee
in the conduct of a CATV business in the town under the authority of a
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.
   STREET. The surface of and the space above and below any publicly or
privately owned or maintained property or right-of-way, street, road, highway,
freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter
existing as such within the town.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service
of a grantee.
   TOWN. The Town of Rutherford College.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the Town of Rutherford College, North
Carolina.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.03 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or otherwise
participate in the construction, operation or maintenance of a community
antenna television service in the town unless such person or the person for
whom the work is being done shall have first obtained a franchise from the Town
Council. It shall also be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
providing a community antenna television service in the town unless such person
shall have first obtained a franchise from the Town Council; provided, however,
this chapter shall not apply to any person who only provides master antenna
service to property owned or leased by said person.
   (B)   A person seeking issuance of a franchise hereunder shall file a
written application in duplicate, with the town’s designated agent. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a
partnership, the name and address of each partner. If the applicant is a
corporation, the application shall also state the names and addresses of its
directors, officers, parents and subsidiary companies and of stockholders
owning as much as 5% of the outstanding stock, and shall include a certified
copy of the articles of incorporation;
      (2)   A statement showing the applicant’s experience, if any, in
establishing and in providing a CATV service;
      (3)   A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or
persons otherwise satisfactory to the Town Council, showing applicant’s
financial status and its financial ability to complete the construction and
installation and to provide a CATV service. In connection therewith,
information with respect to financial projections, including nature and sources
of capital or equity financing, shall be submitted along with the application.
All financial information shall be confidential and shall not be regarded as
public information;
      (4)   A statement and description of the CATV system proposed to be
constructed, installed, maintained or operated by the applicant; the manner in
which applicant purposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the same;
and particularly, the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or
other facilities of other public utilities will be used for such system; number
of channels, including number of channels for public assess; a 12-month service
plan and a projected three- and five-year service plan of the entire franchised
area, with maps to be included showing areas to get service and areas which
will not be served, if any;
      (5)   A copy of any arrangement, agreement or contract, if existing,
between the applicant (and) any public utility providing for the use of
facilities of such public utility, such as poles, lines, cables or conduits;
and copy of agreements with the Department of Transportation to use rights-of-
way;
      (6)   A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings,
whether written, oral or implied, existing between the applicant and any
person, firm or corporation with respect to the ownership, control or transfer
of the proposed franchise or th-proposed CATV system and service. t If a
franchise is granted to a person posing as a front or as the representative of
another person, and such information is not disclosed in the original
application, such franchise shall be deemed void and of no force and effect
whatsoever;
      (7)   A statement or schedule of proposed rates and charges to
residential and commercial subscribers for installation and services;
      (8)   A non-refundable application fee of an amount set by Council from
time to time to cover the costs incurred by the town for reviewing the proposal
and the granting of a franchise if the application is approved; and
      (9)   Any additional information which the Town Council, at any time, may
deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should
be granted.
   (C)   Upon consideration of such application, the town shall determine the
applicant’s qualifications to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system and
to provide CAT service in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, using
the following criteria.
      (1)   Installation plan. Preference may be given an installation plan
that would provide flexibility needed to adjust to new developments,
maintenance practices and services that would be available to the subscriber
and the community immediate and in the future.
      (2)   Rate schedule. Preference may be given to applicants with the most
reasonable installation and subscriber rate schedule.
      (3)   Financial soundness and capability. The evidence of financial
ability require in the applicant’s proposal shall be such as to assure ability
to build the system as proposed.
      (4)   Demonstrated experience in operating a CATV system. Preference may
be given upon evidence of the applicant’s experience in operating a CATV
system, where such evidence would show or tend to show or confirm the ability
of the applicant to furnish sufficient and dependable service to the potential
public and private user.
   (D)   If the Town Council determine that the applicant is not so qualified,
it may refuse to grant the requested franchise.
      (1)   If Town Council determines that an applicant is so qualified, it
may, by ordinance, grant a nonexclusive franchise to such applicant; provided,
however, no provisions of this chapter may be deemed or constructed as to
require the granting of a franchise when the Town Council determines that to do
so would not be in the public interest.
      (2)   The franchise granted shall not be pledged collateral or security
for any indebtedness or security obligation without the express written consent
of the Town Council.
      (3)   Any franchise granted shall include the following condition: the
CATV system and service herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and
exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by ordinance of town and no
other purpose whatsoever.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04 FRANCHISE ACCEPTANCE; INDEMNIFICATION; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Within 60 days after the town has taken final action to approve the
granting of a franchise, the grantee shall file a written acceptance of the
franchise, acknowledging before a notary public, with the town’s designated
agent. Such acceptance shall acknowledge that the grantee agrees to be bound by
and to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise, and shall
be in such form and content as to be satisfactory to and approved by the Town
Attorney.
   (B)   Concurrently with the filing of the written acceptance, the grantee
shall file with the town’s designated agent the bond and insurance policies
required by §
111.11.
   (C)   The effective date of the franchise shall be the date on which the
grantee files the acceptance and a satisfactory bond and insurance policies as
required herein.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.05 DURATION OF FRANCHISE, TERMINATION; TRANSFER.
   (A)   The franchise shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of 15
years the effective date thereof, as specified in §
111.04, and shall be renewable for five years terms upon agreements
satisfactory to the town and the grantee.
   (B)   The franchise shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or
disposed of, or whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by
volunteer sale, merge stock ownership transfer, consolidation or otherwise,
without the prior consent of the Town Council expressed by resolution, and then
only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed.
      (1)   In addition to such conditions, the successor in inter as approved
by the Town Council shall comply with the requirements of §
111.04 with respect to filing acceptance, bonds and insurance and shall show
that it is financially responsible.
      (2)   Any such sale, transfer, lease, assignment or disposal shall be
made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be
filed in the office of the town’s designated agent, within 30 days thereof;
provided, however, the provisions of this division (B)(2) shall not apply to a
transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation to secure an indebtedness.
      (3)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the Town Council
will not approve a transfer or assignment of the franchise before completion of
initial construction of the energized cable, or within the first two years of
operation thereafter.
   (C)   The Town Council may terminate the franchise prior to the date of
expiration upon a finding, made after 30 days’ notice of any proposed
termination and public hearing, that the grantee has failed to comply in some
material respect with any provision of this chapter, or has, by any act or
omission, violated in some material respect any term or condition of any
franchise or permit issued hereunder; the grantee made a material, false
statement in the application for the franchise, knowing it to be false; or the
grantee, contrary to the best interest of public convenience and welfare, is
not providing subscribers with regular, adequate and proper service.
   (D)   In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is
discontinued for any reason, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or
has expired, the grantee shall promptly remove from the streets or public
places all such property and poles of the system, other than those which the
town’s designated agent may permit to be abandoned in place, and as directed by
the town’s designated agent, shall either restore the street or pay the town
for restoring the street or other area which such property has been removed to
a condition for public use acceptable to the town’s designated agent based on
department of transportation standards. Any property remaining in place six
months after the discontinuance, termination or expiration of the franchise
shall be considered permanently abandoned and may be appropriated by the town
or removed by the town at the expense of the grantee.
   (E)   In the event of any termination of the franchise, the Town Council may
seek another grantee to provide the service. If the terminated grantee wishes
to sell his or her system to another provider, the terminated grantee shall
execute such deeds, bill of sale and other documents as may be necessary to
effectuate the sale. The Town Council’s decision to terminate shall be subject
to appellate review as provided by law. If removal of the CATV system from the
street, roads or public places is required by any law, statute or regulation,
such removal shall be performed by and at the expense of the terminated
grantee. In carrying out this removal, the grantee shall place the streets,
roads or public places in the same condition as before the system was built. If
the town or state is forced to remove the system, the work shall be done at the
expense of the terminated grantee.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.06 AUTHORITY GRANTED BY AND DUTIES THEREUNDER.
   (A)   The grantee of any franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall, subject to conditions and restrictions set out in this chapter,
be authorized to construct, or have constructed, operate and maintain a CATV
system and to engage in the business of providing a CATV service in the town,
and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace,
reconstruct, maintain and retain, in, over, on, under, upon, across and along
any public street, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits,
vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may
be necessary and appurtenant of the CATV system; and, in addition, so to use,
operate and provide similar facilities or properties lawfully rented or leased
from other persons, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other
grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the town. It shall be
unlawful for any telephone, telegraph or power company, or any other public
utility company or person operating in the town to lease or otherwise make
available to any other person any poles, lines, facilities, equipment or other
property for use in connection with the operation of a CATV system or service,
unless such other person holds a currently valid franchise granted pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Council shall approve the initial rates that the grantee may
charge subscribers for installation of equipment or connection to its CATV
system and for all subscriber services.
      (1)   This Town Council approval applies also to any new rates that may
be added for new service in the future.
      (2)   Increases in rates and charges shall not be made by the grantee
more than one time per calendar year and shall not exceed the increase in the
consumer price index for the preceding year.
      (3)   If the grantee wishes a larger increase than that dictated by the
consumer price index, it shall not be made without the specific approval of the
Town Council.
      (4)   No increases in rates and charges shall be made, unless the grantee
has filed a schedule of such charges with the town’s designated agent at least
60 days in advance of the effective date thereof, and the town’s designated
agent has verified that the charges are in accordance with this section.
   (C)   The grantees shall not engage in the sale, service, repair, rental or
leasing of television receivers, radio receivers, parts or accessories, and
shall not require or attempt to influence its subscribers to deal with any
particular person in regard thereto.
   (D)   Construction and maintenance of the CATV service, including house
connections, shall be in accordance with the FCC standards, the National
Electrical Safety Code of the American Insurance Association and such
applicable ordinances and regulations of the town affecting electrical
installations as may be presently in effect or may be enacted by the town, and
shall be subject to the approval of the inspection department of the town.
   (E)   The grantee shall provide a minimum of 11 channels of programs as a
basic service, and a total of 19 active channels available.
   (F)   The grantee shall make its facilities available for use by public and
private schools for local origination programs and for closed circuit
educational films, subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to
such use by the grantee and in such manner as not to unduly interfere with the
cable television operations of grantee. These facilities shall be located no
more than 30 air miles from the Old Burke County Courthouse located in downtown
Morganton, North Carolina. The grantee is hereby encouraged to provide this
service and applicants for a franchise that provide local origination programs
will be carefully considered.
   (G)   The grantee shall not make or grant any preference or advantages to
any subscriber, and shall not subject any subscriber or other person to any
prejudice or disadvantage. This provision shall not prohibit promotional
campaigns to stimulate subscriptions to the system or other legitimate uses
thereof, nor shall it prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of
charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classifications shall be entitled.
   (H)   All the terms, conditions and requirements of this entire chapter
shall be deemed to be made an integral part of each and every franchise granted
hereunder, to the same extent as though set forth in full therein.
   (I)   The grantee shall provide without charge one outlet to each volunteer
fire station, emergency medical service center and rescue squad center that is
passed by its cable within the town. Grantee shall also provide without charge
one basic service outlet to each floor of each town owned building and public
or private school, approved to the State Department Public Instruction, that is
passed by its cable within the town. If additional outlets are requested at any
of said locations, the grantee may install such additional outlet or outlets at
the cost of time and materials only. There will be no monthly basic service
charge at such locations. The grantee shall make studio facilities, including
color cameras and other equipment, available for use by such public and private
schools for local origination programs and for closed circuit educational
films, subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to such use by
grantee, and in such manner as not to unduly interfere with the cable
television operations of grantee.
   (J)   The grantee shall provide, free of charge, at least one dedicated
composite access channel for use by noncommercial public, educational, state
and local government agencies on a developmental basis; such channel will be on
a time-shared basis with other governmental agencies requesting the same
service.
   (K)   The grantee shall install equipment and cable that is adequate to
provide a capacity of 35- channel service within all areas served in the town.
Such equipment and cable shall include convertors, amplifiers, headend and all
materials throughout the system so that full 35 channel capability is assured.
   (L)   The grantee shall remain technologically aware of improvements within
the CATV industry and upon agreement with the town provide such additional
state-of-the-art services in the future when it is determined by the town and
the grantee that such service is financially feasible. Such additional services
may include, but are not limited to, two-way communication, emergency override,
interconnection with adjoining systems, program initiation, addressibility and
the like.
   (M)   The grantee is encouraged to provide the necessary supplemental power
source(s) to ensure that cablevision service will not be interrupted due to
minor isolated short-term power outages to the amplifiers along the cable
strand.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07 USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   There is hereby granted the further right, privilege and authority to
a grantee to lease, rent or in any other manner obtain the use of towers,
poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities from any and all
holders of public licenses, permits and franchises within the town and to use
such towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities, subject
to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the town and state.
   (B)   The installation of lines, including service drops to subscribers,
shall be made underground in areas where telephone and power lines are
underground. Such underground installation shall be made through use of
conduits, openings, pipes, cables or other installations which have already
been made by such other utilities and without staking new excavations or taking
up or disturbing any pavement, sidewalks or other improvements of any street,
except to the extent that the same is absolutely necessary to install service
drops to subscribers, and such installation shall be done in a manner approved
by the town’s designated agent upon providing proof that owner or owners of
such property to which new excavation is required has authorized same. Where
individual service drops are installed, proof of owner(s) authorization need
not be submitted to the town’s designated agent, but such proof must be
maintained in the grantee’s records for the term of the franchise.
   (C)   The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support temporarily,
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place or remove from
the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by
the town or state by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway and street construction change or establishment of street
grade, installation of sewer, water pipes, power lines, signal lines or any
other type of structures or improvements and the town and state shall be liable
for any disturbance of the grantee’s installation resulting therefrom, all at
the grantee’s expense. The grantee shall carry out the instructions and
directions of the town’s designated agent and Department of Transportation
Engineer whenever it is necessary to raise or remove any of the grantee’s wires
or cable temporarily, for the purpose of moving and removing buildings or
structures on the public and private streets of the town and shall perform such
tree trimming or other maintenance work as shall be required or as shall be
directed by the town or Department of Transportation.
   (D)   Wherever a grantee takes up or disturbs any pavements, sidewalk or
other improvement of any street, the same shall be replaced with the surface
restored in as good condition as before entry, all in accordance with
Department of Transportation regulations. The condition of such replacement and
restoration shall be guaranteed for a period of one year following completion
of such work and in the event any such work shall fail within said period of
one year, it shall again be replaced. Any opening or obstruction in the street
shall be guarded and protected in accordance with Department of Transportation
regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.08 PERMITS; INSTALLATION AND SERVICE.
   (A)   Within 30 days after acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall
commence proceedings and negotiations for obtaining all necessary permits and
authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including,
but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, licenses and
authorizations required by duly constituted regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems and service.
   (B)   The grantee shall accomplish significant construction of the system
within one year after the date of the franchise and thereafter extend energized
trunk cable to a substantial percentage of the town- approved three-year
service plan. At least 30% of the franchised area shall be operational with
subscriber service within the first year after the granting of the franchise
agreement as aforesaid, and an additional 30% each year until completed. In all
events, completion of the service shall be pursued with reasonable diligence.
   (C)   Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and diligently pursue
each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set
forth herein, shall be grounds for termination of such franchise, under and
pursuant to the terms of division (B) above; provided, however, the Town
Council may extend the time of the commencement and completion of construction
and installation for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in
good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control.
   (D)   The grantee shall provide a high quality service to each subscriber.
The minimum measured signal to noise ratio at the furthest cable line run and
last subscriber shall be at least 40 decibels.
   (E)   The grantee shall file a map with the town, or on before January 31,
of each year, showing the areas and locations of the town being served by the
same system, and the location and identification of the component parts of the
system, said map being accurate as of the end of the calendar year immediately
preceding the date of filing.
   (F)   The grantee shall file a revised 12-month service plan and a projected
three- and five-year service plan complete with maps and anticipated
technological service improvements on or before January 31, of each year,
showing the areas, proposed to be served during the respective plans time
frame. These service plans must be approved by the town prior to construction
and extension of service. In the event that no official town action has been
taken within 45 days, the service plans shall be deemed approved.
   (G)   It is the intention of the town to encourage the extension of CATV
service to as much of the town as is practicable without the impairment of the
economic feasibility of a grantee’s system.
      (1)   In the event that potential subscribers in a sparsely settled
section of the franchise areas shall request service, and grantee shall be of
the opinion that the small number of potential subscribers make such service
economically unfeasible, the grantee may make such service available by
requiring a reasonable contribution from the potential subscribers to the cost
of such extension of service; however, grantee shall not be required to make
such services available.
      (2)   Similarly, in the event potential subscribers in a non-sparsely
settled portion of the franchise area request service and grantee must run its
cables through a sparsely settled section in order to reach those potential
subscribers, the grantee may make such service available by requiring a
reasonable contribution from such potential subscriber; to the cost of such
extension through the sparsely settled section; however, grantee shall not be
required to make such service available.
      (3)   The areas of the town having less than 30 or more homes per cable
mile shall be deemed “sparsely settled”, as that term is used herein, and the
areas of the town having 30 or more homes per mile shall be deemed “non-
sparsely settled”, as that term is used herein.
      (4)   In determining the reasonable contribution from subscribers as
herein provided, the grantee shall take into account the size of the sparsely
settled areas through which it must run its cables in a sparsely settled area
seeking service, the number of potential subscribers in such sparsely settled
area seeking service, and the economic effects of the proposed extension and
service upon the total operation of grantees’ system.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.09 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The grantee shall install and maintain a CATV system which shall be in
accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the industry to the
end that subscriber shall receive the best possible service. In addition, the
grantee shall comply with all requirements of duly constituted regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the CATV or the operation of CATV system.
   (B)   The grantee must obtain individual permits for street opening, must
have the installation or construction plans approved prior to construction,
must secure all necessary permits at his or her expense and must pay all fees
and charges for closing payment cuts.
   (C)   When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public
utility poles and facilities, a certification that agreement for such joint use
has been entered into shall be filed with the towns’s designated agent.
   (D)   The grantee shall maintain an office located as described in §
111.06(F) for the purpose of investigating and resolving subscriber complaints
and providing prompt maintenance service.
      (1)   In furtherance of this object, the grantee shall:
         (a)   Maintain a telephone number which subscribers can call without
additional toll or message charges, and which will be publicly listed in the
white and yellow pages of all telephone directories in which all or a portion
of whose area is served by the grantee;
         (b)   Establish procedures so that all service complaints and special
requirements are recorded on standardized forms;
         (c)   Employ at all times sufficient and qualified technicians and
maintain requisite equipment in order that all bona fide service complaints may
be corrected as expeditiously as possible;
         (d)   Inform all subscribers in writing at the time of the institution
of cable television service of the procedures and facilities maintained by the
grantee for the purpose of investigating and resolving service complaints, and
of the fact that subscribers may inform the town’s designated agent in the
event that complaints are not resolved to their satisfaction;
         (e)   Retain complaint records available for inspection at any time
and from time to time by the town’s designated agent showing the nature of the
complaint and its disposition;
         (f)   Provide the town’s designated agent annual reports summarizing
the number of complaints, the disposition thereof, and the lengths of time
required for disposition; and
         (g)   The grantee shall ensure that in the event any subscriber’s
service is not satisfactory because of circumstances solely within the control
of the grantee for a period of 24 continuous hours, such subscriber shall
receive a prorated credit on his or her next regular statement for each day or
portion thereof such service is unsatisfactory.
      (2)   The town shall designate its agent, who is and shall be responsible
for supervision of the grantee’s resolution of service complaints; and the
town’s designated agent and grantee shall confer with respect to any and all
complaints received by the town’s designated agent from subscribers with
respect to the quality of service provided.
   (E)   The grantee shall abide by all federal laws and regulations governing
the operation of a CATV system.
   (F)   The grantee must carry the signal of any local television broadcasting
station or stations which may hereafter be erected on its cable on the same
basis as other stations already being carried, if FCC regulations so require
such service. In the event FCC regulations are changed, no commercial
television station within 30 air miles of the Old Burke County Courthouse which
has previously been carried shall be dropped.
   (G)   The grantee shall use the highest standard of care to protect the
privacy of all subscribers to the CATV system, and the system shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to that end.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.10 REMUNERATION TO THE TOWN.
   (A)   Upon the acceptance of a franchise and in consideration of the rights
and privileges granted thereunder, the grantee shall pay to the town an initial
franchise fee equal to an amount set by Council from time to time per month for
each month or major fraction of a month remaining between the date of
acceptance of the franchise and the next June 30 or 3% of the initial year’s
gross subscriber revenues, whichever is greater, thereafter, during the life of
the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the town on or before August 1 each
year a franchise fee to cover the preceding 12-month period, commencing July 1
and terminating the following June 30; the amount of said franchise fee to be
three percent of the grantee’s gross subscriber revenues derived from its
operation in the town’s corporate limits for the grantee’s most recent ending
fiscal year.
      (1)   The fee for the last year of the grantee’s franchise shall be
computed on the same basis, even though the term of the franchise is due to
expire during the year.
      (2)   Within 120 days after the expiration of the grantee’s fiscal year,
the grantee shall file with the town a financial statement prepared by a
independent certified public accountant, or other person satisfactory to the
town, showing in detail the gross subscriber revenues herein of grantee during
such fiscal year. The payment of this fee is in addition to any ad valorem
taxes which the town may be entitled to receive by reason of the existence of
grantee’s real and personal property. At any time during the three fiscal years
following the payment of the annual fee, the town shall have the right to
inspect the grantee’s records showing the gross subscriber revenues from which
these payments are computed and the right to audit and re-computation of any
and all amounts under this chapter. Acceptance of payment hereunder shall not
be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
town may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for
the performance of any other obligation hereunder.
   (B)   In the event of holding over after expiration or other termination of
any franchise granted hereunder without the consent of the town, the grantee
shall pay to the town reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than
100% of its total gross profits during said period.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.11 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE TOWN.
   (A)   The town, hereby reserves the right to amend any section, part or
whole of this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in
any way, to any extent, any right of the town to acquire the property of the
grantee its successors or assigns, by purchase at an agreed upon price. Said
acquisition could only occur in the event of termination of franchise or in
denial of a renewal period.
   (C)   At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized
representative of the town:
      (1)   To examine any and all financial records maintained by or under the
control of the grantee relating to all revenue obtained by it from its
operations under the franchise;
      (2)   To inspect and obtain copies of any or all maps or other diagrams
maintained by or under control of the grantee showing the location and the
layout of the various components of the CATV service operated by it under the
franchise; and
      (3)   To inspect any and all installations owned, maintained or used by
the grantee in its operations under its permit, including all towers, cables
and other components of the grantee’s CATV service.
   (D)   The grantee shall indemnify and save harmless the town, its officers
and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits and
proceedings by others, and against all liability to others, arising out of the
exercise or enjoyer of its franchise, including, but not limited to, any
liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure of the grantee
to secure consents from the owners, authorized distribution or licensees of
programs to be delivered by the grantee’s CATV service and against any loss,
cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney’s
fees.
   (E)   Concurrently with the filing of the written acceptance as required in
§
111.06, the grantee shall file with the town’s designated agent and at all
times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such permit
or any renewal thereof a good and sufficient liability insurance policy or
policies, or in lieu thereof a certificate or certificates of insurance
demonstrating the existence of such coverage, providing $300,000 coverage for
personal injuries to each person; $500,000 coverage for all personal injuries
in each accident; and $300,000 coverage for all property damage in each
accident. The policy or policies shall name the town as additional insured and
shall be for the purpose of insuring the town against any and all legal
liability, court costs and costs of defense for any action, cause of action,
claim or demand for personal injury, death or property damage arising out of
the operations of the grantee under this chapter of its permit.
   (F)   Concurrently with the filing of the written acceptance as required in
§
111.04, the grantee shall file with the town’s designated agent a corporate
surety bond by a company authorized to do business in the state and found
acceptable by the Town Attorney, in the amount of $50,000 to guarantee the
timely construction, and full activation of the cable television system.
      (1)   The bond shall provide, but not be limited to, the following
condition: there shall be recoverable by the town, jointly and severally from
the principal and surety any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the
town resulting from the failure of the grantee to satisfactorily complete and
fully activate the cable television system pursuant to the terms of the
franchise.
      (2)   The construction bond shall be terminated only after the Town
Council find that the company has satisfactorily completed and fully activated
the cable system pursuant to the terms of the franchise.
      (3)   The rights of the town with respect to the construction bond are in
addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by this chapter or
authorized by the law and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with
respect to such construction bond shall effect any other right the town may
have.
   (G)   Concurrently with the filing of the written acceptance as required in
§
111.04, the grantee shall deposit with the town’s designated agent a letter of
credit from a financial institution in the amount of $10,000. The identity of
the financial institution, and form and consent of such letter of credit shall
be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The letter of credit shall be used to
insure the faithful performance by the grantee of all provisions of this
chapter and the franchise and compliance with all reasonable orders, permits
and directions of any agency of the town having jurisdiction over its acts of
defaults under this chapter of the franchise, and the payment by the grantee of
any claims, liens and taxes due the town which arise by reason of the
construction, operations or maintenance of the cable television system.
      (1)   The letter of credit shall be maintained at $10,000 during the
entire term of the franchise or until such time as the town may reduce the
amount or release the letter. The town shall consider said reduction or release
upon request of the grantee and not prior to two years after completion of the
initial system. Criteria that the town may consider in its decision shall
include the grantee’s total performance record within the town. The grantee
shall maintain the letter of credit of $10,000, even if amounts are withdrawn
pursuant to this section.
      (2)   If the grantee fails to pay the town any compensation within the
time fixed herein; or fails, after 30 days’ notice to pay to the town any taxes
due or unpaid, or fails to repay the town within such 30 days, any damages,
costs or expenses which the town shall be compelled to pay by reason of any act
or default of the grantee in connection with this chapter of the franchise; or
fails, after three days’ notice of such failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter or the franchise which the town’s designated agent reasonably
determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit, the town’s
designated agent may immediately request payment of the amount thereof, with
interest and any penalties, from the letter of credit.
         (a)   Upon such request for payment, the town’s designated agent shall
notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof.
         (b)   The rights reserved to the town with the respect to the letter
of credit are in addition to all other rights of the town, whether reserved by
the ordinance or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the
town may have.
   (H)   The operation of any CATV system shall be subject to and restricted by
the rules, regulations and specifications promulgated from time to time by the
Federal Communications Commission and similar agencies affecting CATV systems
of the type contemplated by this franchise.
   (I)   The grantee shall pay to the town all expenses, including reasonable
legal and consulting fees in connection with the granting of a franchise
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter less all application fees collected
by the town pursuant to the process leading to the award of the franchise. Such
payment shall be made within 30 days after the town furnishes the grantee with
written statement of such expenses.
   (J)   The town hereby reserves the right to periodically review the
technological operation of the grantee to ensure that the subscribers receive
the highest technically financially feasible level of service than can be
provided.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.12 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized
connection whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise with any part of a franchised CATV system within this town for the
purpose of enabling himself or herself or others to take or receive television
signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound with or without payment to
the owner of the system.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wire or equipment used
for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or
sound.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.13 SERVICES PRESENTLY PROVIDED.
   Any person, firm or corporation which is providing CATV service at the time
of the adoption of this chapter shall not be deemed to be in violation of this
chapter until such time as a franchise is issued pursuant to this chapter for
the area in which the person, firm or corporation without a franchise is
operating.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.14 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   When a conflict exists between the provisions of this chapter and
regulations of the FCC respecting the operations of the grantee, the more
stringent will control.
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
chapter shall be unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter,
since the same would have been enacted by the Town Council without the
incorporation in this chapter of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section.
   (C)   The grantee agrees to comply fully with all local ordinances, state
and federal laws, and with all rules issued by all regulatory agencies now or
hereafter in existence.
   (D)   The captions to sections are inserted solely for information and shall
not affect the meaning of interpretation of the ordinance.
   (E)   The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the town or its
officers, boards, Town Council, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense
or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this franchise or
because of its enforcement.
   (F)   The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly
with any of the provisions of the franchise by any failure of the town to
promptly enforce the ordinance.
   (G)   This chapter and any disputes arising from its adoption, or from the
exercise of any franchise granted pursuant thereto shall be governed by the
laws of the state and the town consistent with applicable FCC rules and
regulations required to be observed in the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by fine of an amount set by Council from time to time and
imprisonment of up to 30 days.
   (B)   The existence of this penalty is exclusive of civil remedies for
enforcement as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. passed 5-9-1983)
CHAPTER 112: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
112.01   Regulation of garage sales
§ 112.01 REGULATION OF GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   No individual person, firm, association, church or corporation that is
not regularly engaged in the sale of personal property shall hold or have a
garage sale or sale in the general nature of a garage sale without first
obtaining a permit form the town.
   (B)   A charge shall not be made by the town for the issuance of such
permits.
   (C)   An individual person and members of his or her immediate family living
in same household shall not have more than two garage sales or similar sales
per calendar year.
   (D)   Non-profit organizations, such as clubs, firms, associations and
churches are not limited as to the number of such sales in each calendar year.
   (E)   Any individual, non-profit organization engaging in a garage sale
shall be responsible for the removal of all signs, and unsold merchandise
within 12 hours after the conclusion of said sale. In addition, no merchandise
or signs advertising said sale shall be placed at a sale location more than 72
hours in advance of the sale.
   (F)   Individual or non-profit organizations conducting a garage sale shall
be responsible for providing adequate traffic control at the sale area as well
as assuming responsibility for all accidents and damages, collection and
disposal of all refuse created by said sale.
   (G)   If any person, firm or organization shall be found to be in violation
of any of the provisions of this section, and so convicted, he or she shall be
punished as provided in §
10.99.
(1979 Code, § G-1) (Ord. passed 2-8-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Permit required
   
113.03   Application for permit
   
113.04   Issuance of permit
   
113.05   Records required
   
113.06   Maintenance of records
   
113.07   Enclosure required
   
113.08   Accessory buildings
   
113.09   Burning prohibited
   
113.10   Combustible materials
   
113.11   Unlawful for unlicensed persons to keep junk; removal
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Any worn out, discarded or old iron, other metal, automobiles parts,
chain, copper, parts of machinery, automobile tires, appliances or old wrecked
or unusable automobiles and trucks, and other articles commonly known as JUNK.
   JUNK YARD. Any area larger than 100 feet by 100 feet in which junk is stored
or permitted to accumulate.
(1979 Code, § E-1)
§ 113.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person who shall engage in the business of buying, selling, handling,
storing or hauling junk shall first obtain a permit therefor, and shall pay for
such permit a fee to be established by the Council.
(1979 Code, § E-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for a permit to engage in the junk business shall be made to the
Building Inspector and shall state the place where the business is to be
conducted and that the terms of this chapter shall be met.
(1979 Code, § E-3)
§ 113.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The executive officer of the municipality shall issue a permit to engage in
the junk business to the applicant therefor if it shall appear that the
location of the junk yard shall not constitute a fire hazard or other hazardous
condition to any adjacent property.
(1979 Code, § E-4)
§ 113.05 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   Any person or corporation operating or maintaining a junk yard shall keep
records on each article of junk, which will show the following:
   (A)   Description of junk;
   (B)   Person or corporation from whom obtained; and
   (C)   Serial or motor number, if any.
(1979 Code, § E-5)
§ 113.06 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   The records required to be kept by junk dealers shall not be destroyed until
three years of age and shall be available for inspection by the Chief Executive
Officer of the municipality at reasonable times.
(1979 Code, § E-6)
§ 113.07 ENCLOSURE REQUIRED.
   All junk yards shall be enclosed by a wire or metal fence of a minimum
height of six feet, protected by gates which may be locked, and shall be locked
when an attendant is not present. The plans for construction of the fence and
gates shall be first submitted to the Chief Executive Officer of the
municipality, and approved by him or her.
(1979 Code, § E-7)
§ 113.08 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   Nothing but automobile dismantling shall be carried on in any automobile or
truck junk yard, and if repairs are made at or in any junk yard to automobiles
or trucks, such repairs shall be made in a building meeting all the applicable
provisions of this code and state law.
(1979 Code, § E-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.09 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No junk or any vehicle, including automobiles and trucks, shall be burned in
or on any premises occupied as a junk yard.
(1979 Code, § E-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.10 COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Gas and oil and all other combustible material shall be stored in a
building of fire-proof construction, which shall be constructed in full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this code and state law.
   (B)   Upon being stored or placed in the junk yard, all gas and oil shall be
drained from vehicles and stored.
(1979 Code, § E-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.11 UNLAWFUL FOR UNLICENSED PERSONS TO KEEP JUNK; REMOVAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than licensed junk dealers,
to place, keep, store or otherwise allow any worn out, discarded or old iron,
other metal, automobile parts, chain, copper, parts of machinery, automobile
tires, appliances or old wrecked, or unusable automobiles and trucks, and other
articles commonly known as junk.
   (B)   In event any of the above described junk shall be left upon the
premises located within the town, the town may, at its option, cause the same
to be removed after serving the property owner or parties in charge of the
property with a written notice, ten days in advance of the removal of the same,
that the town does intend to remove said junk in accordance with this chapter.
(1979 Code, § E-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL BUSINESSES
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Investigation of license applicant
   
114.04   License denial or revocation
   
114.05   Records of transactions
   
114.06   Goods to be kept for five days
   
114.07   Purchasing from juvenile
   
114.08   Use of unlicensed premises prohibited; exception
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SECONDHAND ARTICLE shall mean an article which has been used or which has
been previously traded or sold by a retailer. For purpose of this chapter, the
term SECONDHAND ARTICLE shall not include any coin or any gold or silver ingot
or bar.
   SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL BUSINESS. Any person, firm, corporation or
association engaged in the business of purchasing, trading for or otherwise
acquiring ownership of any secondhand article made, in whole or in part of gold
or silver or platinum.
(1979 Code, § H-1) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, partnership, corporation or association shall operate a
secondhand precious metal business, as herein defined, unless such person,
partnership, corporation or association shall have first applied for and
received a privilege license from the Chief Executive Officer of the town. A
separate license shall be required for each location, place or premises used
for the conduct of a secondhand precious metal business, and each license shall
designate the location, place or premises to which it applies. In addition,
such business shall not be carried or conducted in any other place than that
designated in or by such license.
   (B)   Every partnership, corporation or association operating as a
secondhand precious metal business shall be responsible for insuring that every
employee, before being employed is registered by name and address with the
Chief Executive Officer of the town by name and address. Such employee shall
then be issued by the Chief Executive Officer of the town a certificate of
compliance with this section.
(1979 Code, § H-2) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 INVESTIGATION OF LICENSE APPLICANT.
   (A)   Any person applying to the Chief Executive Officer of the town for a
license to conduct the business of a secondhand precious metal dealer shall
also report to any law enforcement agency designated by the Chief Executive
Officer and furnish his or her full name, address, physical description, age,
North Carolina driver’s license number (if applicable) and Social Security
number to assist in an investigation of his criminal record and character.
   (B)   In the even the applicant is a partnership or association, all persons
owning or having an interest therein shall comply with the provisions of
division (A) above.
   (C)   In the case of a corporate applicant, each stockholder owning 10% or
more of the corporation’s common stock shall comply with the provisions of
division (A) above.
(1979 Code, § H-3) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 114.04 LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to any applicant if any of the persons
required to be investigated under §
114.03 have been convicted of any felony or of a crime involving fraud, theft
or receiving or possessing stolen property in the five years immediately
preceding the date of the license application.
   (B)   The conviction of any person required to be investigated under §
114.03 for any felony or for any crime involving fraud, theft or receiving or
possessing stolen property or for any violation of this chapter shall
constitute grounds for immediate revocation by the Chief Executive Officer of
the privilege license issued to such secondhand precious metal business.
(1979 Code, § H-4) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 114.05 RECORDS OF TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   Every secondhand precious metal business shall keep a tightly bound
book or books, not loose-leaf, with pages numbered in sequence, in which there
shall be legibly written at the time of any transaction with a non-licensee
involving the purchasing of, trading for or acquiring of ownership of any
secondhand article made, in whole or in part, of gold or silver or platinum,
the following information:
      (1)   An account and description of the item(s), article(s) or thing(s)
purchased, traded for or taken in, including, if applicable, the manufacturer’s
name, the model, the model number, the serial number and any engraved number
(s), initials or marking(s);
      (2)   The amount of money involved in the transaction any item offered in
trade; all money being paid to a seller by a secondhand precious metal business
shall be paid by check;
      (3)   The date of the transaction;
      (4)   The name and residence of the person involved in the transaction
with the secondhand precious metal business, along with the person’s date of
birth and general physical description, including hair color and approximate
height and weight; and
      (5)   A notation whether the item(s), article(s) or thing(s) are stored
on the licensed premises or elsewhere.
   (B)   No transaction involving purchasing, trading for or taking in a
secondhand article made, in whole or in part, of gold or silver or platinum
shall be completed by any secondhand precious metal business or an agent or
employee thereof until the person involved in the transaction presents two
forms of positive identification or one state or federal government issued
identification containing a photographic representation imprinted thereon. This
identification information shall be recorded not to the person’s name and
residence in the book required to be kept pursuant to division (A) above.
   (C)   The book(s) required by this section shall be a permanent record to be
kept at all times on the premises of the secondhand precious metal business.
Such book(s) shall be made available, during regular business hours, to any law
enforcement officer. A full and accurate copy of the records required to be
kept by this section shall be filed with the Chief Executive Officer within 48
hours of the transaction. The full and accurate filing with the Chief Executive
Officer or Town Clerk of the records required hereunder by a licensee which is
also a licensed pawnbroker shall constitute compliance with the filing
provisions of G.S. § 66-410 (as the same appears in the 1979 Cumulative
Supplement to Volume 2C of the North Carolina General Statutes) for any
transaction subject to the provisions thereof.
   (D)   The book(s) need not be kept longer than three years by the licensee.
(1979 Code, § H-5) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 114.06 GOODS TO BE KEPT FOR FIVE DAYS.
   (A)   Every secondhand precious metal business must keep all secondhand
articles made, in whole or in part, of gold or silver or platinum open to
inspection by any law enforcement officer at reasonable times for a period of
five days after the purchase or acquisition thereof in any transaction subject
to the provisions of §
114.05.
   (B)   During this period, the appearance of such articles shall not be
altered in any way.
   (C)   A secondhand precious metal business is not prohibited from selling or
arranging to sell or trade such articles during the five-day period, as long as
such articles remain in its possession as required by this section.
(1979 Code, § H-6) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
§ 114.07 PURCHASING FROM JUVENILE.
   No secondhand precious metal business or employee or agent thereof shall
purchase from any juvenile under 18 years of age any secondhand article made,
in whole or in part, of gold or silver or platinum without the written consent
of the juvenile’s parent or guardian or presentation of proof of ownership.
(1979 Code, § H-7) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.08 USE OF UNLICENSED PREMISES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No secondhand precious metal business shall make use of any property or
premises not included within the premises designated in or by the license
required by this chapter for the display or any secondhand article made, in
whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum or for the conduct of a
secondhand precious metal business. This chapter does not prohibit the storage
or safekeeping of any such secondhand article off of the licensed premises.
(1979 Code, § H-8) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall
constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, a violator shall be punished by
a fine in an amount set by Council from time to time or imprisonment for not
more than 30 days. Each and every violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
(1979 Code, § H-9) (Ord. passed 2-9-1981)
CHAPTER 115: TAXICAB LICENSING AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Compliance with chapter and other provisions
   
115.03   Insurance
   
115.04   License required
   
115.05   Inspection of vehicles
   
115.06   Inspection card
   
115.07   Type of vehicle to be used as taxicab
   
115.08   Determination of rates and fares
   
115.09   Payment of rates, fares
   
115.10   Identification of vehicles
   
115.11   Refusal of passengers restricted
   
115.12   Maintenance of vehicles
   
115.13   Exterior and interior appearance
   
115.14   Acceptance of additional passengers
   
115.15   Number of passengers
   
115.16   Accident reports
   
115.17   Transportation of nonpaying passengers
   
115.18   Soliciting business; cruising prohibited
   
115.19   Transporting persons for unlawful purposes
   
115.20   Loading or unloading passengers by buses
   
115.21   Certificate of convenience and necessity
   
115.22   Display
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CORPORATE LIMITS. Includes all the area within the corporate limits of the
town and the area adjacent thereto within a radius of one-mile of the corporate
limits.
   DRIVER. Anyone who does or expects to drive, either for himself or herself,
or for some other person, taxicabs.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers, operated upon
any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers
indiscriminately for hire between such points along streets or highways as may
be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported, and shall not
include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as defined in G.S. § 62-3(17).
(1979 Code, § D-1-1)
§ 115.02 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AND OTHER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of a taxicab or taxicab company to
comply with the provisions of this chapter and to require that all drivers or
chauffeurs driving or proposing to drive a taxicab for such owner adhere to and
at all times conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab
upon the streets of the town in violation of the provisions of this chapter or
any other applicable provision of this code, state law or ordinance of the
town.
   (C)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any owner or operator of a taxicab
or taxicab company to knowingly permit or cause to be driven or operated upon
the streets or other public ways of the town any taxicab belonging to such
owner or operator by any driver or chauffeur who has not complied with or who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
provisions of the code, state law or town ordinance.
(1979 Code, § D-1-2) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.03 INSURANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a taxicab to operate such
taxicab in the corporate limits without first taking out and keeping in effect
at all times a policy or policies of insurance issued by some insurance company
duly licensed to do business in the state to cover damages.
   (B)   Said insurance shall at all times equal or exceed the minimum
requirements in effect under the state’s insurance regulations.
(1979 Code, § D-1-3) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every owner of a taxicab or taxicab company for which a certificate of
convenience and necessity has been issued to operate a taxicab in the corporate
limits shall apply to and secure form the tax collector an annual license for
the privilege of operating such taxicab.
(1979 Code, § D-1-4) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.05 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be
operated, within the corporate limits any taxicab or motor vehicle carrying
passengers for hire without first submitting and presenting each said motor
vehicle so used to the Chief Executive Officer of the municipality for an
inspection of the brakes, lights, horn, motor and general condition of said
car.
   (B)   Each said motor vehicle so used and operated for the carrying of
passengers for hire must conform to the requirements of state law in regard to
speed, lights, brakes, horn and any other requirements set forth therein.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every taxicab owner to present each and every
motor vehicle used as a taxicab one each six months after the first inspection
for a reinspection.
(1979 Code, § D-1-5) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.06 INSPECTION CARD.
   (A)   The Chief Executive Officer of the municipality shall issue an
inspection card to the owner of each taxicab inspected, showing the make of the
car, model, motor number, name of owner, date of inspection, condition of
lights, horn, brakes and general condition of said car.
   (B)   The inspection card shall at all times be displayed in a visible place
in said car when used as a taxicab and this card must be submitted and
presented to the Chief Executive Officer of the municipality every six months
thereafter at the time when the car for the said card was issued is submitted
and presented for inspection as above set forth.
   (C)   The Chief Executive Officer of the municipality shall note on the
inspection card the date of each and every car inspection.
(1979 Code, § D-1-6) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.07 TYPE OF VEHICLE TO BE USED AS TAXICAB.
   All vehicles used as taxicabs shall be four-door sedans and shall be
maintained in good, safe mechanical working order.
(1979 Code, § D-1-7) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.08 DETERMINATION OF RATES AND FARES.
   (A)   The rates and fares which shall be charged by the drivers or operators
of taxicabs or other vehicles for hire within the town shall be determined by
the Town Council from time to time.
   (B)   A rate card showing the current rates shall be posted in the passenger
compartment and available to passengers at all times.
(1979 Code, § D-1-8) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.09 PAYMENT OF RATES, FARES.
   No person, except persons entitled to free transportation, shall ride upon
any bus, taxicab or other public conveyance without paying the fare prescribed
or allowed by law.
(1979 Code, § D-1-9) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.10 IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate, or cause to be operated
within the corporate limits, any motor vehicle as a taxicab unless that person
has the correct trade name of the person operating such taxicab or motor
vehicle, together with the telephone number of every such person, displayed on
such taxicab.
   (B)   The name and telephone number may either be painted on the car in
letters and figures at least four inches in height or be displayed in an
illuminated sign on the top of said taxicab.
   (C)   Every such person operating taxicabs shall have assigned to each said
taxicab so used, a number; the number or numbers so assigned shall be assigned
by the town and shall either be painted on the taxicab under the trade name, or
shall be painted on either end of the illuminated sign.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or taxicabs,
unless the number so assigned shall be painted upon the taxicab or the sign.
   (E)   Each person so operating one or more taxicabs shall give the correct
name and address of the true and actual owner of such taxicab at the time he or
she receives his or her certificate or convenience and necessity to operate the
same.
(1979 Code, § D-1-10) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.11 REFUSAL OF PASSENGERS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator to refuse to carry or
transport any orderly person anywhere in the town, unless previously engages or
unable to do so.
(1979 Code, § D-1-11) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.12 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES.
   Each taxicab owner shall at all times maintain the taxicab he or she is
driving in a clean, sanitary and good mechanical condition.
(1979 Code, § D-1-12) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.13 EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Each owner and driver of a taxicab shall maintain the vehicle he or
she owns or operates as a taxicab in such condition that the exterior and
interior appearance of same is good and acceptable to the Chief Executive
Officer of the municipality. In determining if the appearance of a taxicab
meets this standard and requirement, the Chief Executive Officer of the
municipality shall be governed by and follow the general standards of
appearance used and followed by other owners and operators of taxicabs in the
town.
   (B)   If the owner or driver fails or refuses to maintain the vehicle he or
she owns or operates as a taxicab in such condition that the appearance of the
same meets the requirement of this section, the Chief Executive Officer of the
municipality shall require the owner and operator to cease use of such vehicle
as a taxicab.
(1979 Code, § D-1-13) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.14 ACCEPTANCE OF ADDITIONAL PASSENGERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator, driver or owner of any
taxicab carrying passengers for hire within the corporate limits, to permit any
person form the general public to ride in any taxicab for hire, when such
taxicab owner, operator or driver is transporting in said taxicab for hire a
paying passenger or passengers, if said passenger or passengers object thereto.
(1979 Code, § D-1-14) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.15 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or causing to be operated
taxicabs or motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire within the corporate
limits, to carry at any time in any such motor vehicle so used and operated,
more passengers that the seating capacity of the said car, including the
driver, children under 12 years of age excepted.
(1979 Code, § D-1-15) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.16 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   It shall be the duty of the holder of a certificate of convenience and
necessity to report any and all accidents of any taxicabs operated by him or
her, to the Chief Executive Officer of the municipality within a period of ten
hours after such accident.
(1979 Code, § D-1-16) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.17 TRANSPORTATION OF NONPAYING PASSENGERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or owner of a taxicab to
permit nonpaying passengers, except the immediate members of the family of the
driver or owner, to ride in any vehicle while being used as a taxicab.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit a driver from transporting nonpaying
passengers if the vehicle is not being used as a taxicab.
(1979 Code, § D-1-17) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.18 SOLICITING BUSINESS; CRUISING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No taxicab driver or owner, or the agent, employee or servant of any
such driver or owner, or any other person, shall solicit passengers by word of
mouth at or in front of any store, depot or terminal, on any street corner, at
any street intersection, or on any public street, square, alley or sidewalk
within the corporate limits.
   (B)   Cruising is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits.
(1979 Code, § D-1-18)
§ 115.19 TRANSPORTING PERSONS FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab or permit the same
to be driven for the purpose of conveying any person to or from any place or
point for the purpose of indulging in any act of illicit sexual intercourse or
any other immoral or unlawful act.
(1979 Code, § D-1-19) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.20 LOADING OR UNLOADING PASSENGERS BY BUSES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of operating
motor buses for the transportation of passengers for hire, to halt or bring to
a stop said motor buses on the streets of the town, within the following
described portion of the town, for the purpose of loading or unloading all or a
part of its passengers, except at one central place designated for loading and
unloading, or union bus terminal.
(1979 Code, § D-1-20) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.21 CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon and over the
streets within the corporate limits without first having applied for and
secured form the Town Council a certificate of convenience and necessity.
(1979 Code, § D-1-21) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.22 DISPLAY.
   The driver of every taxicab shall, at all times while operating said
taxicab, prominently post and display in such taxicab so as to be visible to
the passengers therein his or her permit to drive a taxicab.
(1979 Code, § D-1-40)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The violation of §
115.13 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of 30 days or
a fine in an amount set by Council from time to time, or both.
(1979 Code, § D-1-13)
CHAPTER 116: BEGGING AND SOLICITING REGULATIONS
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   Regulations
 
   
116.99   Penalty
 
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of begging, see G.S. § 160A-179
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure unimpeded pedestrian and vehicular
traffic flow, to maintain and protect the well-being of the public and to
otherwise foster a harassment-free climate in public places.
(Ord. passed 3-7-2016)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCOSTING. Approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would
cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act upon his or her person, or upon property in his or her immediate
possession.
   AFTER DARK. From one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before
sunrise. The times of sunset and sunrise will be established by the times
listed in the Morganton New Herald or another publication of similar
distribution.
   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. Any device or machine, linked to a financial
institution’s account records, which is able to carry out transactions,
including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals,
balance inquires, and mortgage and loan payments, and includes an automated
banking device as defined by G.S. § 14-113.8
   BEG, SOLICIT, or PANHANDLE. Includes, without limitation, use of the spoken,
written, or printed word, or other acts as are conducted in the furtherance of
the purpose of immediately collecting contributions of money, food, or
employment for oneself or others. As used in this chapter, the word SOLICIT,
and its forms, includes begging and panhandling.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. A bank, trust company, savings and loan association,
credit union, check-cashing business, or other entity principally engaged in
the business of lending money or receiving or soliciting money on deposit.
   FORCING ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER.
      (1)   Continuing to solicit in close proximity to the person addressed
after the person to whom the solicitation is directed has made a negative
response, either verbally, by physical sign, by attempting to leave the
presence of the person soliciting, or by other negative indication;
      (2)   Blocking the passage of the person solicited; or
      (3)   Otherwise engaging in conduct that could reasonably be construed as
intending to compel or force a person to accede to a solicitation.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
organization, or any other group acting as a unit.
   PUBLIC AREA. Any area to which the general public has access, and includes,
but is not limited to, public streets, rights-of-way, alleys, roads, highways,
sidewalks, driveways, bridges, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, any
property owned or operated by the city, and streets open to the general public
and any buildings, premises, or other structures open to the general public
including the doorways and entrances to such buildings, premises, or other
structures and the grounds enclosing them.
(Ord. passed 3-7-2016)
§ 116.03 REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or panhandle as
follows:
   (A)   By accosting or by forcing oneself upon the company of another;
   (B)   In or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public, no person
shall procure or attempt to procure goods or money from another in a manner or
under circumstances manifesting an express or implied threat or coercion;
   (C)   Within 50 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or financial
institution, or within 50 feet of any automated teller machine, without the
consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities.
Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an
automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the
entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility;
   (D)   On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked
the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly
indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property;
   (E)   From any operator or passenger of a motor vehicle while standing,
sitting or loitering in any street or highway, including the shoulders or
median strip, but excluding sidewalks and to solicit or accept contributions
from the occupants of any stopped vehicle or to distribute merchandise or
services to the occupants of any stopped vehicle;
   (F)   In a manner that impedes pedestrians or traffic;
   (G)   In a public park owned by the city;
   (H)   Within 50 feet of any outdoor dining area or outdoor merchandise area,
provided such areas are in active use at the time;
   (I)   While the person being solicited is standing in line waiting to be
admitted to a commercial establishment;
   (J)   In any public area within the Central Business District and Highway
Business District in the downtown area, as established in the zoning code and
as such areas are modified from time to time. This prohibition is not intended
to apply and shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person, business, or organization currently located within the
town limits of Rutherford College taking part in any festival or other activity
under a Council approval from the town; or
   (K)   After dark.
(Ord. passed 3-7-2016)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in G.S.§ 14-4 and, upon conviction, shall
be subject to a maximum fine of $50 per occurrence, or imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. passed 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 117: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
117.01   Sunday sales
§ 117.01 SUNDAY SALES.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87, any establishment located
in the Town of Rutherford College that holds an ABC permit issued pursuant to
G.S. § 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit beginning
at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. passed 12-4-2017)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   DISORDERLY CONDUCT
      
131.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
      
132.   LITTERING
CHAPTER 130: DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Section
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct, specifically
   
130.02   Disturbing public meetings or gatherings
   
130.03   Disturbing school decorum
   
130.04   Malicious mischief
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT, SPECIFICALLY.
   (A)   Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be
guilty of disorderly conduct:
      (1)   Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his or her life,
limb or health;
      (2)   Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed
or damaged;
      (3)   Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of
violence, angry threats and abusive conduct;
      (4)   Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl
or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of
another;
      (5)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl;
      (6)   Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly crowding or
pushing any person in any public place;
      (7)   Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds for unlawful
purposes;
      (8)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in illegal gaming;
      (9)   Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to
obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice
or device;
      (10)   Any person who assembles with another or others for the purpose of
engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing
in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet therein;
      (11)   Any person who frequents any place where illegal gaming or the
illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous
drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated;
      (12)   Any person who shall act in a dangerous manner toward others;
      (13)   Any person who shall use “fighting words” directed towards any
person who becomes outrages and thus creates turmoil;
      (14)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others
for the pursuit of a unlawful occupation;
      (15)   Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with
another’s pursuit of lawful occupation; and/or
      (16)   Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on
any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and
refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or
other person having authority.
   (B)   Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this
section, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject
to a fine not to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day
that any of the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
(1979 Code, § F-1-1) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 DISTURBING PUBLIC MEETINGS OR GATHERINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or wantonly to disturb any
public meeting or gathering.
(1979 Code, § F-1-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 DISTURBING SCHOOL DECORUM.
   No person shall engage by conversation, sign or otherwise, the attention of
any pupil to the disturbance of the discipline of any school.
(1979 Code, § F-1-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure, damage, deface,
break, mutilate or otherwise harm any real or personal property, whether public
or private, not his or her own.
(1979 Code, § F-1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
   
131.01   Unnecessary noises prohibited
   
131.02   Noises expressly prohibited
   
131.03   Posting bills; other advertising
   
131.04   Fire bombs prohibited
   
131.05   Leaving ice boxes, refrigerators and the like unattended
   
131.06   Obscenity; displaying obscene pictures and the like
   
131.07   Prostitution; renting house to be used as house of ill fame
   
131.08   Keeping house of assignation; receiving persons for purpose of
prostitution
   
131.09   Admitting officers of policement to houses of ill fame
   
131.10   Gathering of disorderly character
   
131.11   Conveying prostitutes in taxicabs
   
131.12   Solicitation by prostitutes
   
131.13   Gambling
   
131.14   Indecent exposure
   
131.15   Curfew
   
131.16   Nuisances generally
   
131.17   Weapons/dangerous missiles
§ 131.01 UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or
assist in creating, permit, continue or permit the continuance of any
unreasonable loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town.
   (B)   Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental
to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-1) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.02 NOISES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disrupting
and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal devise on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal
if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion
only as a danger signal after, or as brakes are being applied and deceleration
of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of such signal device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police,
fire or other emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The use or operation of any piano, manual or automatic, phonograph,
radio, loud speaker or any other instrument, or sound amplifying devices so
loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof or in such a manner as
renders the same a public nuisance; provided, however, that upon application to
the executive officer of the municipality, permits may be granted to
responsible organizations to produce programs in music, speeches or general
entertainment;
      (4)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent loud
continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (5)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in any such manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (6)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
      (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhausts of any steam
engine, motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
      (8)   The use of any mechanical devise operated by compressed air unless
the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (9)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the
executive officer of the municipality, which permit may be renewed for a period
of three days or less while the emergency continues;
      (10)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, church, institution of learning or court while the same is in session
or interferes with the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs
are displayed on such streets indicating that the same is a school, court or
hospital street;
      (11)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church, provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
      (12)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading or unloading any vehicle, of the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
      (13)   The sounding of any bell or gong, attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (14)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers, vendors and
other persons which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity
thereof;
      (15)   The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale or display of merchandise;
      (16)   The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes except where
specific license is received from the Council;
      (17)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling
station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to
be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and
      (18)   The firing or discharging of squibs, crackers, gunpowder or other
combustible substance in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making
noise or disturbance except by permit from the town.
      (19)   Unmuffled engine compression brakes.
         (a)   Definitions.
            1.   PROPER SIGNAGE. An NCDOT approved sign stating “Unmuffled
Engine Braking Prohibited.”
            2.   UNMUFFLED ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE. A motor vehicle brake
which is activated or worked by the compression of the engine of a motor
vehicle, and which is not effectively muffled to prevent excessive noise.
         (b)   Prohibition.
            1.   No person shall use an unmuffled engine compression braking
system, which is in anyway activated or operated by the compression of the
engine of any such motor vehicle or any such unit or part thereof, on any
street within the town limits for which one or more signs are posted stating
“Unmuffled Engine Braking Prohibited” except in cases of emergency or necessary
for the protection of persons and/or property. Such braking is commonly
referred to as compression braking or “jake brake.”
            2.   The town shall collaborate with NCDOT to identify the areas
that engine braking is prohibited, and signs shall be conspicuously posted in
such areas stating “Unmuffled Engine Braking Prohibited.” This division (19)
shall not apply to public school buses or public safety vehicles, including but
not limited to, fire trucks and emergency medical service vehicles.
         (c)   Penalty. Violation of this division (19) shall be a traffic
infraction as outlined in G.S. § 14-4 and shall result in a fine of $50.   
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-2) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022; Res. 06052023, passed 6-5-2023)
§ 131.03 POSTING BILLS; OTHER ADVERTISING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post,
nail, stick or otherwise affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or any
other printed or graphic matter upon public property in the town. This section
shall not apply to notices, signs or advertisements required to be posted by
law, signs or plates on residential premises giving the name or address of the
occupant, mail boxes or newspaper tubes, municipal, county, state and federal
traffic signs, historical markers, monuments or signs erected by public
authority, temporary displays as a part of customary holiday decorations, and
signs denoting the location of underground utilities.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to nail,
stick or otherwise affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or other
printed or graphic matter upon private property within the town without the
consent of the owner.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be lawful to post or
affix printed or graphic materials upon public property in the town for up to
60 days preceding a national, state or local election or referendum to be held
in the town when such materials relate to the candidate or candidates seeking
election or the political issues being voted upon; provided, however, the chief
executive officer of the municipality may require the giving of a bond by those
posting such election-related materials, the amount of such bond to be
commensurate with the cost of removing the election materials so posted. If the
election-related materials are not removed within 30 days following the
scheduled election, the bond shall be retained by the town to defray the costs
of removing such election-related posters and materials.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be lawful to affix
temporary banners or signs advertising the place and date of fairs, carnivals,
horse shows and similar events to be observed within the town for a period not
to exceed 30 days and after the giving of a bond which the chief executive
officer of the municipality may require, the amount of such bond to be
commensurate with the cost of removing such banners or signs. If the signs or
banners are not removed within the 30-day period, the bond may be retained by
the town to defray the costs of removing the banners or signs.
   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-4) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.04 FIRE BOMBS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FIREBOMB. As any type of object designed or constructed so that upon
being propelled it will explode or ignite its area of impact.
      MOLOTOV COCKTAIL. Any breakable container, or any container which is
designed in such a manner that upon being propelled it will at impact empty its
contents which is filled with an inflammable fluid of substance, and which is
fitted with a fuse or wick.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture,
possess, transport or use any Molotov Cocktail or other firebomb.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to possess all
the items or materials needed to manufacture Molotov Cocktails on other
firebombs, other than on his or her or their premises. The provisions of this
section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other ordinance or state
statute on this subject.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-5) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.05 LEAVING ICE BOXES, REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE UNATTENDED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave ice
boxes, refrigerators, deep freeze units and boxes of similar nature, which have
thereon a latch door, in the open and unattended, without first removing the
door, latch or back of such unit.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-6) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.06 OBSCENITY; DISPLAYING OBSCENE PICTURES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display on any street or in any
store, shop or public place any obscene pictures, marks, words or
representations of any kind.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-7) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.07 PROSTITUTION; RENTING HOUSE TO BE USED AS HOUSE OF ILL FAME.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, as a lessor, to knowingly rent or
lease, in any manner whatsoever, any house to be used as a house of ill fame or
disorderly house.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-9) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.08 KEEPING HOUSE OF ASSIGNATION; RECEIVING PERSONS FOR PURPOSE OF
PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a house of assignation or
knowingly to receive a man or woman for the purpose of prostitution.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-10) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.09 ADMITTING OFFICERS OF POLICEMENT TO HOUSES OF ILL FAME.
   (A)   It shall be the obligation of the occupant or owner of any house of
ill fame or disorderly house to open the doors thereof and give entrance to any
officer or police officer, who shall demand admission and at the same time
state his or her official character, for the purpose of suppressing disorderly
conduct therein or making arrests.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-11) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.10 GATHERING OF DISORDERLY CHARACTER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a gathering or party of
disorderly character to assemble in his or her house, to the disturbance of the
neighborhood.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-12) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.11 CONVEYING PROSTITUTES IN TAXICABS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person driving a taxicab to carry or
convey any prostitute on any street or alley for an immoral purpose.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-13) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.12 SOLICITATION BY PROSTITUTES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any prostitute to solicit for the purpose of
illicit sexual intercourse.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-14) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.13 GAMBLING.
   (A)   If any person at any game of chance at which any money, property or
other thing of value is bet, whether the same in the stake or not, both those
who play and those who bet thereon shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-15) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.14 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   (A)   Any person who in any place willfully exposes his or her person, or
private parts thereof in the presence of one or more persons of the opposite
sex whose person, or the private parts thereof are similarly exposed, or who
aids or abets in any such act, or who procures another so as to expose his or
her person, or the private parts thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who shall willfully make any indecent public exposure of
the private parts of his or her person in any public place, street or highway
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-16) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.15 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 15 years of age to be found
upon the streets of the town after 12:00 p.m., without the written permission
of his or her parents or guardian.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-17) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.16 NUISANCES GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his or her
lot or a lot occupied by him or her, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his or
her lot or a lot occupied by him or her.
   (B)   Anything that causes an offensive odor or that causes injury or damage
to the health or life of any other person or anything that interferes with the
peaceful enjoyment of one’s property is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(1979 Code, § F-4-18) (Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
§ 131.17 WEAPONS/DANGEROUS MISSILES.
   (A)   No person shall shoot or project any stone, rock, shot or other hard
substance by means of a pistol, rifle shotgun, beech loading firearm or muzzle
loading firearm, bow or other similar contrivance, provided:
      (1)   Hunting privileges and rights may be exercised within the municipal
limits under the provisions of applicable state regulations governing wildlife
statutes of the state; and the following:
         (a)   Rifles and firearms above a .22-caliber and shotguns above a 12-
gauge are prohibited, and the use of all shotgun slugs are prohibited;
         (b)   All shooting will be prohibited within 500 feet of any house,
building or across any street or road is prohibited; and
         (c)   Hunting will be allowed on your own property, or on someone
else’s property by written permission only.
      (2)   Target practice is specifically permitted under the following
conditions:
         (a)   Use of a safety backstop;
         (b)   Riles and firearms above a .22-caliber and shotguns above a 12-
gauge are prohibited, and the use of all shotgun slugs are prohibited;
         (c)   All target practice will be prohibited within 100 feet of
adjacent property not in the direction of any occupiable building and across
any street or road; and
         (d)   All target shooting target shooting is expressly prohibited on
Sundays.
      (3)   Archery shooting and practice is specifically permitted under the
following conditions:
         (a)   Use of a safety backstop;
         (b)   All archery shooting and practice will be prohibited within 100
feet of adjacent property not in the direction of any occupiable building and
not across any street or road.
         (c)   While exercising archery privileges, no arrows are to be
released or shot on a vertical angle.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of any
concealed weapon without proper permit and licensing. Other deadly weapons of
any kind are prohibited on town property.
      (5)   This section shall not be applicable to police officers or other
law enforcement officers while discharging their official duties, or shall this
section be applicable to private citizens in justifiable self-defense of their
person or property or the defense of others under the laws of the state or by
persons lawfully engaged in pest control or the taking of dangerous animals.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012; Ord. passed 3-7-2022; Ord. passed 3-4-2024)
CHAPTER 132: LITTERING
Section
   
132.01   Title
   
132.02   Purposes and objectives
   
132.03   Definitions
   
132.04   Littering prohibitions
   
132.05   Administration and enforcement
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be known and may be cited as “Rutherford College Litter
Ordinance”.
(1979 Code, § L-1) (Ord. passed 7-10-1989)
§ 132.02 PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES.
   The purposes and objective for which this chapter is passed are as follows:
   (A)   To promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
town;
   (B)   To preserve the dignity and aesthetic quality of the environment of
the town; and
   (C)   To protect the economic interests of the citizens and residents of the
town which are dependent on tourism.
(1979 Code, § L-2) (Ord. passed 7-10-1989)
§ 132.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COVER. Anything tarpaulin, plastic or similar which is laid, set or spread
securely over all rubbish, garbage, solid waste or miscellaneous refuse, which
would otherwise be subject to fell or spill onto roadways, thoroughfares or
adjoining property.
   GARBAGE. All putrescent waste, including animal and vegetable matter, animal
offal and carcasses, and recognizable industrial by-products, exclusive of
sewage and human wastes.
   MISCELLANEOUS REFUSE. All rubbish and refuse (other than garbage, ashes or
dead animals) incident to the ordinary conduct of the household.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage; and
the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, tires,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, dust, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
and other combustible materials or similar materials.
   SOLID WASTE. Ashes, building materials, dead animals, garbage, miscellaneous
refuse, putrescent waste, furniture, refuse, rubbish, sawdust, spoiled food,
tires, trash, waste and other discarded solid materials, including solid waste
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, residential and
community operations and activities, including, but not limited to, bicycles,
motorcycles, mopeds, tractors, lawn mowers, automobiles, trailers, trucks, farm
machinery, mobile homes, boats, campers and motor homes.
(1979 Code, § L-3) (Ord. passed 7-10-1989)
§ 132.04 LITTERING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter the ground by placing,
throwing, dumping or allowing to blow from vehicle or trailer, or dropping
thereon any solid waste as defined herein. Furthermore, it shall be forbidden
to drive, propel or mobilize any vehicle or trailer containing solid waste
without the utilization of a cover as defined herein.
   (B)   The owner, operator or other person responsible for the operation of
all business establishments shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, at all
times on the premises, sufficient receptacles or other devices for the disposal
of solid waste, as will permit adequate depositories for use by the customers,
and patrons of such establishments. The owner, or other person responsible for
the operation of all business establishments, shall be responsible for keeping
the grounds surrounding the business free of sold waste (including, but not
limited to, papers and debris) and shall be responsible for picking up the sold
waste that has been allowed to transfer onto surrounding properties.
(1979 Code, § L-4) (Ord. passed 7-10-1989) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be vested
with the Manager of the town, and his or her duly authorized Solid Waste
Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   The Director of the County Health Department, and his or her
representative, are hereby designated and authorized to assist the Manager, as
directed by him or her, in the enforcement of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § L-5) (Ord. passed 7-10-1989)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to the imposition by citation of a civil penalty
for each such violation in the amount set by Council from time to time, which
shall be paid in full within 72 hours of the service of the citation in
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall further be subject to the town enforcing the provisions of
this chapter by applying to a court of competent jurisdiction in the general
court of justice for equitable relief including, but not limited to, mandatory
or prohibitory injunctions and/or orders of abatement in accordance with G.S. §
160-175(d) and (e).
   (C)   Each day of violation shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense for the purpose of the enforcement of this chapter.
   (D)   Failure to make payment and correct the violation within the 72-hour
period will result in an additional fine of an amount set by Council from time
to time per day for a total of 15 days.
(1979 Code, § L-6) (Ord. passed 7-10-1989)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   ABANDONED MANUFACTURED HOMES
      
151.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
152.   ZONING CODE
      
153.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
      
154.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 150: ABANDONED MANUFACTURED HOMES
Section
   
150.01   Intent
   
150.02   Abandoned, nuisance and junked mobile homes unlawful
   
150.03   Notice requirements for abandoned manufactured homes
   
150.04   Removal of abandoned manufactured homes
   
150.05   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
150.06   Appeals
§ 150.01 INTENT.
   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health and the
environment through the deconstruction of abandoned manufactured homes to
reduce blight and attractive nuisances.
   (B)   It is a policy of the town to promote the removal of reusable or
recyclable materials to reduce the impact of such solid wastes and production
of said materials on the environment.
(1979 Code, § F-5-1) (Ord. passed 4-1-2013)
§ 150.02 ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOBILE HOMES UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a manufactured home and for the owner, lessee or occupant of the
real property upon which the manufactured home is located to leave, allow or
suffer the manufactured home to remain on the property after it has been
declared an abandoned manufactured home or a public nuisance.
   (B)   A manufactured home shall be deemed to be an abandoned manufactured
home for the purposes of this chapter in the following circumstances: any
manufactured home that is either vacant or in need of extensive repair; and an
unreasonable danger to public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
   (C)   A manufactured home shall be considered vacant when it has not been
occupied for at least 120 days and meets any of the following criteria:
      (1)   Provides a location for loitering, vagrancy, unauthorized entry or
other criminal activity;
      (2)   Has been boarded for at least 30 days;
      (3)   Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365 days;
      (4)   Has utilities disconnected or not in use.
(1979 Code, § F-5-2) (Ord. passed 4-1-2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.03 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS FOR ABANDONED MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   The town shall notify the responsible party and the land owner for each
identified abandoned manufactured home in writing and shall be sent to the
person in the form of certified mail.
(1979 Code, § F-5-3) (Ord. passed 4-1-2013)
§ 150.04 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   The owner or responsible party shall be given 60 days from receipt of
the written notice to dispose of the abandoned manufactured home in a legal
manner.
   (B)   If the owner or responsible party fails to comply with this order, the
town shall take any action it deems reasonably necessary to dispose of the
abandoned manufactured home, including entering the property where the
abandoned manufactured home is located and arranging to have the home de-
constructed and disposed of in a manner consistent with the town’s garbage
collection and disposal provisions (Chapter 50 of this code).
(1979 Code, § F-5-4) (Ord. passed 4-1-2013)
§ 150.05 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked manufactured home, for disposing of such manufactured home
as provided in this chapter.
(1979 Code, § F-5-5) (Ord. passed 4-1-2013)
§ 150.06 APPEALS.
   (A)   Within the 60-day period mentioned in §
150.04, the owner of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the
findings of the enforcement officer to the Board of Adjustment by giving
written notice of appeal to the enforcement officer, the appeal to stay the
abatement of the nuisances by the enforcement officer until a final
determination by the Board of Adjustment. In the event no appeal is taken, the
enforcement officer may proceed to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment, in the event an appeal is taken as provided
in division (B) above, may, after hearing all interested persons and reviewing
the findings of the enforcement officer, reverse the finding made pursuant to §
150.04, but if the Board of Adjustment shall determine that the findings of the
enforcement officer made pursuant to the section are correct and proper, it
shall declare the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard
to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
town and a public nuisance, and directing the enforcement officer to cause the
conditions to be abated.
(Ord. passed 4-1-2013)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Authority and enactment clause
   
151.03   Jurisdiction
   
151.04   Purpose
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   No services or permits until final plat approved
   
151.07   Variances
   
151.08   Registration of ordinances and plats
   
151.09   Amendments
   
151.10   Relation of subdivision regulations to zoning/other
   
151.11   Lots shall be suitable for uses intended
   
151.12   Effect of plat approval on status of dedication and acceptance of
streets
   
151.13   Effect of subdivision regulations on erection of structures
Procedure for Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
   
151.25   Generally
   
151.26   Minor subdivision approval process
   
151.27   General subdivision approval process
   
151.28   Preliminary plat
   
151.29   Final plat approval process
   
151.30   The final plat
   
151.31   Review procedure
Installation of Permanent Reference Points and Improvements
   
151.45   Permanent reference points
   
151.46   Design standards and required improvements
General Requirements and Minimum Standards of Design
   
151.60   General requirements
   
151.61   Design standards
   
151.62   Lot design
   
151.63   Hillside subdivisions
   
151.64   Family subdivision
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Ordinance
for the Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina”.
(1979 Code, § S-1-1) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.02 AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE.
   The Town Council, pursuant to the authority conferred by G.S. §§ 160A-371
through 160A-376, do hereby ordain and enact into law the following.
(1979 Code, § S-1-2) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
Editor’s note:
   G.S. §§ 160A-371 through 160A-376 were repealed by S.L. 2019-111, Sec. 2.3.
§ 151.03 JURISDICTION.
   On and after the date of adoption, these regulations shall govern each and
every subdivision of land submitted for review within the town (hereinafter
referred to as the “town”) and the town’s extraterritorial planning
jurisdiction.
(1979 Code, § S-1-3) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.04 PURPOSE.
   An ordinance establishing procedures and standards for the development and
subdivision of real estate and regulating the subdivision of land and for the
surveying and platting thereof as adopted and prescribed in this chapter, as
hereby found by the Town Council to be necessary and appropriate in order to
aid in promoting the following:
   (A)   The orderly development of the town and safeguard conditions essential
to public health, safety and welfare;
   (B)   To provide space for safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations within
the town;
   (C)   To promote the eventual elimination of unsafe and unsanitary
conditions arising from the overcrowding and concentration of population,
improper planning, lack of proper light, air and space, unsafe or unsanitary
design and arrangements, lack of sanitary facilities and existence of
conditions which endanger life or property by fire or other causes;
   (D)   To provide for suitable neighborhoods with adequate streets and
utilities and appropriate building sites;
   (E)   To save unnecessary expenditures of public funds by reserving space
for public lands and buildings and by initial proper construction of streets
and utilities;
   (F)   To provide for economical and sufficient streets with adequate width
and proper alignment and grade for the coordination of utilities, streets and
highways within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and
highways and other public facilities; and
   (G)   To provide proper land records for the convenience of the public and
for better identification and permanent location of real property boundaries.
(1979 Code, § S-1-4) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   Subdivision.
      (1)   Generally. For the purpose of this chapter, the term SUBDIVISION
shall mean all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development, whether immediate or future, and shall include all divisions of
land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets;
provided that the following shall not be included within this definition nor be
subject to the regulations established herein.
      (2)   Exemptions.
         (a)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the town as shown in its
subdivision regulations;
         (b)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where
no street right-of-way dedication is involved;
         (c)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets; and
         (d)    The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area
is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to
or exceed the standards of the town, as shown in this chapter.
         (e)   The following certifications shall be shown on all exempt plats:
   CERTIFICATION OF EXEMPTION
               I,                                                  , hereby
that this plat is exempt from the Town of Rutherford College Subdivision
Ordinance according to §
151.02 (2) of the Subdivision Ordinance. I certify that the property shown
meets the minimum standards of the Rutherford College Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                           
            Zoning Administrator
                                                        
            Date
   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY AND ACCURACY
               I,                                                 , certify
that this was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey
made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description
recorded in Book                , Page                  , Book
                   , Page                          , etc.) (other); that the
error of closure as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1:
                      ; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken
lines plotted from information found in Book           , Page
                          ; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S.
§ 74-30, as amended. Witness my hand and seal this                     day of
                      , A.D., 20               .
                                                                               
            Registered Surveyor or Professional Engineer
                                                                                
            License or Registration Number
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY REVIEW OFFICER
               I,                                                 , Review
Officer for Rutherford College, certify that the plat to which this
certification is affixed meets all the statutory requirements for recording.
                                                                     
            Review Officer
                                                       
            Date
      (3)   Interpretation. In interpretation of division (A)(2)(a) above, the
term PREVIOUSLY PLATTED shall mean platted, approved and recorded, if such lots
were created in accordance with subdivision regulations in effect at the time
of their creation, or created as a result of a recorded land division prior to
existence of applicable subdivision regulations. In interpretation of division
(A)(2)(b) above, the phrase WHERE NO STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION IS INVOLVED
shall be construed as meaning that any such parcel shall be served by an
existing street which has been accepted for dedication and maintenance by the
town or the State Department of Transportation.
(1979 Code, § S-2-1)
   (B)   Minor subdivision. For purposes of these regulations, a MINOR
SUBDIVISION is defined as a subdivision:
      (1)   Involving not more than five lots fronting on an existing approved
street;
      (2)   Not involving any new street or prospectively requiring any new
street for access to interior property;
      (3)   Not requiring extension of public sewage or water lines or creation
of new drainage easements through lots to serve property at the rear;
      (4)   Not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the
parcel or of adjoining property; and
      (5)   Creating no new or residual parcels not conforming to the
requirements of these regulations.
(1979 Code, § S-2-2)
   (C)   Additional definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESS CORRIDORS. A strip of land lying between the side lot boundary
lines of lake or river front lots offering access to lots at least one lot
depth away from the water’s edge.
      ACCESS STREETS. A platted street designed for the purpose of giving
access to adjacent property owners.
      ALLEY. A minor right-of-way privately or publicly owned, primarily for
service access to the back or side of properties.
      BUFFER. A buffer as required by certain sections of these regulations
shall be one of or equal to one of the following:
         (a)   A six-foot high wood, basket-weave type fence;
         (b)   A six-foot high solid picket type fence with the pickets being
placed facing the adjoining property;
         (c)   A six-foot high chain link type fence with panel inserts;
         (d)   A six-foot high, open type fence with evergreen vegetation
planted facing the adjoining property and completely blocking the view from one
area to another; or
         (e)   A six-foot high solid masonry wall.
      BUILDING. Includes the word STRUCTURE.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the front property line in
front of which no structure shall be erected.
      CLERK OF SUPERIOR COURT. Clerk of Superior Court of Burke County, North
Carolina.
      DEDICATION. A gift, by the owner, of his or her property to another party
without any consideration being given for the transfer. Since a transfer of
property is involved, the DEDICATION is made by written instrument and is
completed with an acceptance.
      DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from
both streets upon which it fronts.
      EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a
specified purpose and use by the public, a corporation or persons.
      HILLSIDE SUBDIVISION. Land proposed to be subdivided which has a slope of
16% or greater; that is, an average difference is elevation of at least 16 feet
in a horizontal distance of 100 feet. The average shall be obtained from at
least 15 measurements, each 20 feet from the next.
      LOT. A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as
a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. This word may also
include the words PLOT, PARCEL, TRACT or SITE.
      LOT FRONT. A portion of the lot adjacent to the street. In the case of
lots which abut a stream, lake or pond, the LOT FRONT is considered to be the
part of the lot which abuts the water.
      OFFICIAL MAPS OR PLANS. Any maps or plans endorsed by the Town Council as
a guide to the development of the town.
      ORDINANCE or REGULATION. This chapter/the Subdivision Ordinance for
Rutherford College, North Carolina.
      PLANNING BOARD. The Planning Board of Rutherford College, North Carolina.
      PLAT. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be or has been
subdivided.
      PRIVATE DRIVE WAY. A roadway serving two or fewer lots, building sites or
other division of land and not intended to be public ingress or egress.
      PRIVATE STREETS. A street intended to be for private ingress or egress,
or to serve a large development under one ownership, such as in a large
industrial park or within a planned unit development.
      RECREATION AREA or PARK. An area of land or combination of land and water
resources that is developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuant with
various human-made features that accommodate such activities.
      RESERVATION. A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of
property rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from
development for a stated period of time.
      SINGLE-TIER LOT. A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier or another type of land use and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.
      STAFF PLANNER. The Planner for Rutherford College, North Carolina, or his
or her designated agent.
      STREET. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
traffic. The following classifications shall apply.
         (a)   ARTERIALS. This thoroughfare category includes those streets and
highways which carry large volumes of traffic at moderate speeds through and
within the town. These thoroughfares provide access to major commercial,
industrial and public traffic generators.
         (b)   CUL-DE-SAC. A short local street having but one end open to
traffic and the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular turn-
around provided.
         (c)   LOCAL STREETS. The local street system comprises all facilities
not in one of the higher systems. It serves primarily to provide direct access
to abutting land and access to the higher order system.
         (d)   MAJOR COLLECTOR STREETS. As the name indicates, traffic from
local streets is collected by these thoroughfares and carried to arterial
streets. While also serving as connectors between arterials, these streets
perform an additional function of providing access to abutting properties.
Smaller volumes of traffic are carried on these streets and speeds are lower.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, organization or corporation who subdivides
or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
      TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of Rutherford College, North Carolina.
      TOWN ENGINEER. The engineer for Rutherford College, North Carolina, or
his or her designated agent.
(1979 Code, § S-2-3)
   (D)   Word interpretation. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words
shall be interpreted as follows.
      (1)   The word MAY is permissive.
      (2)   The words SHALL and WILL are mandatory.
      (3)   The present tense includes in the future tense and the future tense
includes the present tense.
      (4)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
(1979 Code, § S-2-4)
(Ord. passed 6- -1987; Ord. 040124-2, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 151.06 NO SERVICES OR PERMITS UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVED.
   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the town nor shall any street
lighting, water or sewer be extended to or connected with any subdivision of
land, nor shall any permit be issued by an administrative agent or department
of the town for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring
a permit, upon any land concerning which a plat is required to be approved,
unless and until the requirements set forth in this chapter have been complied
with.
(1979 Code, § S-1-5) (Ord. passed 6- -1987) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Varying minimum standards. These land subdivision regulations are
adopted only as minimum requirements.
      (1)   Developers are encouraged to go beyond the standards of these
regulations. The Planning Board and the Town Council may require standards
above the minimum contained herein whenever the public health, safety and
welfare justify such increase.
      (2)   Furthermore, either Board may reduce or otherwise vary the
requirements of these regulations only when it encounters the situation
described below. In granting such variances, the Planning Board and Town
Council may attach and require whatever conditions it feels are necessary to
secure the basic objectives of this chapter. Any variance granted shall be
noted in the official minutes of both the Planning Board and the Town Council
along with the reasons which justified the granting of the variance.
   (B)   Hardship required.
      (1)   The Planning Board and the Town Council may reduce or otherwise
vary the requirements of these regulations only when a definite hardship is
created by strict enforcement of the standards herein.
      (2)   The following conditions must be met before any variance can be
granted by either the Planning Board or the Town Council:
         (a)   A particular hardship to the subdivider would occur because of
peculiar physical surroundings or topographical conditions of the specific
property involved. A definite major hardship must be demonstrated and
distinguished from a minor inconvenience;
         (b)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based
are unique to the property involved and are not generally applicable to other
properties and have not been created by any person having an interest in the
property;
         (c)   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire for financial gain; and
         (d)   The variance will not be detrimental to the public safety,
health or welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
(1979 Code, § S-1-8) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.08 REGISTRATION OF ORDINANCES AND PLATS.
   (A)   State statutes. In accordance with G.S. § 160A-373, the town shall
file a copy of this chapter with the Register of Deeds of the county upon
adoption.
   (B)   Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds shall not, after the
effective date of this chapter, record a plat of a subdivision of land lying
within the jurisdiction of this chapter that has not been approved in
accordance with the provisions contained herein; nor shall the Clerk of
Superior Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the recording would
be in conflict with the provisions or intent of this chapter.
(1979 Code, § S-1-9) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
Editor’s note:
   G.S. § 160A-373 was repealed by S.L. 2019-111, Sec. 2.3.
§ 151.09 AMENDMENTS.
   The Town Council may from time to time amend the terms of this chapter, but
no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or
shall have been submitted to the Planning Board for review and recommendation.
The Planning Board shall have 45 days within which to submit its report. If the
Planning Board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be
deemed to have approved the amendment.
(1979 Code, § S-1-10) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.10 RELATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS TO ZONING/OTHER.
   Regulations set forth herein are part of a system of regulations governing
land subdivision, development and use, construction and improvements on land,
supplementing and supplemented by zoning, health, drainage, improvement, flood
hazard and other controls. Applications for subdivision approval shall be
considered in relation to all such regulations applicable in the particular
case forth herein. Where there are conflicts between these and other lawfully
adopted regulations involved in such considerations, those which establish the
highest requirements or most stringent limitations shall govern except where
specific exceptions are set forth in such regulations.
(1979 Code, § S-1-11) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.11 LOTS SHALL BE SUITABLE FOR USES INTENDED.
   No lot shall be approved unless an adequate portion thereof is suitable for
a use permitted by the zoning ordinance, and, in particular, no lot shall be
platted for building unless it contains an adequate building site, as required
by §
151.62.
(1979 Code, § S-1-12) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.12 EFFECT OF PLAT APPROVAL ON STATUS OF DEDICATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF
STREETS.
   (A)   The approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an
acceptance by the town or the public of the dedication of any street or other
ground shown upon the plat.
   (B)   Acceptance of such dedications within the town shall be only by
resolutions of the Town Council.
   (C)   It shall consider such resolutions only on determination that any
required improvements have been properly installed and all applicable
conditions met as determined by the Staff Planner.
(1979 Code, § S-1-13) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.13 EFFECT OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ON ERECTION OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   From and after the time these subdivision regulations become
effective, no building permit shall be issued for and no structure shall be
erected on any lot unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the
structure is proposed to be placed:
      (1)   Has been accepted, or opened as, or otherwise has received the
legal status of, a public street prior to that time; or
      (2)   Corresponds in its locations and lines with a street shown on a
subdivision plat approved by the town or on an official map adopted by the
Planning Board and the Town Council, or with a street located and accepted by
the Town Council.
   (B)   Any structure erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an
unlawful structure, and the building official or other official designated by
the Town Council may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erections or cause
the building to be vacated or removed.
(1979 Code, § S-1-14) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 151.25 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No final plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the town as
established in §
151.03 shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of the county until it has
been approved by the Town Council as provided herein.
   (B)   To secure such approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall
generally follow the procedure established in this section.
(1979 Code, § S-3-1) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.26 MINOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   If the land to be subdivided meets the requirements of a minor
subdivision as defined in §
151.05(B), the subdivider will not have to follow the same procedures as for a
general subdivision. The review process for minor subdivisions shall be
adequate to protect the public interest, but should also provide minimum delay
and expense to the subdivider. A preliminary plat is not required.
   (B)   The developer may go from a sketch plan to a final plat with the
approval of the Staff Planner; however, the following minor plat approval
process may be used only where the subdivision includes all contiguous land
under the ownership of the sponsor.
      (1)   Sketch plan required. A preliminary plat shall not be required for
approval for minor subdivisions. Instead, a sketch design plan shall first be
submitted to the Staff Planner for approval and shall depict or contain the
following information:
         (a)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways;
         (b)   The boundaries of the tract to be subdivided;
         (c)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
         (d)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the
subdivision and adjoining it;
         (e)   The lines of existing streets and easements;
         (f)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner and/or
developer; and
         (g)   The zoning classification of the tract and adjacent properties.
      (2)   Review procedure. The Staff Planner shall review the sketch design
plan for general compliance with the requirements of this chapter and shall
advise the subdivider or his or her authorized agent of the regulations
pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the
preparation and submission of the final plat.
      (3)   Approval of sketch plat by Staff Planner. The Staff Planner, after
determining that all requirements of this chapter have been met on the sketch
map, shall submit copies to the County Health Department, Erosion Control
Section, Soil and Water Conservation District and Inspection Division for their
comments and reports. The sketch plan shall be approved and the subdivider
shall be advised that the final plat may be prepared as long as it conforms to
the sketch plat. This review shall in no way be construed as constituting an
official approval for recording.
      (4)   Dispute of findings of Staff Planner. In the event that the
subdivider disagrees with any findings of the Staff Planner concerning approval
of a sketch plan of a minor subdivision, the matter shall be taken to the
Planning Board for a decision. No final plat shall be prepared until the
Planning Board has acted on the disputed sketch plan.
      (5)   Disposition of copies. Five copies of the sketch plan shall be
retained as part of the files of the Planning Board, with the original drawing
being returned to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent.
      (6)   Certificates required. The following signed and notarized
certificates shall appear on the reproducible copy of the final plat which is
submitted to the Subdivision Administrator:
   CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
            I hereby certify that I am/we are the owner(s) of the property
shown and described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of
Rutherford College, and that I/we hereby adopt this plan of minor subdivision.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
         Owner(s)
                                                          
         Date
   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY AND ACCURACY
            I,                                                        , certify
that this was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey
made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description
recorded in Book                         , Page                 , Book
                      , Page                    , etc.) (other); that the error
of closure as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1:
                       : that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken
lines plotted from information found in Book                , Page
                      ; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. §
74-30, as amended. Witness my hand and seal this                  day of
                   , A.D., 20     .
                                                                                  
         Registered Surveyor or Professional Engineer
                                                                                  
         License or Registration Number
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
            I,                             , Zoning Administrator for the Town
of Rutherford College, do hereby certify that the property shown meets the
minimum standards of the Rutherford College Zoning Ordinance.
                                                                            
         Zoning Administrator
                                        
         Date
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY REVIEW OFFICER
            I,                                                 , Review Officer
for Rutherford College, certify that the plat to which this certification is
affixed meets all the statutory requirements for recording.
                                                                
         Review Officer
                                                 
         Date
      (7)   Final plat approval of minor subdivision. In order not to cause any
unnecessary expense to the developer and to the administrative departments of
the town, the Staff Planner shall have the responsibility for approving minor
subdivisions. The final plat for minor subdivision shall be complete and show
all information required for a final plat for general subdivisions as
prescribed by this chapter. The recording of a minor subdivision plat shall be
the same as for a general subdivision as provided in this chapter. If a minor
subdivision plat is disapproved, the Staff Planner shall specify the reasons
for such action in writing. One copy of such reasons shall be given to the
subdivider. If a minor subdivision plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make
the recommended changes as requested and submit a revised minor plat, or appeal
the decision to the Board of Adjustment.
(1979 Code, § S-3-2) (Ord. passed 6- -1987; Ord. passed 8- -2011; Ord. 040124-
2, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 151.27 GENERAL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS.
   The following procedure shall be followed to obtain approval of all general
subdivisions.
   (A)   Sketch design plan. If the land to be subdivided contains more than
ten acres, the subdivider shall submit a sketch plan prior to submitting a
preliminary plat. Smaller subdivisions may be submitted in sketch plan form if
the developer wishes. Sketch plans shall conform to the following requirements.
   (B)   Number of copies and graphic media. A minimum of two copies of a
sketch design plan shall be submitted. No specific graphic media must be
employed.
   (C)   Size of plan and scale. No specific size requirements apply to a
sketch design plan; it is suggested that the requirements applicable to
preliminary and final plats be utilized. See §
151.30(B)(4).
   (D)   Administrative fees. No administrative fees are charged in connection
with the submission of sketch design plans.
   (E)   Certification required. No certificates are required in connection
with the submission of sketch design plans.
   (F)   Contents required. The sketch design plan shall depict or contain the
following information:
      (1)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways;
      (2)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be
subdivided;
      (3)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
      (4)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision
and adjoining it;
      (5)   The proposed street and lot layout;
      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the owners;
      (7)   Street and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties; and
      (8)   The zoning classification(s) of the tract and of adjacent
properties.
   (G)   Review procedure. The Staff Planner shall review the sketch design
plan for general compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any other
applicable ordinances and shall advise the subdivider or his or her authorized
agent of the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission of the
preliminary and final plats. This review shall in no way be construed as
constituting an official action of approval for recording of the subdivision by
the Planning Board or the Town Council as required by this chapter.
   (H)   Dispute of findings of the planning division. In the event that the
subdivider disagrees with any findings of the Staff Planner concerning approval
of a sketch plan, the matter shall be taken to the Planning Board for a
decision. No final plat shall be prepared until the Planning Board has acted on
the disputed sketch plan.
   (I)   Disposition of copies. One copy shall be retained as a part of the
files of the Planning Board with the other copy being returned to the
subdivider or his or her authorized agent.
(1979 Code, § S-3-3) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.28 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   After approval of the sketch plan, the preliminary plat can then be prepared
and shall be submitted to the Planning Board at least 20 days prior to a
regular meeting of the Planning Board, for every subdivision of land which is
located within the territorial jurisdiction established by §
151.03, unless it meets the requirements of a minor plat.
   (A)   Number of copies and graphic media. Eight copies of the preliminary
plat shall be submitted; no specific graphic media must be employed.
   (B)   Size of plat and scale. No specific size requirements apply to
preliminary plats. Preliminary plats shall be prepared at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet, or greater. (Refer to § 151.30(B)(4).)
   (C)   Administrative fees. When submitting the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall pay a filing and inspection fee of an amount set by Council
from time to time per lot in the subdivision to the Town Clerk. The fee once
paid will not be refundable.
   (D)   Certifications required. No certifications need be shown on the
drawing in connection with the submission of preliminary plats; however, plans
for proposed utilities shall be approved by appropriate town, county and state
agencies.
   (E)   Contents required. The preliminary plat shall depict or contain the
following information; plats not illustrating or containing the following data
shall be returned by the Staff Planner to the subdivider or his or her
authorized agent for completion and re-submission:
      (1)   The proposed name of the subdivision;
      (2)   A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed
subdivision and the surrounding area;
      (3)   The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided,
distinctly and accurately represented, with all bearings and distances shown;
      (4)   Street line and grade profile;
      (5)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;
      (6)   North arrow and declination;
      (7)   The plans for proposed landscaping, sediment control programs,
utility layouts, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution
lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service, illustrating connections to
existing systems. Plans for water supply and/or sewage disposal, and sediment
control must receive approval by the appropriate county and state authorities,
including the County Health Department and the Division of Land Resources and
Division of Environmental Management/Water Quality Section of the State
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development. Utility plans must
show line sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes, pumps,
force mains and gate valves, and shall include profiles based upon mean sea
level datum for sanitary sewers and storm sewers. These plans may be submitted
separate from the preliminary plat but are due on the same date as the
preliminary plat;
      (8)   Utility layout calculations including storm sewer, sanitary sewer
and water distribution;
      (9)   Proposed street names;
      (10)   Zoning classification of proposed subdivision and adjacent
property;
      (11)   Street design information including vertical and horizontal
curvatures;
      (12)   Proposed location and size of parks, school sites or other
recreational or open space, if any, and their future ownership (dedication for
public use to governmental body, from owners to duly constituted homeowners or
community association, or for tenants, but remaining in subdivider’s
ownership);
      (13)   Site calculations, including:
         (a)   Acreage in total tract to be subdivided;
         (b)   Acreage in parks and other nonresidential use;
         (c)   Total number of parcels created;
         (d)   Linear feet in streets; and
         (e)   Delineate drainage area onsite and offsite.
      (14)   Proposed minimum building setback lines;
      (15)   The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining
subdivision of record (or proposed and under review);
      (16)   Any proposed riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian, bicycle
or other rights-of-way, utility or other easements, their location, width and
purposes;
      (17)   Proposed streets, existing and platted streets on adjoining
properties and in the proposed subdivision, rights-of-way, pavement widths,
grades, typical street cross-sections. If any street is proposed to intersect
with a state-maintained road, the plat shall be accompanied by an application
for driveway approval as required by the Department of Transportation, Division
of Highway’s Manual on Driveway Regulations;
      (18)   Watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on
the land to be subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining corporate
limits, township boundaries and county lines;
      (19)   Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers and approximate
dimensions;
      (20)   Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes,
streams or stream beds, and any other natural features affecting the site; and
      (21)   The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a copy of any
proposed deed restrictions or similar covenants (mandatory when private
recreations areas are established).
   (F)   Review procedures. The Planning Board shall review and take action on
each preliminary plat within 45 days after submission. First considerations
shall be at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board that
follows at least 20 days after the plat is submitted. Before taking action on
the plat, the Staff Planner shall refer copies of the plat and any accompanying
material of those public officials and agencies concerned with new development,
including, but not limited to, the County Health Director, the County Building
Inspection Department, the District Engineer of the State Department of
Transportation and the County Soil Conservation Service.
   (G)   Disposition of copies.
      (1)   If the plat is approved, approval shall be noted on at least three
copies of the plat by the Staff Planner who shall retain one copy for public
examination, one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and one copy shall
be retained for the Planning Board files.
      (2)   If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Board shall
specify the reasons for such action in writing.
         (a)   One copy of such reasons shall be retained by the Staff Planner
and one copy shall be given to the subdivider.
         (b)   If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make
the recommended changes and submit a revised preliminary plat, or appeal the
decision to the Town Council.
(1979 Code, § S-3-4) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.29 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Improvements installation. Upon the approval of the preliminary plat
by the Planning Board, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the
final plat, and the installation or arrangement for required improvements in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this
chapter, except as hereinafter provided concerning performance guarantees,
before final plats are approved:
      (1)   All required improvements shall be completed by the applicant or
his or her agents, and inspected and approved by appropriate public officials
or agencies;
      (2)   All required offers to dedicate, or to reserve for future
dedication, shall be made, clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property
and public improvements thus dedicated; and
      (3)   All required maintenance guarantees shall have been made.
   (B)   Performance guarantees. In lieu of completion of all or part of
required improvements prior to approval of final plats, the applicant may post
a performance guarantee in an amount sufficient to secure to the town the
satisfactory construction, installation and dedication of the uncompleted
portion of the required improvements.
   (C)   Type of guarantee.
      (1)   The performance guarantee may be in the form of a certified check,
a no-contest irrevocable bank letter of credit or a performance and payment
bond underwritten by a state-licensed corporate surety company.
      (2)   Except in the case of certified check, such sureties shall not be
accepted unless the Town Attorney has made a review thereof and rendered a
written opinion that the interests of the town are fully protected.
      (3)   The certified check should be deposited with the Town Clerk, as
escrow agent, who shall deposit it in an escrow account of the town.
      (4)   The no-contest irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be from a
banking corporation licensed to do business in the state. The terms of the
letter shall include the absolute right of the Town Clerk to
withdraw funds from the bank forthwith upon the Town Clerk certifying to the
bank that the terms and conditions of the performance guarantee have been
breached.
   (D)   Plans and construction programs.
      (1)   Plans, specifications, quantities, unit costs and estimated total
costs shall be provided by the applicant to the Staff Planner, together with a
schedule indicating time of initiation and completion of the work, as a whole
or in stages. Number of copies shall be as required for records and processing
in the particular case.
      (2)   The Staff Planner shall refer such plans and programs to
governmental bodies exercising control for their recommendations as to whether
the proposals meet all requirements of such agencies, as to sufficiently of
cost estimates, and as to reasonableness of construction programs.
   (E)   Amount and terms of guarantee; time limits.
      (1)   Following receipt of such commendations, the Staff Planner shall
prepare recommendations as to amount and terms of the performance guarantee,
including time of initiation and completion of the work, as a whole or in
stages, provisions concerning extensions for cause and provisions for release
of portions of the guarantee upon completion of portions or stages of the work.
      (2)   The time between initiation and the completion of the required
improvements, including any provision for extension shall not exceed two years.
      (3)   The Planning Board, based upon the recommendations and with such
changes as it sees fit, shall set the amount and terms of the performance
guarantee, subject to the legal review and opinion required by division (C)
above.
      (4)   The amount of the guarantee shall be sufficient to provide adequate
funds to the town to insure, in the case of default, the installation of all
required improvements uncompleted at the time of default. In setting the amount
of the performance guarantee, the Planning Board shall consider the difficult
of restarting a closed project, the size and complexity of the required
improvements, the record of the applicant and the site conditions.
   (F)   Inspections; reports; cost responsibility.
      (1)   Governmental bodies exercising control shall make inspections to
determine whether work has started as scheduled; shall make inspections as are
necessary during the course of work, and shall make final inspections to
determine whether stages of construction required under the performance
guarantee have been completed in accordance with the terms of the guarantee.
      (2)   Within five days of such inspections, copies of reports of the
results thereof shall be provided to the Staff Planner. The full cost of making
such inspections and preparing such reports shall be paid by the applicant.
   (G)   Action on inspection reports.
      (1)   Reports indicating satisfaction of requirements. Where such reports
indicate satisfactory completion of work within the time limits set and in
accord with other terms of the performance guarantee, for agreed-upon stages or
for the entire work, the Staff Planner shall so indicate to the applicant, and
surety company involved and the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk, upon such
notification and any further assurance that may be required from the Town
Attorney or governmental bodies exercising operating control, shall then
release all or portions of the performance guarantee in accordance with the
terms thereof
      (2)   Reports indicating failure to satisfy requirements.
         (a)   Where such reports indicate failure to initiate work on schedule
or to complete work on schedule in full compliance with the terms of the
performance guarantee, the Staff Planner shall so indicate to the applicant,
governmental bodies exercising control, any surety company involved and the
Town Clerk.
         (b)   Such notice shall indicate that, unless action required under
the terms of the performance guarantee is completed within 30 days of the date
of such notification, the performance guarantee or portions thereof set forth
in its terms shall be called.
         (c)   Unless such action is completed, as evidenced by inspections and
reports from governmental bodies exercising control transmitted through the
Staff Planner, the Town Clerk shall call the performance guarantee or affected
portions thereof.
      (3)   Reports indicating unsatisfactory progress. Where such reports
indicate that work initiated appears likely not to be completed on schedule,
and where the performance guarantee provides for extension of time for cause,
the Staff Planner shall notify the applicant and any surety company involved
concerning potential need for an application for such extension. Where such
notice has been given, no application for extension shall be considered after
expiration of the original schedule date.
   (H)   Actions following failure to complete work under performance
guarantee. Where work required under the terms of any performance guarantee is
not completed by the applicant as specified therein, the Town Clerk, following
the call of the guarantee, shall take such action as is appropriate in the
circumstances of the case to procure the completion of the required
improvements at the earliest reasonable time, according to the plans and
specifications and staging of construction approved in connection therewith.
   (I)   Maintenance and warranty funds.
      (1)   The applicant shall maintain all land and required improvements in
satisfactory condition until acceptance of dedication.
      (2)   Prior to acceptance of dedication, the applicant shall make or
cause to be made payment to a warranty fund of an amount not to exceed 3% of
contract costs, determined by the Town Clerk,
upon reports from governmental bodies exercising control, as sufficient to
remedy defects in workmanship or materials for a period of one year from date
of acceptance of dedication.
      (3)   At the end of such year, any balance of such funds not expended in
remedying defects in workmanship or materials shall be returned to the
applicant.
   (J)   Acceptance of guarantee of other governmental agency, public utility
or town water corporation. Where all or part of required improvements are to be
completed by another government agency or public utility, the Town Clerk may
accept the written guarantee of such agency to complete such improvements
within a time to be mutually agreed upon, with time for completion limited as
provided in division (E) above.
   (K)   Building permits and certificates of occupancy prior to completion of
improvements.
      (1)   Building permits may be issued for construction of buildings in
subdivisions prior to completion of required improvements.
      (2)   Certificates of occupancy may be issued and buildings occupied only
when all of the following improvements are available and as further provided
below:
         (a)   Streets shall be passable for private, service and emergency
vehicles under normal weather conditions provided that distance along such
streets shall not exceed 1,200 feet by normal routes;
         (b)   Driveways shall be passable under normal weather conditions;
         (c)   Drainage shall be installed and operative, thus assuring that
under normal weather conditions there will be no flooding of the building site
or accessways to the site;
         (d)   Erosion protection, acceptable under normal weather conditions,
shall be installed; and
         (e)   Domestic water supply and sanitary sewerage shall be installed
and operative.
      (3)   No such permits or certificates shall be issued unless all
remaining required improvements are covered by a performance guarantee and the
applicant accepts tort liability pending completion of all required
improvements.
(1979 Code, § S-3-5) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.30 THE FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time; such
portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider shall
have installed in that area represented on the final plat all improvements
required by this chapter (or shall have guaranteed their installation as
provided for in §
151.29(B) and all permanent reference points described in §
151.45).
      (1)   Plat submitted. The subdivider shall submit five copies of the
final plat, so marked, to the Staff Planner not less than 20 days prior to the
Planning Board meeting, at which time it will be considered for approval.
Further, the plat shall be submitted not more than 12 months after the date on
which the preliminary plat was approved, otherwise a written extension of this
time limit may be granted by the Planning Board on or before the one year
anniversary of the approval.
      (2)   Plat prepared. The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or
professional engineer licensed and registered to practice in the state. The
final plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary plat as it was
approved. The final plat shall conform to the provisions of G.S. § 47-30.
      (3)   Number of copies and graphic media. Eight copies of the final plat
shall be submitted not less than 20 days prior to the Planning Board meeting;
one additional copy shall be drawn in ink on linen or film suitable for
reproduction, and shall bear all the required certifications set forth in
division (B)(5) below. The reproducible drawing shall be given to the Staff
Planner not later than the date of the Planning Board meeting in which approval
is requested.
      (4)   Size of plat and scale. Final plats shall have an outside marginal
size of not more than 18 inches by 24 inches nor less than eight and one-half
inches by eleven inches, including one and one-half inch border for binding on
the left margin and one-half inch border on each of the other sides. Where size
of land areas or suitable scale to assure legibility require, maps may be
placed on two or more sheets with appropriate match lines. Final plats shall be
drawn at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, or greater.
      (5)   Certification required. The following signed and notarized
certificates shall appear on the reproducible copy of the final plat which is
submitted to the Planning Board by the subdivider:
      CERTIFICATION OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION
      I hereby certify that I am/we are the owner(s) of the property shown and
described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of
Rutherford College and that I/we hereby adopt this plan of minor subdivision.
                                                                           
                                                                                
      OWNER(S)
      DATE ___________________
 
      CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY AND ACCURACY
      I, ____________________________, certify that this was (drawn by me)
(drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (and actual
survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book ____, Page
____, Book ____, Page ____, etc.) (other); that the error of closure as
calculated by latitudes and departures is 1:__: that the boundaries not
surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book ____,
Page ____; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 74-30 as
amended. Witness my hand and seal this _______ day of ________________, A.D.,
20___.
   ______________________________________
   Registered Surveyor or Professional Engineer
   ______________________________________
   License or Registration Number
 
      CERTIFICATE OR APPROVAL OF THE DESIGN
AND INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES, AND OTHER REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
      I hereby certify that all required improvements have been installed in an
acceptable manner and according to the Rutherford College specifications and
standards in the ______________ Subdivision or that guarantees of the
installation of the required improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory
to Rutherford College have been received, and that the filing fee for the plat,
in the amount of $__________ has been paid.
   ______________________________________
   Town Clerk
   _____________________________________
   Date
 
      CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF THE DESIGN AND INSTALLATION
OF PUBLIC STREETS:
         DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
            DIVISION OF HIGHWAYS
SUBDIVISION ROAD CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS CERTIFICATION
   APPROVED ______________________________
                  District Engineer
                                                DATE __________
 
   DISCLOSURE AND CERTIFICATION FOR PRIVATE STREETS
      All roads in this subdivision are hereby declared private and shall not
be maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The
maintenance of all streets and roads on this subdivision shall be the
responsibility of
                                                                    and it
shall be the responsibility of
                                                          to bring the roads up
to the standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation Secondary
Roads Council before any private streets or roads on this plat are included, at
any time after the approval of this plat, into the North Carolina State
Maintained Road System.
                                                         
      Subdivider or Agent
 
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
      I                                      , Zoning Administrator for the
Town of Rutherford College, do hereby certify that the property shown meets the
minimum standards of the Rutherford College Zoning Ordinance.
                                                      
      Zoning Administrator
                                        
      Date
 
   CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY REVIEW OFFICER
      I,                                          , Review Officer for
Rutherford College, certify that the plat to which this certification is
affixed meets all the statutory requirements for recording.
                                                       
      Review Officer
                                          
      Date
      (6)   Contents required. The final plat shall depict or contain the
following information. Plats not illustrating or containing the following data
shall be returned by the Staff Planner to the subdivider or his or her
authorized agent for completion and re-submission:
         (a)   The name of the subdivision;
         (b)   The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided fully
dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of intersecting boundary
lines of adjoining lines;
         (c)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;
         (d)   Street names;
         (e)   The location, purpose and dimensions of areas to be used for
purposes other than residential;
         (f)   The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining
subdivisions of records (or proposed and under review);
         (g)   The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility or
other easements, riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths,
and areas to be dedicated to public use with the purpose of each stated;
         (h)   Rights-of-way lines and pavement widths of all streets and
location and width of all adjacent streets and easements;
         (i)   Property lines, buildings or other structures, watercourses,
railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains and both on the land to be
subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining;
         (j)   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce
on the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line,
right-of-way lines, easement line and setback line; including dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, radii, central angles and tangent distances for
the centerline of curbed streets and curbed property lines that are not the
boundary of curbed streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest
one-tenth of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute;
         (k)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments,
markers and control points;
         (l)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block;
         (m)   The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants proposed
for the subdivision, if any;
         (n)   The date of the survey and the plat preparation;
         (o)   North arrow and declination;
         (p)   All certifications as required by division (E) above;
         (q)   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner
(s), registered surveyor(s), land planner(s), architect(s), landscape architect
(s) and professional engineer(s) responsible for the subdivision and the
registration number(s) and seal(s) of the professional engineer(s) and
registered surveyor(s); and
         (r)   Any other information considered by either the subdivider or the
Planning Board to be the pertinent to the review of the final plat.
(1979 Code, § S-3-6) (Ord. passed 6- -1987; Ord. 040124-2, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 151.31 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   Final plats shall be reviewed according to the following procedure.
   (A)   Planning Board review.
      (1)   The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove the final plat
within 45 days of its first consideration.
      (2)   During its review of the final plat, the Planning Board may appoint
any engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat. If
substantial errors are found, the costs shall be charged to the subdivider and
the plat shall not be approved until such errors have been corrected.
      (3)   If the Planning Board approves the final plat, such approval shall
be indicated on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL BY THE PLANNING BOARD
      The Rutherford College Planning Board hereby approves the final plat for
the _____________ Subdivision.
________________          ______________________________________
   Date            Chairperson, Rutherford College Planning Board
      (4)   If the Planning Board disapproved the final plat, the Staff Planner
shall state in writing its reasons for such action, specifying the provisions
of this chapter with which the plat does not comply. One copy of this statement
shall be transmitted to the subdivider within 15 days of disapproval; one copy
shall be retained by the Planning Board as part of its proceedings. If the
final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such changes as will bring
the plat into compliance with the provisions of this chapter and resubmit same
for reconsideration by the Planning Board.
      (5)   If the Planning Board fails to approve or disapprove the final plat
within 60 days after the submission date of the completed final plat as
previously defined in this division (A), such failure shall be deemed to be
approval and shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply for final
approval by the Town Council.
   (B)   Town Council review.
      (1)   The Town Council shall review the final plat with the requirements
of the Planning Board and shall approve or disapprove the plat at their next
regularly scheduled meeting or within 45 days of the Planning Board’s final
action.
      (2)   If the Town Council approves the final plat, such approval shall be
shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL FOR RECORDING
   I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Ordinance for Rutherford College, North Carolina,
and mat this plat has been approved by the Town Council for recording in the
office of the Register of Deeds of Burke County.
   _______________________      _____________________________
   Date                        Town Clerk
      (3)   If the final plat is disapproved by the Town Council, the reason
for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provision(s) of
this chapter with which the final plat does not comply.
      (4)   One copy of such reasons shall be retained by the Town Council as a
part of its proceedings, and the Staff Planner, Planning Board Chairperson and
the subdivider shall each receive one copy. If the final plat is disapproved,
the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into
compliance with this chapter and resubmit same of consideration by the Planning
Board.
   (C)   Disposition of copies. If the final plat is approved by the Town
Council, two copies of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider. The
reproducible tracing and two prints shall be filed with the Register of Deeds.
One print shall be retained by the Planning Board.
   (D)   Recording of the final plat. The subdivider shall file the approved
final plat with the register of deeds of the county for recording within 60
days after the date of the Town Council approval; otherwise, such approval
shall be null and void.
   (E)   Resubdivision procedure. For any replatting or resubdivision of land,
the same procedures, rules and regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for
an original subdivision. Lot sizes may, however, be varied on an approved plat
after recording, provided that:
      (1)   No lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is smaller
than the size shown on the approved plat;
      (2)   Drainage, easements or rights-of-way shall not be changed;
      (3)   Street alignment and block sizes shall not be changed;
      (4)   The property line between the back of the lots shall not be
changed;
      (5)   The rear portion of lots shall not be subdivided from the front
parts; and
      (6)   The character of the area shall be maintained.
(1979 Code, § S-3-7) (Ord. passed 6- -1987; Ord. 040124-2, passed 4-1-2024)
INSTALLATION OF PERMANENT REFERENCE POINTS AND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 151.45 PERMANENT REFERENCE POINTS.
   Prior to the approval of the final plat, permanent reference points shall
have been placed in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   Subdivision corner tie.
      (1)   At least one corner of the subdivision shall be designated by
course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a
corner is within 2,000 feet of a U.S. Coast or geodetic station or state grid
system coordinated monument, or town coordinated system, then this corner shall
be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which
shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument
to an accuracy of 1:10,000.
      (2)   When such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be
made to some pertinent and physical object or structure that could not be
destroyed.
   (B)   Monuments. Monuments, complying with the requirements of the current
edition of the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, shall
be placed in all subdivisions.
      (1)   Within each block of the subdivision, at least two monuments
designed and designated as control corners shall be installed.
      (2)   The surveyor shall employ additional monuments if and when
required.
      (3)   All monuments shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at
least four inches in diameter or square and not less than three feet in length.
      (4)   Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a
suitable means a metal plate of non-corrosive material and marked plainly with
the point, the surveyor’s registration number, the month and the year it was
installed and the word “Monument” or “Control Corner”.
      (5)   Monuments shall be set at least 30 inches in the ground with at
least six inches exposed above the ground unless this requirement is
impractical.
   (C)   Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not
less than three-fourths inches in diameter and at least 30 inches in length
shall be set at all corners, except those located by monuments. A marker shall
also be set at a point of curve, point of intersection, property corner, point
of tangency and reference point unless a monument is placed at said points.
Additional markers shall be placed where necessary.
      (1)   Public sites and open spaces.
         (a)   In subdividing property, due consideration should be given by
the subdivider and the Planning Board to the designation of suitable sites for
parks, schools and other uses.
         (b)   Such provision should be indicated on the sketch plan in order
that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be required.
      (2)   Access to parks, schools and the like. Streets shall be designed or
walkways dedicated to assure convenient access to adjacent parks, playgrounds,
schools and other places of public assembly. Dedicated walkways shall not be
less than ten feet in width.
      (3)   Restrictions on the subdivision for residential purposes of land
subject to flooding. Lots that are subject to flooding shall not be established
in subdivisions for the purpose of creating residential building sites except
as herein provided. These areas can be obtained from the County Planning
Department. Where the developer proposes to provide a levee or raise the floor
elevations above the flood level, an engineering report shall accompany the
subdivision application.
         (a)   If there is any watercourse of any type running through or
within 150 feet of the property proposed for subdividing the prospective
subdivider shall furnish reasonable evidence to the Planning Board that
residential lots within the subdivision will not be flooded.
         (b)   No proposed residential building lot shown that is wholly
subject to flooding shall be approved.
(1979 Code, § S-4-1) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.46 DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   Street requirements for subdivisions shall meet the current minimum
construction standards of the State Department of Transportation, Division of
Highways.
(1979 Code, § S-4-2) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
§ 151.60 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width of all
proposed streets shall be in conformity with official plans and maps of the
town and with existing or amended plans of the Planning Board.
   (B)   Continuation of existing roads. The proposed road layout shall be
coordinated with the existing road system of the surrounding area and, where
possible, existing principal roads shall be extended.
   (C)   Access to adjacent properties. Where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, it is desirable to provide access to an adjoining property, proposed
roads shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a
temporary turnaround shall be provided.
   (D)   Private streets. Private streets may be allowed in subdivisions,
provided they meet certain standards as specified in this chapter for
maintaining private streets
   (E)   Reserve strips. There shall be no reserve strips platted in any
subdivision unless the developer can show good cause for such to the Planning
Board.
   (F)   Large tracts and parcels. Where land is subdivided into larger parcels
than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for
the opening of future roads and logical further resubdivision.
   (G)   Lots. All lots shall front upon a public or private street according
to the requirements of the town’s zoning ordinance.
   (H)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for
other than residential purposes. Alleys are prohibited in residential blocks
unless such are approved by the Planning Board. All dead-end alleys shall be
provided with a turnaround.
   (I)   Contour map. A contour map shall be provided if requested by the Staff
Planner. The contour interval required will depend upon topographic and
drainage characteristics and shall be specified by the Town Engineer.
   (J)   Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with
other existing and named, shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets.
In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically
similar to existing streets names, irrespective of the use of the suffix
street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court and the like.
(1979 Code, § S-5-1) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.61 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following design standards shall be considered minimum requirements
unless the subdivision qualifies as a Hillside Subdivision (see §
151.63).
   (A)   Streets. The design standards which shall apply to streets are as
follows:
      (1)   Right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be in
accordance with the major street plan and shall be not less than the following:
         (a)   Major arterials: 90 feet;
         (b)   Collector streets: 60 feet;
         (c)   Local or minor (residential) streets: 50 feet;
         (d)   Marginal access streets: 50 feet;
         (e)   Cul-de-sacs (turn-arounds): 100 feet; and
         (f)   Alleys: 20 feet.
      (2)   Pavement widths (with curb and gutter). Pavement widths back to
back of curb shall be not less than the following:
         (a)   Major arterials: 44 feet;
         (b)   Collector streets: 34 feet;
         (c)   Local or minor (residential) streets: 26 feet;
         (d)   Marginal access streets: 26 feet; and
         (e)   Cul-de-sacs (turn-arounds): 80 feet.
      (3)   Grades. Street grades shall be as follows:
         (a)   Street grades shall be not more than 12% nor less than 0.5%; and
         (b)   Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed 5% for a
distance of not less than 100 feet from the centerline of said intersection.
      (4)   Horizontal curves. Where a centerline deflection angle of more than
ten degrees occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced, having a centerline
radius of not less than the following:
         (a)   Major arterials: 300 feet;
         (b)   Collector streets: 200 feet; and
         (c)   Minor streets: 100 feet.
      (5)   Vertical curves. All vertical curves shall have such lengths as
necessary to provide safe sight distance.
      (6)   Tangents. A tangent of not less than 100 feet in length shall be
provided between curves.
      (7)   Intersections. Streets shall be laid out as follows.
         (a)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles
and no street shall intersect as less than 75 degrees.
         (b)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall
be avoided.
         (c)   Intersections with a major street or highway shall be at least
800 feet apart This requirement can be waived by the Planning Board if such
requirement would prevent a property owner fronting on a major street or
thoroughfare from having access to such a facility.
         (d)   The dedication of half streets at the perimeter of a new
subdivision is prohibited. If circumstances render this impractical, adequate
provision for the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the street
must be furnished by the subdivider. Where there exists a half street in an
adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided by the proposed
development.
      (8)   Alleys. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with town
specifications and standards and shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Right-of-way width: 20 feet;
         (b)   Minimum centerline radius when a deflection angle of more than
ten degrees occurs: 35 feet; and
         (c)   Property line radius at alley intersection: 15 feet.
   (B)   Blocks. The maximum and minimum length and width of blocks shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Length. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,600 feet nor be less than
400 feet. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Board, a pedestrian crosswalk
of at least ten feet easement in width may be required.
      (2)   Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of
minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by
topographic conditions, in which case a single tier of lots may be approved.
(1979 Code, § S-5-2) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.62 LOT DESIGN.
   (A)   Lots. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall reflect due
consideration for topography and drainage. Lots shall conform to the
requirement of this chapter and, in addition, shall conform to the following
provisions.
   (B)   Arrangement. Every lot must front for at least 35 feet on a public or
private street. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight lines or radial to curbed street lines.
   (C)   Lake frontage lots. Lake frontage lots shall have a minimum width as
sold of 100 feet at the front building line. All other lots within 460 feet of
the official pond level of the lakes within the town’s planning jurisdiction
shall have minimum width as sold of 100 feet at the front building line.
   (D)   Area. All lots shall have an area of at least 15,000 square feet.
   (E)   Width. All lots shall have a minimum width at the building line of 80
feet and a minimum width at the street line of 35 feet. Corner lots shall have
an extra width of ten feet to permit adequate setback from side streets.
   (F)   Depth. All lots shall have a minimum mean depth of not less than 110
feet. Single-tier lots shall have a mean depth of at least 125 feet.
   (G)   Orientation of lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at
right angles or radial to street lines.
   (H)   Easements. Utility and other easements shall be provided as follows.
      (1)   Utility and drainage easements centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least 25 feet in width; or
greater width if required for the installation and maintenance of the facility.
      (2)   Crosswalk easements of ten feet in width shall be provided when
such area is required by the Planning Board.
      (3)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purposes. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
   (I)   Buffer strips. It is required that a buffer be provided adjacent to a
railroad, a limited access highway, and commercial or industrial developments.
   (J)   Storm water drainage.
      (1)   Where curbs and gutters are constructed, they shall be in
accordance with the standards of the State Department of Transportation’s
Guidelines for Curb Cuts and Ramps for Handicapped Persons.
      (2)   No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary
sewer.
      (3)   Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an existing storm
drainage system or stream.
      (4)   Where in existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be extended
to the subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the
proposed development from water damage.
      (5)   Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least three
feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical distance, and courses
shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding.
The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course shall be a
vertical fell of at least one foot in each 200 feet of horizontal distance.
      (6)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and
such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purposes. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.
      (7)   Where storm sewers, drains and structures are installed, they shall
be of a size and type, and location as required by the town. The minimum size
of storm drains shall be 15 inches in diameter. The design frequency for storm
sewer collectors shall be at a ten-year flood level with cross street frequency
at a 25-year storm level. Storm drains carrying water from street right-of-way
shall be placed along lot lines where feasible and shall extend for a distance
of 35 feet minimum back of the building line. All off-street storm drains or
extensions shall be installed initially by the subdivider or the
responsibilities thereafter shall be transferred to the purchaser through the
instrument of property transfer, which responsibility shall be clearly
indicated on the final plat.
      (8)   Cross pipes under streets shall be constructed of State Department
of Transportation approved plastic, reinforced concrete or asphalt coated
corrugated metal.
      (9)   Culverts shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow
and shall be sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the required
slopes. The size openings to be provided shall in no case be built less than 15
inches. Cross drains shall be built on straight line and grade shall be laid on
a firm base, but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with the spigot pointing in
the direction of the flow and with the end filled and matched to provide tight
joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall be placed at a sufficient depth
below the road bed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall
the top of the pipe be less than one foot below the road bed and shall be
constructed of State Department of Transportation approved plastic, reinforced
concrete or asphalt coated corrugated metal.
(1979 Code, § S-5-3) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.63 HILLSIDE SUBDIVISIONS.
   This section shall apply only to that development which occurs in the
subdivision of land along private streets and, furthermore, the development
must comply with the provisions herein referred to in this section.
   (A)   Street design.
      (1)   Widths. The private street shall have a right-of-way of not less
than 60 feet, except that a right-of-way of 50 feet will be permitted if a
reduced width is essentially unavoidable and is approved by the Planning Board.
      (2)   Cul-de-sacs. The required turnaround on a dead end private street
in a hillside subdivision shall have a roadway diameter of not less than 50
feet and a right-of-way diameter of not less than 60 feet. If the street length
does not exceed 300 feet and if construction difficulties will not permit a
turnaround, the use of a “Y” or “T” or other turning space of a design such as
will allow a vehicle with a wheel base of at least 20 feet to complete a
turning movement with a maximum of one backing movement, may be permitted if
approved by the Planning Board.
      (3)   Grading. Grading will not be required for the full right-of-way in
hillside subdivisions if the Planning Board determines that full grading will
prevent convenient access to adjoining property or will destroy the natural
beauty of the site by excessive cut and fill; however, where slope extends
beyond right-of-way, add slope easement where needed. Easement to extend ten
feet beyond top of cut where it exceeds 15 feet.
      (4)   Street grades. In hillside land subdivisions, maximum private
street grades permitted shall be 20% unless the Planning Board determines that
a steeper grade is essentially unavoidable and would not create excessive
danger.
   (B)   Street improvements for Hillside Subdivisions.
      (1)   Pavement widths where required. Pavement widths shall not be less
than 20 feet except for designated interior streets or where the average cross
slope is 16% or greater, pavement widths may be reduced with Planning Board
approval as follows.
         (a)   Where the average cross slope is between 16% and 40%, minimum
pavement width may be reduced to 18 feet.
         (b)   Where the average cross slope is greater than 40%, approval of
the district engineer of the State Highway Commission shall be secured prior to
any road construction. Evidence of such approval shall be shown on the
preliminary plat.
         (c)   Where pavement width is reduced, the more stringent requirements
shall apply.
      (2)   Sixteen to 25% cross slope. When the average cross slop is between
16% and 25%, design requirements for lot are as follows.
         (a)   The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area will
be 15,000 square feet. No less than 80% of the lots shall have a minimum area
of 15,000 square feet, and no lot shall have an area of less than 15,000 square
feet.
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage will be 70 feet except a minimum frontage
of 45 feet may be permitted at the end of a cul-de-sac.
         (c)   Minimum average lot width wilt be 70 feet.
      (3)   Twenty-six to 40% cross slope. When the average slope is between
26% and 40%, design requirements for lots are as follows.
         (a)   The average minimum lot for the entire subdivided area will be
25,000 square feet. Not less than 80% of the lots shall have a minimum area of
28,000 square feet, and no lot shall have an area of less than 15,000 square
feet.
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage will be 100 feet, except a minimum of 50
feet may be permitted at the end of the cul-de-sac.
      (4)   Cross slope greater than 40%. When the average cross slope is
greater than 40%, design requirements for lots are as follows.
         (a)   The average minimum lot area for the entire subdivided area will
be one acre. Not less than 80% of the lots shall have a minimum area of 48,000
square feet, and no lot shall have an area less than 25,000 square feet.
         (b)   Minimum foot frontage of 60 feet may be permitted at the end of
a cul-de-sac.
         (c)   Minimum average lot width will be 130 feet.
      (5)   Panhandle lots. The Planning Board may approve panhandle lots in
exceptional cases where it is unpractical to serve an isolated lot by a public
street. The frontage of the panhandle lot shall have a minimum width of 25 feet
providing an access strip between two regular lots to the isolated building
site. The area of such strip shall be excluded in computing the lot area and
width, and the length of said strip shall not exceed 300 feet.
      (6)   Residential building setback lines. Within the town the residential
building setback lines for Hillside Subdivisions shall conform to the
requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(1979 Code, § S-5-4) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.64 FAMILY SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   This section shall apply only to that development which occurs in the
subdivision of land along private streets and, furthermore, the development
must comply with the provisions herein referred to in this section.
   (B)   Street design:
      (1)   For new lots being developed for someone other than family members,
the property owner is required to pave an 18-foot wide road within a 35-foot
right-of-way leading from the subdivision to a state-maintained road; and
      (2)   For lots developed for family members (defined as children,
grandchildren, parents, grandparents or spouse) the following guidelines must
be followed:
         (a)   For subdivisions created through an estate, a map must be
created to record the subdivision and a 15-foot right-of-way must be dedicated
up to the property to be subdivided and a 45-foot right-of-way within the
estate property; and
         (b)    Subdivisions created by living persons for family members can
be done in stages based on the number of lots involved:
            1.   For one to two lots, a 35-foot right-of-way is required to the
nearest state-maintained road;
            2.   For three to five lots, an 18-foot wide graveled road is
required within a 35-foot right-of-way up to the nearest state-maintained road.
The road also must meet NCDOT design standards; and
            3.   For subdivisions with more than five lots, 18-foot wide paved
roads which meet NCDOT design standards is required within a 35-foot right-of-
way.
(1979 Code, § S-5-5) (Ord. passed 6- -1987)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the jurisdiction of this
chapter thereafter subdivides his or her land in violation of the ordinance or
transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of or any other use of a
plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly
approved under such ordinance and recorded in the office of the appropriate
Register of Deeds, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 and each day
that any of the provisions of this section are violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not
exempt the transaction from this penalty.
   (C)   The town, through its attorney or other official designated by the
Council, may enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer or sale of land by action for
injunction.
(1979 Code, § S-1-6) (Ord. passed 6- -1987; Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Authority and enactment
   
152.002   Short title
   
152.003   Jurisdiction
   
152.004   Interpretation of certain terms and words
   
152.005   Definitions
Establishment of Districts
   
152.020   Use district
   
152.021   District boundaries
   
152.022   Due consideration given to district boundaries
   
152.023   Rules governing boundaries
Use Requirements by District
   
152.035   Table of permitted uses
   
152.036   R-20 Residential District
   
152.037   R-15 Residential District
   
152.037.1   R-10 Residential District
   
152.038   O-I Office and Institutional District
   
152.039   C-B Central Business District
   
152.040   H-B Highway Business District
   
152.041   G-M General Manufacturing District
   
152.042   OD-M Malcolm Boulevard Overlay District
   
152.043   PUD Planned Unit Development
General Zoning Regulations
   
152.055   Application; conformity
   
152.056   Reduction of lot and yard areas prohibited
   
152.057   Relationship of building to lot
   
152.058   Nonconforming uses
   
152.059   Amortization
   
152.060   Interpretation of district regulations
   
152.061   Exemptions and modifications
   
152.062   Fences
Special Regulations
   
152.075   Accessory uses and structures
   
152.076   Adult establishments
   
152.077   Home occupations
   
152.078   Planned unit development
   
152.079   Electronic gaming/internet sweepstakes
   
152.080   Livestock and fowl
   
152.081   Microbreweries, distilleries and wineries
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
   
152.090   General provisions
   
152.091   Permit for mobile home parks required
   
152.092   Conflict with Health Department regulations
   
152.093   Utilities required
   
152.094   Site requirements
   
152.095   Facilities required
   
152.096   General sanitation
   
152.097   Provisions for manufactured homes on individual lots
Watershed Protection
   
152.110   Authority and enactment
   
152.111   Jurisdiction
   
152.112   Exceptions to applicability
   
152.113   Cluster or planned unit development
   
152.114   Buffer areas required
   
152.115   Watershed Administrator and duties thereof
   
152.116   Appeal from the Watershed Administrator
   
152.117   Establishment of Watershed Review Board
   
152.118   Powers and duties of the Watershed Review Board and Board of
Adjustment
   
152.119   Appeals from the Watershed Review Board or Board of Adjustment
   
152.120   High density development standards
   
152.121   High density development permit application
   
152.122   Storm water control structures
   
152.123   Posting of financial security required
   
152.124   Maintenance and upkeep
   
152.125   Application and inspection fees
   
152.126   Inspections and release of the performance bond
   
152.127   Effective date of subchapter
Wireless Telecommunications
   
152.140   Purpose and legislative intent
   
152.141   Title
   
152.142   Severability; special use permit
   
152.143   Definitions
   
152.144   Overall policy and desired goals for special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities
   
152.145   Special use permit application and other requirements
   
152.146   Location of wireless telecommunication facilities
   
152.147   Shared use of facilities and other structures
   
152.148   Height of telecommunications tower(s)
   
152.149   Appearance and visibility of wireless telecommunications facilities
   
152.150   Security of wireless telecommunications facilities
   
152.151   Signage
   
152.152   Lot size and setbacks
   
152.153   Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant
   
152.154   Exceptions from a special use permit for facilities
   
152.155   Public hearing and notification requirements
   
152.156   Action on an application for a special use permit for facilities
   
152.157   Re-certification of a special use permit for facilities
   
152.158   Extent and parameters of special use permit
   
152.159   Application fee
   
152.160   Performance security
   
152.161   Reservation of authority to inspect facilities
   
152.162   Annual NIER certification
   
152.163   Liability insurance
   
152.164   Indemnification
   
152.165   Default and/or revocation
   
152.166   Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities
   
152.167   Relief
   
152.168   Periodic regulatory review by the town
   
152.169   Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations
   
152.170   Conflict with other laws
   
152.171   Authority
Sign Regulations
   
152.185   Purpose
   
152.186   Administration
   
152.187   Definition
   
152.188   Nonconforming signs
   
152.189   Removal of temporary obsolete signs
   
152.190   Measurement of sign area
   
152.191   Sign location
   
152.192   Illumination
   
152.193   Sign types
   
152.194   Number and type of permitted signs in nonresidential zoning districts
   
152.195   Number and type of permitted signs in residential zoning districts
   
152.196   Signs permitted in all zoning districts
   
152.197   Signs prohibited in all districts; table of sign regulations
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Landscaping
   
152.210   Off-street parking requirements
   
152.211   Certification of minimum parking requirements
   
152.212   Minimum off-street parking requirements
   
152.213   Off-street loading and unloading spaces
   
152.214   Shopping center parking requirements
   
152.215   Mixed use building parking requirements
   
152.216   Stacking/drive-through reservoir requirement
   
152.217   Landscaping requirements
   
152.218   General parking requirements
Buffers and Screening
   
152.230   Purpose
   
152.231   General provisions
   
152.232   Screening
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.245   Zoning Enforcement Officer
   
152.246   Zoning compliance permit and building permit required
   
152.247   Application for a zoning compliance permit
   
152.248   Fees
   
152.249   Violation
   
152.250   Liability
   
152.251   Procedure upon discovery of violation
   
152.252   Remedies
Board of Adjustment
   
152.265   Establishment of Board of Adjustment
   
152.266   Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
   
152.267   Composition and duties
   
152.268   Appeals
   
152.269   Special uses; condition governing application
   
152.270   Variances
   
152.271   Voting
   
152.272   Quasi-judicial decisions and judicial review
   
152.273   Oaths
   
152.274   Subpoenas
   
152.275   Fees for variances or appeals
Planning Board
   
152.280   Establishment of the Planning Board
   
152.281   Proceedings of the Planning Board
   
152.282   Duties
Amendments
   
152.285   Action by the applicant
   
152.286   Action by the Planning Board
   
152.287   Action by the Town Council
Legal Statutes Provisions
   
152.300   Conflict with other regulations
   
152.301   Town attorney may prevent violation
   
152.302   Repeal of existing zoning ordinance
   
152.303   Validity
 
   
152.999   Penalty; remedies; sanctions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT.
   The Town Council, in pursuance of the authority granted by G.S. § 160D-1-1,
hereby ordain and enact into law the following, this the fifth day of April,
2010.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.002 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina”.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.003 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all property within
the town limits as authorized by G.S. § 160D-200, and that land as designated
by the official zoning map as authorized by G.S. § 160D-307, to be known as
“extraterritorial area”.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.004 INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS AND WORDS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following interpretations shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (B)   Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in
the plural number include the singular.
   (C)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, corporation, trust and company as well as an individual.
   (D)   The word “lot” includes the word “plot” and “parcel”.
   (E)   The word “building” includes the word “structure”.
   (F)   The word “shall” is mandatory, not directory.
   (G)   The words “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied”.
   (H)   The word(s) “map”, “zoning map” or “town zoning map” shall mean the
“official zoning map of the Town of Rutherford College, North Carolina”.
   (I)   The term “Zoning Inspector” shall include the term “Watershed
Administrator”.
   (J)   The term “zoning permit” shall include the term “watershed protection
permit”, and the term “certificate of occupancy” shall include the term
“watershed protection occupancy permit”.
   (K)   The phrase “date of recordation” shall mean the date on which the deed
for a parcel of property was filed with the County Register of Deeds.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and
used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal building, and
located on the same lot therewith.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or
building.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Decisions made in the implementation,
administration, or enforcement of development regulations that involve the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards set forth in
this chapter or local government development regulations. These are sometimes
referred to as MINISTERIAL DECISIONS or ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS.
   ADULT USE BUSINESS. Any principal or accessory use which excludes minors by
reason of age. This definition does not apply to applicable alcoholic beverage
laws or voluntary restrictions of the motion picture industry. This
classification includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment which has a substantial portion
of its stock and trade in books, magazines, other printed materials or videos
and excludes minors by reason of age.
      (2)   ADULT CABARET. An establishment which features go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainment and excludes minors by reason of age.
      (3)   ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER. A drive-in theater used for showing movies,
slide shows, closed circuit television or similar offerings and excludes minors
by reason of age.
      (4)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR. An establishment in which body massages are
offered as a service and from which minors are excluded by reason of age.
      (5)   ADULT MINI-PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building or part thereof
with the capacity of 50 persons or less used for showing movies, slide shows,
closed circuit television or similar offerings and excludes minors by reason of
age.
      (6)   ADULT PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building or part thereof with
the capacity of more than 50 persons used for showing movies, slide shows,
closed circuit television or similar offerings and excludes minors by reason of
age.
      (7)   ADULT SEXUAL PARAPHERNALIA STORE. Any retail store specializing in
the sale of paraphernalia, devices or equipment distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on depicting or describing specific sexual conduct or used in
connection with specified sexual conduct.
   AGRICULTURE. Farming, including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of
best management practices, seeding, cultivating or harvesting for the
production of food and fiber products (except commercial logging and timber
harvesting).
   ALLEY. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
or access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. An establishment for the care and treatment of small
animals, including household pets.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by the county for the purpose of
impounding and caring for cats and dogs found running at large or otherwise
subject to impoundment in accordance with the provision of this law.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. A residence or building which has six or more guest units
which exhibits a character of use consistent with a motel or hotel and which
may have a restaurant open to the general public as well as the guests.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). A structural or nonstructural management
based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce non-point source
inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.
   BILLBOARD. An outdoor structure or display, pictorial or otherwise, either
freestanding or attached to a building, which advertises or attracts attention
to a business, commodity, service or other activity conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than on the premises on which said sign is located.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building where, for compensation, lodging and/or meals are
provided for not more than ten persons.
   BUFFER (WATERSHED). An area of natural or planted vegetation through which
storm water runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become
channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering or
pollutants. The BUFFER is measured landward from the normal pool elevation of
impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers.
   BUFFER STRIP. A strip of land consisting of walls, fences, vegetation and/or
combination thereof provided between varying zoning districts and/or land uses.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the finished lot grade at the front building line to the highest point of
the roof beams adjacent to the front of the wall in the case of a flat roof, to
the average height of the gables in the case of a pitched roof, and to the deck
line in the case of a mansard roof.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is situated.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance
between the nearest portion of any building (excluding the outermost three feet
of any uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters and similar fixtures), and the
street or highway right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. When
no right-of-way exists, then a 50-foot distance will be used to determine the
setback (25-feet on each side from the center of the road). This distance is
measured from the middle of the existing road or street.
   BUILT-UPON AREA. The portion of a development project that is covered by
impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel
roads, recreation facilities and the like, excluding wooden slatted decks and
the water area of a swimming pool.
   CHILD CARE FACILITY. Any establishment that provides supervision, and cares
for individuals on a regular basis, for more than five individuals unrelated to
the operator for a period of less than 24 hours a day, and which receives
payment, fee or grant, for any of the individuals receiving care, and whether
or not operated for profit. The term includes day care centers, day nurseries,
Smart Start and/or any facility that provides daytime care for individuals.
   CHILD CARE HOM E. Any place operated by a person, society, agency,
corporation, institution or any other group that is licensed by the state
wherein children under 17 years of age who are not related to such person and
whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same house and with such
person, society, agency, corporation or institution responsible for the control
and care of children enrolled therein.
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. The grouping of buildings in order to conserve land
resources and provide for innovation in the design of the project. This term
includes nonresidential development as well as single-family residential
subdivisions and multi-family developments that do not involve the subdivision
of land.
   CORNER LOT. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of
two street lines which make an angle of more than 45 degrees and less than 135
degrees with each other. The street line forming the least frontage shall be
deemed the “front” of the lot, except where the two street lines are equal, in
which case the owner shall be required to specify which is the front when
requesting a zoning compliance permit.
   CRITICAL AREA. The area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir where
risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of
the watershed. The CRITICAL AREA is
defined as extending one-half mile upstream and draining to the normal pool
elevation of a water supply reservoir or water intake located in a stream; or
to the ridge line of the watershed, whichever comes first.
   CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use of a dwelling unit utilized for
gainful employment that is clearly a customary, incidental and secondary use of
a dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect
the residential character of the neighborhood.
   DETERMINATION. A written, final, and binding order, requirement, or
determination regarding an administrative decision.
   DEVELOPER. A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment
authority, who undertakes any development and who is the landowner of the
property to be developed or who has been authorized by the landowner to
undertake development on that property.
   DEVELOPMENT. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term means
any of the following:
      (1)   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation,
substantial repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure.
      (2)   The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of land.
      (3)   The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. § 160D-802.
      (4)   The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the
intensity of use of land.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this chapter that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project, or
development proposal. DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits, variances, and
certificates of appropriateness. The term also includes all other regulatory
approvals required by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, including
plat approvals, permits issued, development agreements entered into, and
building permits issued.
   DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. A unified development ordinance, zoning regulation,
subdivision regulation, erosion and sedimentation control regulation,
floodplain or flood damage prevention regulation, mountain ridge protection
regulation, stormwater control regulation, wireless telecommunication facility
regulation, historic preservation or landmark regulation, housing code, State
Building Code enforcement, or any other regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, or a local act or charter that regulates land use or development.
   DUPLEX. A building designed for containing two dwelling units.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used,
and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith. For the purposes of this chapter, the term does not include
any manufactured home, mobile home, or recreational vehicle, if used solely for
a seasonal vacation purpose.
   DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used for
permanent living quarters for one family. The term DWELLING UNIT shall not be
deemed to include a motel, hotel, tourist home, mobile home or other structure
designed for transient residence.
   ELECTRONIC GAMING/INTERNET SWEEPSTAKES. Any business enterprise where
persons utilize electronic machines, including but not limited to computers and
gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance, including sweepstakes, and where
cash, merchandise or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise
distributed, whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by
electronic games played or by predetermined odds. Electronic gaming operations
may include, but are not limited to, internet cafes, internet sweepstakes,
electronic gaming machines/operations or cyber cafes. This does not include any
lottery approved by the state or any non-profit operation that is otherwise
lawful under state law (such as, church or civic organization fundraisers).
   EMERGENCY STRUCTURE. A temporary building for emergencies including
trailers, mobile vehicles, which can be used for temporary living purposes, or
for office use, in conjunction with construction.
   EVIDENTIARY HEARING. A hearing to gather competent, material, and
substantial evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision
required by a development regulation adopted under this chapter.
   EXISTING DEVELOPMENT. Those projects that are built or those projects that
at a minimum have established a vested right under North Carolina zoning law as
of the effective date of this chapter based on at least one of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Having expended substantial of resources (time, labor, money) based
on a good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval
to proceed with the project;
      (2)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by state
statutes (G.S. § 160D-102); or
      (3)   Having an approved site specific or phased development plan as
authorized by state statutes (G.S. § 160D-102).
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A home licensed by the State Department of Human Resources
with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal
care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six
resident handicapped persons defined by the state. Such
FAMILY CARE HOMES shall not be within a one-half mile radius of an existing
family care home or group home as measured from property line to property line.
This definition shall also include the term GROUP HOME.
   GAMBLING, VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. A building being used for gambling by the
use of any electronic computerized video game machine that, upon the insertion
of cash or other thing of value, is available to play a video game authorized
by the lottery commission, and which uses a video display and microprocessor in
which, by chance, the player may receive free games or credits that can be
redeemed for cash.
   GRADE. An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to
the exterior walls of the building or structure.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total floor area of all buildings in a project
including basements, mezzanines and upper floors exclusive of stairways and
elevator shafts. It excludes separate service facilities outside the main
building such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops.
   GROUP HOME.
      (1)   Any facility licensed by the State Department of Human Resources,
by whatever name it is called, other than a “family care home”, as defined by
this chapter, with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and
board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not
more than nine resident persons.
      (2)   Such GROUP HOMES shall not be within a one-half mile radius of an
existing family care or group home as measured from property line to property
line.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substance listed as such in SARA § 302, Extremely
Hazardous Substances, CERCLA Hazardous Substances or § 311 of CWA (oil and
hazardous substances).
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation customarily conducted for profit within a
dwelling and carried on by the occupant thereof, which use is clearly secondary
to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.
   HORTICULTURE. The use of land for the growing or production for income of
fruits, vegetables, flowers, nursery stock, including ornamental plants and
trees, and cultured sod.
   HOTELS AND INNS. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation, and which is open to transient guests and is not a bed
and breakfast, as herein defined.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any hard-surfaced, human-made area that does not readily
absorb or retain water, including, but not limited to, building roofs, parking
and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks and paved recreation areas.
   JUNK OR SALVAGE. Old, second hand or scrap ferrous or nonferrous metals,
paper and paper products including roofing and tar paper, cloth and clothing,
wood and wood products, manufactured rubber products, including motor vehicle
tires, rope, manufactured plastic products, paint, manufactured clay and
porcelain products, trash and similar materials and shall include dismantled or
inoperable machinery and household appliances, equipment and parts. JUNK AND
SALVAGE shall also include the baling of cardboard boxes, paper and paper
cartons.
   JUNKYARD. The use of more than 100 square feet of the area of any lot for
the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other
scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles or other vehicles or parts thereof.
   KENNEL. Any location where boarding, caring for or keeping of more than a
total of three dogs or cats or other small animals or a combination thereof
(except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on,
and also raising, breeding, caring for or boarding dogs, cats or other small
animals for commercial purposes.
   KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL. Any location where the boarding, caring for and
keeping of more than three, but not more than, ten, dogs or cats or other small
animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six
months of age) is carried on, not for commercial purposes, but as a hobby such
as the raising of show and hunting dogs.
   LEGISLATIVE DECISION. The adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation
under this chapter or an applicable local act. The term also includes the
decision to approve, amend, or rescind a development agreement consistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
   LEGISLATIVE HEARING. A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed
legislative decision.
   LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. Any operation which creates, assembles, improves, treats,
compounds or packages goods or materials in a manner which does not create a
noticeable amount of noise, dust, odor, smoke, glare or vibration outside of
the building in which the activity takes place, which does not require outside
storage of goods or materials and does not generate objectionable amounts of
truck traffic.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a main
building or group of main buildings and accessory buildings, together with such
yards, open spaces, lot width and lot area as are required by this chapter, and
having not less than the minimum required frontage upon a street, either shown
on a plat of record, or considered as a unit of property and described by metes
and bounds.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of
two street lines which make an angle of more than 45 degrees and less than 135
degrees with each other. The street line forming the least frontage shall be
deemed the front of the lot, except where the two street lines are equal, in
which case the owner shall be required to specify which is the front when
requesting a zoning compliance permit.
   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot covered by a building or buildings,
expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat or which has
been recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds or a lot described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded at the
county courthouse.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between side lot lines measured at the building
setback line.
   MAJOR WATERSHED VARIANCE. A variance that results in any one or more of the
following:
      (1)   The complete waiver of a management requirement;
      (2)   The relaxation, by a factor of more than 10%, of any management
requirement that takes the form of a numerical standard; and/or
      (3)   The relaxation of any management requirement that applies to a
development proposal intended to qualify under the high density option.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured housing unit, completely or partially
assembled in a manufacturing plant, designed for transportation from a
manufacturing plant, either on its own chassis or in sections, and placement on
a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent foundation. It shall also comply with
the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, adopted by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (adopted in July 15, 1976) and meet
the setup and appearance criteria established by §§
152.090 through
152.097. For the purpose of this chapter, MANUFACTURED HOMES are further
classified as follows:
      (1)   CLASS B MANUFACTURED HOME. A multi-sectional manufactured home that
meets or exceeds the construction standards established by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) that were in effect at the time of
construction. The majority of these homes were built after July 15, 1976. These
homes are often called DOUBLE-WIDE MANUFACTURED HOMES.
      (2)   CLASS C MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home that meets or
exceeds the construction standards established by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) that were in effect at the time of
construction. The majority of these homes were built after July 15, 1976. These
homes are usually called SINGLE-WIDE MANUFACTURED HOMES. They are often
referred to as MOBILE HOMES or TRAILERS.
      (3)   CLASS D MANUFACTURED HOME. A manufactured home which was
constructed prior to the establishment of any construction standards by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). All of these homes were
built prior to July 15, 1976. They are often referred to as MOBILE HOMES or
TRAILERS. CLASS D MANUFACTURED HOMES are not permitted to be placed anywhere in
the town.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Land used or intended to be used, leased or rented
for occupancy by two or more manufactured homes which are mounted on wheels,
anchored in place by a foundation or other stationary support, to be used for
living purposes and accompanied by automobile parking space and incidental
utility structures and facilities required and provided in connection
therewith. This definition shall not include sales lots on which unoccupied
manufactured homes are parked for purposes of inspection and/or sale.
   MANUFACTURED HOME STAND. The part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of one manufactured home unit.
   MEDICAL OFFICES. A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical
service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis,
including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration
and services to outpatients, employees or visitors.
   MICROBREWERIES, DISTILLERIES AND WINERIES. Facilities or establishments
engaged in the manufacturing, production, distillation, packaging, distribution
of microbrew beer, ales, wines, and/or spirituous liquors.
   MINOR (WATERSHED) VARIANCE. A variance from the minimum statewide watershed
protection rules that results in a relaxation, by a factor up to 5% of any
buffer, density or built-upon requirement under the high density option; or
that results in a relaxation, by a factor up to 10%, of any management
requirement under the low density option.
   MINOR WATERSHED VARIANCE. A watershed variance that does not qualify as a
major variance.
   MIXED USE STRUCTURE. A building containing residential in addition to
nonresidential uses permitted in the zone.
   MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the standards
set forth in the State Building Code and composed of components substantially
assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for
final assembly on a permanent foundation. Among other possibilities, a MODULAR
HOME may consist of two or more sections transported to the site in a manner
similar to a manufactured home (except that the modular home meets the North
Carolina Building Code), or a series or panels or room sections transported on
a truck and erected or joined at the building site.
   MOTEL. A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for
transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which
ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily direct from an
exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for and containing three or more
dwelling units.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building or land lawfully occupied by a use that does
not conform with use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. All development other than residential
development, agriculture and silviculture.
   OPEN SPACE. Any front, side or rear yards, courts, usable open space
provided about a building in order to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   OPEN STORAGE. Unroofed storage area, whether fenced or not.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. An area where certain additional requirements are
superimposed upon a base zoning district or underlying district and where the
requirements of the base or underlying district may or may not be altered.
   PARK. A noncommercial, not-for-profit facility designed to serve the
recreation needs of the residents of the community. Such facilities include
subdivision recreation facilities (neighborhood parks), community parks,
regional parks and special use facilities, all as described in the recreation
and open space element of the comprehensive plan. Such facilities may also
include, but shall not be limited to, school and religious institution
ballfields, football fields and soccer fields, if they meet the above
definition. Commercial amusement facilities, such as water slides, go-cart
tracks and miniature golf courses shall not be considered PARKS.
   PARKING LOT. Any designated area designed for temporary accommodation of
motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating conditions whether
for a fee or as a service.
   PARKING SPACE. A storage space of not less than nine feet by 18 feet for one
automobile plus the necessary access space.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A form of development characterized by a
unified site design for a number of housing units, clustering of buildings and
providing common open space, density increased, mixed uses and a mix of
building types. It permits the planning of a project and a calculation of
densities over the entire development rather than on an individual lot-by-lot
basis. The site must include two or more principal buildings. Such development
shall be based on a plan which allows for flexibility of design most available
under normal district requirements.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is situated.
   PROTECTED AREA. Area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of WS-IV
watersheds. The BOUNDARIES OF THE PROTECTED AREA are defined as the area five
miles upstream and draining to water supply reservoirs, or ten miles upstream
and draining to water intakes located in streams or rivers, or to the ridge
line of the watershed, whichever comes first.
   RECYCLING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment for the processing (separation
and/or recovery) or collection of recyclable materials from solid wastes.
Recycling of oil or other liquids may also occur.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL. An individual septic tank system of sewage
disposal. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS must be installed and maintained
in accordance with the Division of Health Services, State Department of Human
Services Rules and Regulations Governing the Disposal of Sewage from any
Residence, Place of Business or Place of Public Assembly in North Carolina, and
the regulations of the County Board of Health.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC. A system serving two or more connections. Plans for
public and community sewer systems must be approved by the Division of
Environmental Management, State Department of Natural Resources and Community
Development.
   SIGNS. Any form of publicity, visible from any public highway directing
attention to an individual activity, business, service, commodity or product
and conveyed by means of word, figures, numerals, lettering, emblems, devices,
designs, trademarks or trade names or other pictorial matter designed to convey
such information and displayed by means of bills, panels, posters, paints or
other devices erected on an open framework or attached or otherwise applied to
posts, stakes, poles, buildings or other structures or supports.
      (1)   SIGN AREA. SIGN AREA shall be measured by the smallest square,
rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the
entire advertising copy area, excluding architectural trim and structural
members. In computing AREA, only one side of a double-faced sign shall be
considered.
      (2)   SIGN, OFF-SITE. A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, activity, service or product not necessarily conducted, sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
      (3)   SIGN, ON-SITE. A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for and containing one dwelling
unit.
   SKILLED NURSING OR OTHER ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A home for the aged or
ill persons in which three or more persons not of the same immediate family are
provided with food, shelter and care for compensation, but not including
hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and
treatment.
   STREET (ROAD, LANE, WAY, TERRACE, DRIVE). A dedicated, recorded and accepted
public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of
access to abutting properties.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change on the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
structural change in the roof, or dimensions or the rooms therein.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something
having more or less permanent location on the ground.
   SUBDIVISION. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of sale, lease, legacy or building development; it includes all
divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access
(whether public or private) or a change in an existing street, and includes re-
subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the
following are not included within this definition:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted
lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are
equal to the standards of these regulations; and
      (2)   The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no
new street is involved.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted
when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing to
circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.
   WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURE. Any structure for which the use requires access
to or proximity to or citing within surface waters to fulfill its basic
purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary
facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and
commercial boat storage areas are not WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURES.
   WATER SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL. A drilled or bored well or spring which serves a
single connection. Individual water supply systems should be located,
constructed and operated in accordance with the Division of Health Services,
State Department of Human Resources.
   WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC. Water supply systems serving ten or more connections
are classified as a public water supply by state law. Plans and specifications
must be approved by the Sanitary Engineering Section, Division of Health
Services, State Department of Human Resources.
   WATER SYSTEM, SEMIPUBLIC. Water supply systems serving from two to nine
connections, inclusive. This system may be regulated by the County Board of
Health, and plans should be approved by the County Health Department.
   WATERSHED. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific
point (e.g., the water supply intake.)
   WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR (ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER). An official designated
by the Town of Rutherford College responsible for administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
   WATERSHED VARIANCE. A permission to develop or use property granted by the
Watershed Review Board relaxing or waiving a water supply watershed management
requirement adopted by the Environmental Management Commission that is
incorporated into this chapter.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward.
   YARD, FRONT. An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
between the front line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the front
property or street right-of-way line and extending across the full width of the
lot.
   YARD, REAR. An open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot
and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building
projected to the side lines of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space situated between the side line of the
building and adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of
the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.
   ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Town official charged with the responsibility of
enforcing this chapter.
   ZONING PERMIT. Permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer indicating
that a proposed use is in compliance with requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 1-7-2013; Ord. passed 2-1-2016; Ord. passed
5-3-2021)
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
§ 152.020 USE DISTRICT.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the town is hereby divided into districts
designated as follows:
   (A)   R-20 Residential District;
   (B)   R-15 Residential District;
   (C)    O-I Office and Institutional District;
   (D)   CB Central Business District;
   (E)   HB Highway Business District;
   (F)   GM General Manufacturing District;
   (G)   OD-M Malcolm Boulevard Overlay District; and
   (H)   PUD District.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord.
05012023-2, passed 5-1-2023)
§ 152.021 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map accompanying this
chapter and made a part thereof entitled “Official Zoning Map, Town of
Rutherford College”.
   (B)   The zoning map and all the notations, references and amendments
thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this
chapter the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully
described as set forth herein.
   (C)   The zoning map properly attested is posted at the Town Hall Planning
Office, and is available for inspection by the public.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.022 DUE CONSIDERATION GIVEN TO DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   In the creation of this chapter of the respective districts, careful
consideration is given to the general suitability of each and every district
for the particular uses and regulations applied thereto, and the necessary and
property grouping and arrangement of various uses and densities of population
in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan for the physical
development of the town. The Zoning Map shall be maintained for public
inspection in the office of the local government clerk. The maps may be in
paper or a digital format approved by the local government (G.S. § 160D-105).
(Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.023 RULES GOVERNING BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall
apply:
   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets and highways, street lines or railroad right-of-way
lines or such lines extended, such centerlines, street lines or railroad right-
of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way
of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto
and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance
is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on
said zoning map.
   (D)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the
district requirements for the least restrictive portion of such lot shall be
deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not
include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary
line. The term “least restrictive” shall refer to zoning restrictions, not lot
or tract size.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT
§ 152.035 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES.
   Within the districts indicated on the zoning map, no building or land shall
be used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is intended or
designed to be used in whole or in part, for any use other than those listed as
permitted for that district in this subchapter, and the following table of
permitted uses. The table of permitted uses is intended for quick reference of
the use requirements for the districts. Please refer to the individual district
sections for detailed requirements.
Table of Permitted Uses
X =
permitted
by right
CU =        R- 20 Low   R-15 High                             CB       HB
conditional Density     Density     R-10        O/I Office/   Central  Highway  GM General
use,        Residential Residential Residential Institutional Business Business Manufacturing
requires
Board of
Adjustment
approval
Table of Permitted Uses
X = permitted by right                           R- 20 Low   R-15 High   R-10        O/I Office/   CB       HB       GM General
CU = conditional use, requires Board of          Density     Density     Residential Institutional Central  Highway  Manufacturing
Adjustment approval                              Residential Residential                           Business Business
Accessory uses and buildings (see § 153.075)    X           X                       X             X        X        X
Agriculture (non-commercial)                     X           X                       X             X        X        X
Agriculture (commercial)                         CU          CU                      CU            CU       CU       CU
Animal hospitals, veterinary offices and clinics                                     CU            CU       X        X
(no outside kennels)
Animal pound or shelter                                                                                     CU       CU
Appliance repair (no front yard storage) (see §                                                   X        X        X
153.231)
Athletic fields and similar outdoor facilities   CU          CU          CU          X             X        X        X
Auto, boat, recreation vehicle and motorcycle                                                               X        X
sales
Automobile accessories sales                                                                       X        X        X
Automobile body shops (see § 153.231)                                                                      X        X
Automobile service and repair (see § 153.231)                                                              X        X
Bakery (production and distribution)                                                               CU       X        X
Coffee/bakery shop                                                                   CU            X        X        X
Banks and other financial establishments                                             CU            X        X        X
Barbershops, salons and spas                                             X           X             X        X        X
Bed and breakfast                                X           X           X           X             X        X        X
Boat service and repair (see § 153.231)                                                                    X        X
Bus station                                                                                                 X        X
Car wash                                                                                                    X        X
Cemeteries                                       CU          CU                      CU            CU       CU       CU
Child care facility                                                                  X             X        X        X
Child care home                                                                      X             X        X        X
Churches and other places of worship             CU          CU                      CU            X        X        X
Clubs and lodges                                 CU          CU                      CU            X        X        X
Commercial indoor recreation establishments                                          CU            CU       CU       CU
Commercial outdoor recreation establishments                             X           CU            CU       CU       CU
Community centers                                CU          CU          X           X             X        X        X
Public community swimming pools                  CU          CU          X           X             X        X        X
Concrete or paving materials plant                                                                                   X
Convenience store (with gas) or gas station                                                        CU       X        X
Convenience store (without gas)                                                                    X        X        X
Drug stores and pharmacies                                                                         X        X        X
Dry cleaning                                                                                       X        X        X
Duplexes                                                     X           X           X             X        X        X
Electronic gaming/sweepstakes                                                                               CU
Emergency response facilities                    CU          CU                      X             X        X        X
Family campgrounds                               CU          CU
Family care homes                                                                    X             X        X        X
Fishing lakes                                    CU          CU
Florist                                                                  X                         X        X        X
Funeral homes and mortuaries                                                                       X        X        X
Government facilities                                                                X             X        X        X
Group home developments                          CU          CU
Group project commercial                                                                           CU       CU       CU
Group project industrial                                                                                             CU
Hatcheries                                                                                                           CU
Heavy equipment service and repair (see §                                                                  X        X
153.231)
Heavy equipment sales and rental                                                                            X        X
Home occupations (see § 153.077)                X           X           X           X             X        X        X
Hospitals                                                                            CU            CU
Hotels, inns and motels                                                  X                                  X        X
Institutional facilities, such as libraries and                                      X             X        X        X
other non-profits
Laundromat                                                                                         CU       X        X
Livestock and fowl (see § 152.081)              X           X                       X             X        X        X
Manufactured homes                                           CU
Manufactured home parks                                      CU
Manufacturing (less than 25,000 sq. ft. gfa)                                                                X        X
Manufacturing (greater than 25,000 sq. ft. gfa)                                                                      X
Material and equipment storage                                                                              CU       CU
Medical offices                                                          X           X             X        X        X
Microbreweries, distilleries and wineries                                                          X        X        X
Mini-storage                                                                                                X        X
Mixed use buildings                                                      CU          CU            CU       CU       CU
Movie theaters                                                           X                                  X        X
Multi-family dwellings                                       X           X                         X        X        X
Museums and art galleries                        CU          CU          X           X             X        X        X
Off-frame modular homes                          X           X           X           X             X        X        X
Offices, business, professional and public                               X           X             X        X        X
Parking lot                                                                                                 X        X
Performing theaters                                                      X                                  X        X
Photography services                                                                 X             X        X        X
Photography, dance, art and music studios                                            X             X        X        X
Planned Unit Development (see § 153.078)        CU          CU                      CU            CU       CU       CU
Playgrounds                                      X           X           X           X             X        X        X
Printing and copy services                                                           X             X        X        X
Public facilities, such as utilities lines and   X           X                       X             X        X        X
pump stations
Public or private parks                          X           X           X           X             X        X        X
Radio and TV broadcasting                                                                                   X        X
Radio, TV and computer repair                                                                      X        X        X
Recycling establishment (see § 153.231)                                                                             X
Restaurants (with drive-through)                                                                   CU       X        X
Restaurants (without drive-through)                                                                X        X        X
Retail sales (less than 3,000 sq. ft. gfa)                               X           CU            X        X        X
Retail sales and shopping centers (3,000-10,000                                                    X        X        X
sq. ft. gfa)
Retail sales and shopping centers (greater than                                                             X        X
10,000 sq. ft. gfa)
Secondary schools and colleges                   CU          CU          CU          CU            CU       CU       CU
Sexual oriented establishment (see § 152.076)                                                              CU       CU
Single-family dwelling                           X           X           X           X             X        X        X
Skilled nursing and other assisted living                                            CU            CU       X        X
facilities
Telecommunication towers                         CU          CU                      CU            CU       CU       CU
Towing service (see § 153.231)                                                                             X        X
Warehousing and distribution (25,000 sq. ft. gfa                                                            X        X
or less)
Warehousing and distribution (greater than                                                                  X        X
25,000 sq. ft. gfa)
Wholesale establishments (25,000 sq. ft. gfa or                                                             X        X
less)
Wholesale establishments (greater than 25,000                                                                        X
sq. ft. gfa)
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 7-9-2012; Ord. passed 1-7-2013; Ord. passed
5-5-2014; Ord. passed 2-1-2016; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed 5-3-2021;
Ord. passed 10-4-2021)
 
§ 152.036 R-20 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   The regulations of this district are intended to provide for low
density residential development, and to ensure that residential development not
having access to public water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for
sewage disposal will occur at sufficiently low densities to provide a healthful
environment.
   (B)   Within the R-20 Residential District, the following uses shall only be
permitted:
      (1)   Principal uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Single-family modular homes;
         (c)   Non-commercial agricultural uses;
         (d)   Home occupations (see §
152.077);
         (e)   Bed and breakfast;
         (f)    Playgrounds;
         (g)   Public or private parks;
         (h)   Public works and public utility facilities such as distribution
lines, transmission lines and towers, electric substations, water tanks and
towers, pumping stations, water treatment plants, sewage lagoons and plants,
telephone exchanges and fire stations, provided:
            1.   Such facilities are essential to the service of the immediate
area;
            2.   No vehicles or materials shall be stored in the premises and
no offices shall be permitted, except in the case of fire stations, water
treatment plants, sewage lagoons and plants;
            3.   All buildings and facilities shall be set back at least 20
feet from all property lines, and shall be designed and landscaped in such a
way as to blend in with the surrounding area; in height; and
            4.   All dangerous apparatus shall be enclosed by a chain-link
fence at least eight feet;
            5.   There shall be a densely planted and maintained buffer strip
along the rear and side lot lines. No such buffer shall, however, extend nearer
to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the
adjoining lots.
         (i)   Customary accessory uses and structures including private
garages, carports, parking decks, swimming pools and other accessory structures
(see §
152.075).
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to a
Board of Adjustment review and approval:
         (a)   A temporary structure or dwelling for emergencies or for
construction purposes, provided permits for such uses shall be issued for
periods not to exceed six months, but may be renewed for one additional six-
month period;
         (b)   Athletic fields and similar outdoor facilities;
         (c)   Cemeteries;
         (d)   Commercial agricultural uses;
         (e)   Churches and other places of worship;
         (f)   Group home developments;
         (g)   Museums and art galleries;
         (h)    Community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, community
swimming pools, fishing lakes, family campgrounds and other similar recreation
uses; and
         (i)   Telecommunication towers (see §§
152.140 through
152.171).
      (3)   Accessory uses. Customary accessory buildings or uses, provided
such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall be situated not less than
ten feet from any property line; and further provided that in the case of
corner lots such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 25 feet
from any side line right-of-way line (See §
152.075).
      (4)   Dimensional requirements. Within an R-20 District as shown on the
zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:
         (a)   Minimum required lot width: average of 100 feet;
         (b)   Minimum required front building setback line: 30 feet from edge
of ROW;
         (c)   Minimum required side yard: 15 feet each. Corner lots must have
an additional ten feet along the side street line from edge of ROW;
         (d)   Minimum required rear yard: 40 feet; and
         (e)   For purposes of computing the size of lots in an R-20 District,
the lot area may include public road rights-of-way and private road easements;
provided, said rights-of-way and easements shall not exceed 30 feet in overall
width for purposes of lot area computation.
      (5)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage.
         (a)   Lots recorded prior to October 1, 1993 to be used for single-
family purposes or where the development does not require a Sedimentation/
Erosion Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 20,000
square feet; and
            2.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
         (b)   Lots recorded after October 1, 1993 to be used for single-family
purposes where the development requires a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan
under state law:
            1.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 21,780
square feet (one-half acre); and
            2.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
         (c)   Lots to be used for multi-family where the development does not
require a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Minimum required lot area for the first dwelling unit: 20,000
square feet;
            2.   Minimum required lot area for each additional unit: 10,000
square feet; and
            3.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
         (d)   Lots to be used for multi-family where the development requires
a Sedimentation/ Erosion Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Option 1.
               A.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 21,870
square feet (one- half acre); and
               B.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
            2.   Option 2.
               A.   Minimum required lot area for the first dwelling unit:
20,000 square feet;
               B.   Minimum required lot area for each additional unit: 10,000
square feet; and
               C.   Maximum permissible impervious coverage as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed 36% of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot
area if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located
within the WS-4 Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 05012023-2, passed 5-1-2023)
§ 152.037 R-15 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-15 Residential District is established as a district in which
the principal use of the land is for low density residential and agricultural
purposes and to provide and protect low density residential areas for those
desiring that type of environment. These districts are intended to ensure that
residential development having access to public water supplies and dependent
upon septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur at a sufficiently low density
to provide a healthful environment.
   (B)   Within the R-15 Residential District, the following uses shall only be
permitted:
      (1)   Principal uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted in the R-20 Residential District;
         (b)   Multi-family dwellings;
         (c)   Condominiums; and
         (d)   Individual mobile homes, as defined in §
152.005, and subject to the provisions of §
152.097.
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to a
Board of Adjustment review and approval: all special uses permitted in the R-20
Residential District.
      (3)   Accessory uses. Same as set forth under the R-20 Residential
District, §
152.036.
      (4)   Dimensional requirements. Within an R-20 District as shown on the
zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:
         (a)   Minimum mean lot width: 100 feet;
         (b)   Minimum required front building setback line: 25 feet from edge
of ROW;
         (c)   Minimum required side yards for the principal building shall be
at least 15 feet from property line or edge of ROW;
         (d)   Minimum required rear yard shall be 20% of the mean lot depth,
provided that such yard need not exceed 30 feet;
         (e)   Height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet unless the depth of
the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased
by one foot for each two feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in
excess of 35 feet; and
         (f)   For purposes of computing the size of lots in an R-15 District,
the lot area may include public road rights-of-way and private road easements;
provided, said rights-of-way and easements shall not exceed 30 feet in overall
width for purposes of lot area computation.
      (5)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage.
         (a)   Lots recorded prior to October 1,1993, to be used for single-
family purposes or where the development does not require a Sedimentation/
Erosion Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 15,000
square feet; and
            2.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
         (b)   Lots recorded after October 1, 1993, to be used for single-
family purposes where the development does not require a Sedimentation/Erosion
Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Option 1.
               A.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 14,520
square feet (one- third acre), or 21,780 square feet (one-half acre) if the lot
abuts a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located in the WS-
4 Critical Area; and
               B.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
            2.   Option 2.
               A.   Minimum required lot area for the first dwelling unit:
15,000 square feet;
               B.   Minimum required lot area for each additional unit: 5,000
square feet; and
               C.   Maximum permissible impervious coverage as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed 36% of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot
area if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located
in the WS-4 Critical Area.
         (c)   Lots to be used for multi-family where the development does not
require a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Minimum required lot area for the first dwelling unit: 15,000
square feet;
            2.   Minimum required lot area for each additional unit: 5,000
square feet: and
            3.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
         (d)   Lots to be used for multi-family where the development requires
a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan under state law:
            1.   Option 1.
               A.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 14,520
square feet (one- third acre); or 21,780 square feet (one-half acre) if the lot
abuts a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located in the WS-
4 critical area; and
               B.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal and accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50 % of the lot area.
            2.   Option 2.
               A.   Minimum required lot area for the first dwelling unit:
15,000 square feet;
               B.   Minimum required lot area for each additional unit: 5,000
square feet; and
               C.   Maximum permissible impervious coverage as defined in this
chapter shall not exceed 36 % of the total lot area, or 24 % of the total lot
area if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located
within the WS-4 critical area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed 10-4-2021)
§ 152.037.1 R-10 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   The R-10 Residential District is established as a district in which
the principal use of the land is for high density residential development with
limited home occupations and private/public community uses.
   (B)   Within the R-10 Residential District, the following uses shall only be
permitted:
      (1)   R-10 principal uses.
         (a)   Single-family dwellings and off-frame modular homes.
         (b)   Condominiums.
         (c)   Multi-family dwellings.
      (2)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to
a Board of Adjustment review and approval:
         (1)   Mixed-use developments and athletic fields.
      (3)   Accessory uses. None due to allowed minimum lot sizes.
      (4)   Dimensional requirements. Within an R-10 District as shown on the
zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:
         (a)   Minimum mean lot width: 60 feet.
         (b)   Minimum required front building setback line: 25 feet from edge
of ROW.
         (c)   Minimum required side yards for the principal building shall be
at least ten feet from property line or edge of ROW.
         (d)   Minimum required rear yard shall be 25 feet.
         (e)   Height of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet unless the depth of
the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased
by one foot for each two feet, or fraction thereof, of building height more
than 35 feet.
         (f)   For purposes of computing the size of lots in R-10, the lot area
may include public road rights-of-way and private road easements; provided,
said rights-of-way and easements shall not exceed 15 feet in overall width for
purposes of lot area computation.
      (5)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage.
         (a)   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 10,000 square
feet.
         (b)   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal buildings shall
not exceed 50% of the lot area.
         (c)   Option 1.
            1.   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 10,000
square feeet (roughly one-quarter acre lots).
            2.   Maximum permissible lot coverage by principal buildings shall
not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
         (d)   Option 2.
            1.   Minimum required lot area for the second dwelling unit: 6,000
square feet.
            2.   Maximum permissible impervious coverage as defined shall not
exceed 36% of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot area if the lot abuts
a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located in a critical area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2021)
§ 152.038 O-I OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   The regulations of this district are intended to provide for the
conversion of older homes into office or apartment structures where such are
appropriate and to provide a buffer between purely business and purely
residential areas.
   (B)   Within an O-I Office and Institutional District the following uses
shall be permitted:
      (1)   Principal uses.
         (a)   Any use permitted in the R-15 Residential District, except
multi-family, individual mobile homes and mobile home parks;
         (b)   Barbershops, salons and spas;
         (c)   Child care facility;
         (d)   Child care home;
         (e)   Community centers;
         (f)   Dairy bars and ice cream;
         (g)   Public community swimming pools;
         (h)   Emergency response facilities;
         (i)   Family care homes;
         (j)   Government facilities;
         (k)   Institutional facilities, such as libraries and other non-
profits;
         (l)   Medical offices;
         (m)   Museums and art galleries;
         (n)   Offices, business, professional and public;
         (o)   Photography services;
         (p)   Photography, dance, art and music studios;
         (q)   Printing and copy services; and
         (r)   Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same
lot as the principal structure, excluding, however, open storage.
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to a
Board of Adjustment review and approval:
         (a)   Accessory buildings in the nature of guest cottages for private
residential purposes;
         (b)   Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics, but excluding open
kennels on the premises;
         (c)   Athletic fields and similar outdoor facilities;
         (d)   Coffee/bakery shop;
         (e)   Banks and other financial establishments;
         (f)   Commercial indoor recreation establishments;
         (g)   Commercial outdoor recreation establishments;
         (h)   Hospitals;
         (i)   Mixed use buildings;
         (j)   Retail sales (less than 3,000 square feet gross floor area);
         (k)   Skilled nursing and other assisted living facilities;
         (l)   The conversion of any residential structure so as to provide
additional dwelling units shall be permitted only if each resulting dwelling
unit has a minimum of 650 square feet of usable floor area and adequate private
sanitary facilities;
         (m)   Mixed uses, i.e., buildings erected for both dwelling and
business purposes, provided such buildings shall be furnished with side yards
on each side of the building measuring not less than eight feet in width,
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the street side of a
corner lot; and
         (n)   A temporary structure or dwelling for emergencies or for
construction purposes, provided, further, permits for such uses shall be issued
for periods not to exceed six months, but may be renewed for one additional
six-month period.
      (3)   Accessory uses. Customary accessory buildings or uses, provided
such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall be situated not less than
ten feet from any property line; and further provided that in the case of
corner lots such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet
from any side line right-of-way line.
      (4)   Off-street parking requirements. See §§
152.210 through
152.218.
      (5)   Dimensional requirements.
         (a)   Minimum required lot width: 100 feet;
         (b)   Minimum required front building setback line: 30 feet;
         (c)   Minimum required side yard: 15 feet. Corner lots must have an
additional ten feet along the side street line. Where a lot abuts a residential
district, an eight-foot high planted buffer strip is required except in the
case of where a lot abuts a public street;
         (d)   Minimum required rear yard: 25 feet. Where a lot abuts a
residential district, an eight-foot high planted buffer strip is required
except in the case of where a lot abuts a public street; and
         (e)   All buildings (except church spires, flagpoles, antennas,
chimneys or similar accessories to structures), more than 35 feet in height
from the foundation of the building measured at the center of the structure,
shall be required to increase the original side yard requirement by one foot
for every additional foot of height.
      (6)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage. Within the O-I Office
and Institutional District the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet,
and principal and accessory buildings can cover 40 % of the lot area; however,
if the development activity requires a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan, the
maximum permissible impervious surface coverage, as defined in this chapter,
shall not exceed 36% of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot area if the
lot abuts a curb and gutter street system, or if the lot is located in the WS-
4 Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed 10-4-2021)
§ 152.039 C-B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   The regulations of this district are intended to provide the town with
compact and efficient retail shopping, consumer services, financial and
governmental center.
   (B)   The following uses shall only be permitted:
      (1)   Principal uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted in the O-I Office and Institutional District;
         (b)   Appliance repair (no front yard storage);
         (c)   Automobile accessories sales;
         (d)   Coffee/bakery shop;
         (e)   Banks and other financial establishments;
         (f)   Churches and other places of worship;
         (g)   Clubs and lodges;
         (h)   Convenience store (without gas);
         (i)   Drug stores and pharmacies;
         (j)   Dry cleaning;
         (k)   Florist;
         (l)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;
         (m)   Laundromat;
         (n)   Publishing establishments;
         (o)   Radio, TV and computer repair;
         (p)   Restaurants (without drive-through);
         (q)   Retail sales (less than 3,000 square feet gross floor area);
         (r)   Retail sales and shopping centers (3,000 to 10,000 square feet
gross floor area);
         (s)   Theaters housed in a permanent indoor structure; and
         (t)   Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same
block as the principal structure, excluding, however, open storage, provided:
            1.   Such facilities are essential to the service of the immediate
area; and
            2.   No vehicles or materials shall be stores on the premises and
no offices shall be permitted, except in the case of fire stations, water
treatment plants, sewage lagoons and plants.
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to a
Board of Adjustment review and approval:
         (a)   All uses special uses permitted in the O-1 Office and
Institutional District;
         (b)   Bakery (production and distribution);
         (c)   Convenience store (with gas) or gas station;
         (d)   Group project commercial; and
         (e)   Restaurants (with drive-through).
      (3)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. See §§
152.210 through
152.218 for parking requirements.
      (4)   Dimensional requirements. Within any C-B Central Business District
as shown on the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be
complied with:
         (a)   Residences shall comply with the dimensional requirements of an
R-15 Residential District;
         (b)   Minimum square footage for a commercial structure: none
required;
         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet;
         (d)   Minimum required side yard: 15 feet. Corner lots must have an
additional ten feet along the side street line. Where a commercial use abuts a
residential district, commercial buildings shall maintain a ten-foot side and
rear setback as well as an eight-foot high planted buffer strip. No such buffer
strip, however, shall extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the
established building setback line of the adjoining lots;
         (e)   Minimum required rear yard: 25 feet. Where a lot abuts a
residential district, an eight- foot high planted buffer strip is required
except in the case of where a lot abuts a public street; and
         (f)   Height of buildings shall not exceed 80 feet.
      (5)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage. Within the C-B Central
Business District the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet, and
principal and accessory buildings can cover 40% of the lot area; however, if
the development activity requires a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan, the
maximum permissible impervious surface coverage, as defined in this chapter,
shall not exceed 36% of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot area if the
lot abuts a curb and gutter street system, or if the lot is located in the WS-
4 Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.040 H-B HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   The H-B Highway Business Districts are located on major thoroughfares
and collector streets in the town planning area.
      (1)   They are intended to provide for offices, personal services and the
retailing of durable and convenience goods for the community.
      (2)   Because these commercial uses are subject to public view and are
important to the economy of the community, they should have ample parking,
controlled traffic movement and suitable landscaping.
   (B)   Within the H-B Highway Business District, the following uses shall
only be permitted:
      (1)   Principal uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted in the C-B Central Business District;
         (b)   Animal hospitals, veterinary offices and clinics (no outside
kennels);
         (c)   Auto, boat, recreation vehicle and motorcycle sales;
         (d)   Automobile body shops (see § 153.231);
         (e)   Automobile service and repair (see § 153.231);
         (f)   Bakery (production and distribution);
         (g)   Boat service and repair (see § 153.231);
         (h)   Bus station;
         (i)   Car wash;
         (j)   Convenience store (with gas) or gas station;
         (k)   Heavy equipment service and repair (see § 153.231);
         (l)   Heavy equipment sales and rental;
         (m)   Hotels, inns and motels;
         (n)   Laundromat;
         (o)   Manufacturing (less than 25,000 square feet gross floor area);
         (p)   Mini-storage;
         (q)   Movie theaters;
         (r)   Parking lot;
         (s)   Performing theaters;
         (t)   Radio and TV broadcasting;
         (u)   Restaurants (with drive-through);
         (v)   Retail sales and shopping centers (greater than 10,000 square
feet gross floor area);
         (w)   Skilled nursing and other assisted living facilities;
         (x)   Towing service with (see § 153.231);
         (y)   Warehousing and distribution (25,000 square feet gross floor
area or less);
         (z)   Warehousing and distribution (greater than 25,000 square feet
gross floor area); and
         (aa)   Wholesale establishments (25,000 square feet gross floor area
or less).
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to a
Board of Adjustment review and approval:
         (a)   All uses permitted in the C-B Central Business District;
         (b)   Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same
lot as the main structure, excluding open storage;
         (c)   Bowling alleys and skating rinks, miniature golf courses, riding
stables and other commercial recreational facilities;
         (d)   Animal pound or shelter;
         (e)   Material and equipment storage;
         (f)   Sexual oriented establishment (see §
152.076); and
         (g)   Any lawful retail, service, repair or wholesaling use not
specifically referred to in this section.
      (3)   Dimensional requirements. Within the H-B Highway Business District,
as shown on the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be
complied with:
         (a)   The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet;
         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet. Off street parking as
required by this chapter may be permitted in required yards but shall not be
closer than ten feet from the front property line or any dedicated street or
railroad right-of-way line;
         (c)   Minimum required side yard setbacks shall be at least 15 feet; a
side yard of 20 feet is required on the street side of a corner lot.
Furthermore, buildings used for residential purposes shall comply with the
dimensional requirements of the R-15 Residential District; buildings used
wholly or in part for permitted nonresidential uses shall meet the dimensional
requirements for the use district in which they are located. Furthermore, upon
any side or rear lot line which abuts a residential district there shall be a
densely planted and maintained buffer strip. No such buffer, however, shall
extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building
setback line of the adjoining residential lots, and no buffer shall be required
upon any yard which abuts a public street;
         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet; and
         (e)   No buildings shall exceed 50 feet in height unless the depth of
the required front yard and the total width of the required side yard shall be
increased by one foot for each two feet, or fraction thereof, of building
height in excess of 50 feet.
      (4)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. See §§
152.210 through
152.218 for parking requirements.
      (5)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage. Within the H-B Highway
Business District there is no minimum lot size, and principal and accessory
buildings can cover 50% of the lot area; however, if the development activity
requires a Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan, the maximum permissible
impervious surface coverage, as defined in this chapter, shall not exceed 36%
of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot area if the lot abuts a curb and
gutter street system, or if the lot is located in the WS-4 Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.041 G-M GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   This district provides a place for the location of manufacturing and
other uses which would be inimical or incompatible with general business areas.
   (B)   It is not intended to permit in this district any use which is
inherently obnoxious to urban areas because of noise, odors, smoke, light, dust
or the use of dangerous materials.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in G-
M General Manufacturing Districts:
         (a)   Any use permitted in the H-B Highway Business District;
         (b)   Any lawful retail, service, repair or wholesaling use not
specifically referred to in this section (see § 153.231);
         (c)   Gasoline, oil or fuel storage above ground;
         (d)   Mixing plans for concrete or paving materials;
         (e)   Stone crushing, cutting and polishing;
         (f)   Wholesale and warehouse establishments (greater than 25,000
square feet gross floor area), except for the storage of dangerous or offensive
items such as uncured hides and explosives;
         (g)   Recycling establishment (see § 153.231);
         (h)   Manufacture, processing or fabrication (greater than 25,000
square feet gross floor area) of the following products:
            1.   Wood and wood products, including furniture;
            2.   Textiles;
            3.   Metals and metal products;
            4.   Household appliances;
            5.   Glass;
            6.   Electric and electronic products;
            7.   Foods and food products, not including abattoirs and
slaughterhouses;
            8.   Bedding, carpets and pillows;
            9.   Animal feeds;
            10.   Ice;
            11.   Leather goods, not including the processing or storage of raw
hides;
            12.   Machine tools;
            13.   Paints;
            14.   Pottery, porcelain and vitreous china;
            15.   Soap, detergent and washing compounds;
            16.   Rubber products, including the processing or manufacture of
rubber;
            17.   Paper products, not including the manufacturing or processing
of paper;
            18.   Plastics;
            19.   Furniture;
            20.   Building materials; and
            21.   Pharmaceuticals and medical devices, in accordance with state
and federal regulations.
         (i)   Customary accessory uses and structures, including open storage,
provided the area devoted to open storage is enclosed by a fence at least six
feet in height.
      (2)   Special uses. The following uses shall be permitted subject to a
Board of Adjustment review and approval:
         (a)   Manufacturing uses not otherwise named herein which come within
the spirit or intent of this zoning district; and
         (b)   Planned development manufacturing.
      (3)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a nuisance or hazard.
      (4)   Off-street parking and loading requirements. See §§
152.210 through
152.218 for parking requirements.
      (5)   Dimensional requirements. Within any G-M General Manufacturing
District as shown on the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements
shall be complied with:
         (a)   Minimum required building setback line: 25 feet; and
         (b)   Minimum side and rear yards: ten feet; however, where a lot
abuts a residential district, there shall be a ten-foot high densely planted
buffer strip. No such buffer, however, shall extend nearer to a street right-
of-way line than the established building setback line of the adjoining
residential lots. No buffer shall be required upon a side or rear yard that
abuts a public street.
      (6)   Minimum lot sizes and maximum lot coverage. Within the G-M General
Manufacturing District there is no minimum lot size and development activities
can cover 100% of the lot area; however, if the development activity requires a
Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan, the maximum permissible impervious surface
coverage, as defined in this chapter, shall not exceed 36% of the total lot
area, or 24% of the total lot area if the lot abuts a curb and gutter street
system, or if the lot is located in the WS-4 Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 08072023, passed 8-7-2023)
§ 152.042 OD-M MALCOLM BOULEVARD OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   The regulations of this district are intended to accommodate future widening
of Malcolm Boulevard (SR 1001) from the Catawba River to Interstate 40 and to
better increase the aesthetic values of Malcolm Boulevard as the major
thoroughfare through the town.
   (A)   Purposes.
      (1)   The Malcolm Boulevard Overlay District is designed to create an
aesthetically pleasing corridor along Malcolm Boulevard in keeping with the
town’s policy of protecting our safe, family-friendly, attractive,
predominately residential environment.
      (2)   This district is intended to protect properties adjacent to the
roadway from the noise, activity, light and dust of vehicular traffic by
requiring building setbacks and landscaping along the corridor. The Malcolm
Boulevard Overlay District does not affect land use regulations or development
standards of the underlying zoning districts except as specified in this
section.
      (3)   The specific purposes of the OD-M District are:
         (a)   To ensure compatibility with any future widening of Malcolm
Boulevard;
         (b)   To encourage appropriate residential and commercial development;
         (c)   To preserve, enhance and improve the visual quality, function,
safety and enjoyment of the Malcolm Boulevard corridor;
         (d)   To promote orderly development and safe and efficient movement
of traffic;
         (e)   To preserve and enhance the streetscape along Malcolm Boulevard;
and
         (f)   To preserve, enhance and improve the Malcolm Boulevard corridor
as a major thoroughfare through a predominately residential area.
   (B)   District boundaries.
      (1)   The Malcolm Boulevard Overlay District shall extend along Malcolm
Boulevard from the town’s northern-most boundary to the I-40 intersection,
including any extraterritorial jurisdictions in the northern part of town.
      (2)   The width of the Malcolm Boulevard Overlay District shall include
the entire area of all lots adjoining either side of Malcolm Boulevard.
   (C)   Principal uses. Any permitted or special use allowed in the underlying
general zoning district or parallel special use district shall be permitted in
the OD-M District. In addition, all such permitted and special uses shall also
meet all requirements of the OD-M District. Where the requirements of the OD-
M district are more restrictive than in the underlying district, the
regulations of the OD-M District shall prevail.
   (D)   Setbacks. Minimum required front yard setback: 30 feet, measured from
existing right-of-way.
   (E)   Sign standards. To reduce clutter, improve visual impact and enhance
safety.
      (1)   Signs shall be in accordance with §§
152.185 through
152.197 for the underlying zoning district, with the following exceptions.
      (2)   Prohibited signs.
         (a)   Billboards;
         (b)   Any sign attached to trees or utility poles;
         (c)   Abandoned or dilapidated signs; and
         (d)   More than two temporary signs per lot except for political
signs.
   (F)   Development standards.
      (1)   The following standards to apply to every nonresidential principal
structure located inside the OD-M District.
         (a)   The proposed location of all proposed structures shall be shown
on the site plans. For buildings located within the Overlay District (OD), the
site plan shall include exterior facades of the proposed buildings (and/or
additions) and all other information necessary to show compliance with this
section.
         (b)   Where the facade of any principal structure is visible from a
public road, metal materials shall constitute less than 50% of the entire area
of such facade.
         (c)   Windows and building entrances shall comprise at least 50% of
the first floor length of any principal structure. On any ground floor level,
any window or door shall be horizontally separated by no greater than 15 feet
from the nearest other such window or door in the same facade level. If the
principal structure contains a second or higher story, each such story shall
contain windows that are spaced in a manner complementary to the second story
of nearby buildings.
         (d)   The exterior color finish of all building facades visible from
the street shall be of low reflectance, subtle or neutral earth tone colors.
High intensity colors, metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors shall be
prohibited.
         (e)   All vegetation shall be installed and maintained to a uniform
and well- kept standard, consistent with the spirit of the Malcolm Boulevard
Overlay District. During the course of standard maintenance, vegetative waste
will be discarded to preserve the sightliness of curb and gutter and parking
areas within the district.
      (2)   Except for single- and two-family dwellings, all streets,
driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and other common areas and facilities shall
be lighted where necessary to insure the security of property and the safety of
persons using the facilities.
         (a)   In no case shall sources cause direct light or glare upon
adjacent property or constitute a hazard to motorists using public streets.
         (b)   Exterior lighting on any lot shall be designed and directed so
that light is confined primarily to that lot.
   (G)   Exceptions.
      (1)   If the Planning Board deems it impractical for a developer to
comply with portions of this subchapter, the Planning Board shall have the
authority to modify or elect not to apply portions of this subchapter, so long
as the modification or deletion of a requirement does not constitute a
variance.
      (2)   Any nonconforming structure existing before the adoption of this
chapter shall be allowed to expand as long as the new construction falls within
existing setbacks.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 152.043(F)(E), passed 11-6-
2023)
§ 152.043 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   The purpose of a planned unit development (PUD) is to allow diversification
in the relationship of industrial, commercial, office and/or residential uses
and structures to their sites and to permit a more flexible development of such
sites through unified site planning. The application of PUD concepts is
intended to encourage good architectural and site design, to use public
facilities efficiently, to avoid development of environmentally sensitive
areas, and to insure substantial compliance with the intent of the Rutherford
College Zoning Ordinance and other provisions related to public health, safety,
and general welfare.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Planned unit developments may be approved for any use
or combination of uses permitted in existing districts, except combinations of
residential and industrial uses. Additionally, commercial or residential
marinas may be permitted as PUDs if located on Lake Rhodhiss.
   (B)   Minimum site area.
PUD Type Minimum Area
PUD Type                            Minimum Area
Residential (Single-Family)         Two acres
Residential (Multi-Family)          Two acres
Residential (Mixed Multi/Single)    Two acres
Office/Commercial                   Four acres
Office/Commercial/Residential Mixed Five acres
Industrial                          Ten acres
Industrial/Commercial               Ten acres
 
   (C)   Relationship to adjacent areas. The design and layout of a PUD shall
take into account the relationship of the site to the surrounding areas.
Additionally, the perimeter of the PUD shall be so designed as to minimize any
negative impact on adjacent properties.
   (D)   Phased development. Development of a PUD may be phased, in which case
all the property anticipated for PUD development shall be submitted as part of
the PUD development plan showing a conceptual depiction of the eventual
development and approximate phase lines shown. Plats for PUD's requiring
platting may be processed concurrently with the PUD approval procedures.
   (E)   Design standards and requirements.
      (1)   Subdivision requirements. If land or structures within a proposed
PUD are to be sold to more than one person, partnership, firm or corporation,
or are to include the dedication of land, then the proposed PUD shall be
subject to the Rutherford College Subdivision Regulations. Deviations from said
standards may be approved provided they are stated as part of the PUD
development standards.
      (2)   Density. The basic density in a PUD shall be established on the
approved development plan.
      (3)   Open space requirements. A commercial PUD shall provide not less
than 10% of the gross land area for common open space. In residential or
residential mixed use PUDs, the PUD shall provide not less than 25% open space.
Required open space may not be part of any proposed or platted single-family
residential lots.
      (4)   Setbacks. Setbacks from property lines shall generally follow the
standards of the districts abutting the PUD. Deviations from said standards may
be approved by Council provided they are stated as part of the PUD development
standards.
      (5)   Lot sizes. Minimum lot sizes for single-family residential lots
shall generally follow the average of the districts abutting the PUD.
Deviations from said standards may be approved by Council provided they are
stated as part of the PUD development standards. In no case shall the density
or built-upon area of a site exceed the requirements of the Watershed
Protection Ordinance of Rutherford College.
      (6)   Parking. Parking ratio and design for the development shall conform
to the standards of §§
152.210 -
152.218, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Landscaping.
      (7)   Landscaping and buffering. Landscaping and buffering shall conform
to the standards of §§
152.230 -
152.232, Buffers and Screening.
      (8)   Pedestrian and vehicle access. All PUDs shall provide for
pedestrian connectivity through a minimum of 5' wide concrete sidewalk or
pedestrian path built to ADA standards along internal streets and on the
external boundary of the property if its abuts an existing street. To the
extent practicable, adjoining parking lots, serving non-residential buildings
shall be interconnected. Parking lots and driveways shall be designed to
minimize conflict with pedestrians.
   (F)   Procedure for approval of planned unit developments. PUDs may be
approved according to the procedures in §
152.078 and §
152.285.
(Ord. 05012023-2, passed 5-1-2023)
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 152.055 APPLICATION; CONFORMITY.
   No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof
shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located. (Ord. passed 4-5-
2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.056 REDUCTION OF LOT AND YARD AREAS PROHIBITED.
   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein, except
for street widening. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.057 RELATIONSHIP OF BUILDING TO LOT.
   Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot of record and in no case shall there be more than one
principal building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot of record,
except in the case of a specially designed complex of institutional buildings,
cluster housing, multi-family residential areas, planned unit developments and
group projects, commercial and industrial in an appropriate zoning district.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.058 NONCONFORMING USES.
   After the effective date of this chapter, existing structures, or the uses
of land or structures which would be prohibited under the regulations for the
district in which it is located (if they existed on the adoption date of this
chapter), shall be considered as nonconforming. Nonconforming structures or
uses (as defined in §
152.005) may be continued provided they conform to the following provisions.
   (A)   Continuing nonconforming uses of land.
      (1)   Extensions of use. Nonconforming uses or land shall not hereafter
be enlarged or extended in any way.
      (2)   Change of use. Any nonconforming uses of land may be changed to a
conforming use, or with the approval of the Board of Adjustment, to any use
more in character with the uses permitted in the district in question.
      (3)   Cessation of use. When nonconforming uses of land are discontinued
for a continuous period of 180 days the property involved may thereafter be
used only for conforming purposes.
         (a)   All nonconforming uses of land involving minor structures such
as junkyards, signs or any nonconforming uses similar to those enumerated,
shall be eliminated within two years from the date of adoption of this chapter.
         (b)   A record of these nonconforming uses shall be compiled by the
Planning Board and kept on permanent file in the Town Hall.
         (c)   Involved property owners shall be notified of this provision
within six months of the adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Continuing the use of nonconforming buildings.
      (1)   Extensions of use. Nonconforming buildings and nonconforming uses
of buildings shall not hereafter be enlarged. Additionally, no nonconforming
structure or use may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its
dimensional deficiencies.
      (2)   Change of use. The lawful use of a building existing at the time of
the adoption of this chapter may be continued although such use does not
conform with the provisions of this chapter, and such building may be
reconstructed or structurally altered and nonconforming use therein changed
subject to the following regulations.
         (a)   The order of classification of uses from highest to lowest for
the purpose of this section shall be as follows: single-family residential
uses, multi-family residential uses, commercial uses and industrial uses as
permitted by this chapter.
         (b)   A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of higher
classification but not to a use of lower classification, nor shall a
nonconforming use be changed to another use of the same classification unless
the new use shall be deemed by the Board of Adjustment, after public notice and
hearing, to be less harmful to the surrounding neighborhood, from the
standpoint of the purposes of this chapter, than the existing nonconforming
use.
         (c)   A nonconforming commercial or industrial use may not be
extended, but the extension of a use to any portion of a building, which
portion is at the time of the adoption of this chapter primarily or designed
for such nonconforming use, shall not be deemed to be an extension of a
nonconforming use.
         (d)   Nor shall the building be enlarged, unless the use therein is
changed to a conforming use; provided, however, that a nonconforming building
damaged by fire, explosion, tornado, earthquake or similar uncontrollable cause
to the extent of not more than 60% of its assessed value at the time of the
damage may be repaired or rebuilt within one year of the date of such damage,
but not thereafter. Such determination shall be made by the Board of
Adjustment.
         (e)   Nevertheless, the erection of a single-family dwelling unit
shall be permitted on any lot of record which contains an area or width less
than that required for a single-family dwelling in the district in which such
lot is located. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous
frontage with other lots in the same ownership on the effective date of this
chapter. Variance of any district regulations other than area and/or width
shall be obtained only through the action of the Board of Adjustment.
      (3)   Cessation of use. If active operations are discontinued for a
continuous period of 180 days with respect to a nonconforming use of a
building, such nonconforming use shall thereafter be occupied and used for a
conforming use. A period, however, between tenants or occupant shall not be
construed to mean discontinuance.
   (B)   Continuing the nonconforming use of manufactured homes and
manufactured home parks.
      (1)   Extension of use. Nonconforming manufactured homes and manufactured
home parks existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be
allowed to continue to their present existence. Existing mobile home parks
shall not hereafter be enlarged or extended in any way.
      (2)   Replacement of manufactured homes in existing manufactured home
parks. Manufactured home parks that are operating as existing parks as of the
effective date of this chapter may continue to operate. The replacement of
nonconforming manufactured homes in manufactured home parks is allowed and must
meet the criteria of this section.
      (3)   Nonconforming manufactured homes, however, may be replaced provided
that the new or replacement manufactured home is a Class B manufactured home as
defined in this chapter, is not more than seven years old, and meets all other
standards for manufactured homes outlined in § 153.097.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.059 AMORTIZATION.
   The following uses, if they are nonconforming, shall be terminated and all
outside storage or junk removed within three years:
   (A)   Junk yards not located in a G-M General Manufacturing District; and
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not be applicable,
provided, that the following conditions pertaining to junk yards herein are
met:
      (1)   The junk or salvage yard area must comply with all setback
requirements for the G-M General Manufacturing District.
      (2)   A natural buffer, consisting of a double row of evergreen trees
which will reach at least ten feet in height within three years and be of
sufficient density to provide a reasonable visual buffer or a ten-foot high
view-obscuring fence shall be placed between the site and all streets, roads or
highways and surrounding property within sight distance of the junk yard. This
requirement may be waived or modified by the Board of Adjustment if it can find
that the intent of this section is met by existing topographic conditions or
vegetation. Junk or salvage shall not be piled higher than the height of the
fence, nor against the fence.
      (3)   All materials shall be required to be stored in such a manner as to
prevent the breeding or harboring of rats, insects or other vermin. Where
necessary, this shall be accomplished by enclosures in containers, storage of
materials above ground, separation of types of materials, preventing the
collection of stagnant water, extermination procedures or other means.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.060 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Uses not designated as permitted by right or as a special use approved
by the Board of Adjustment shall be prohibited. Additional uses in character
with the district may be added to the ordinance by amendment.
   (B)   The regulations set forth by this chapter shall be minimum
regulations. If the district requirements set forth in this chapter are at a
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations
or ordinances, the more restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
   (C)   Unless the restrictions established by covenants for the land are
prohibited by or are contrary to the provisions of this chapter, nothing herein
contained shall be construed to render such covenants inoperative.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.061 EXEMPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Lot of record.
      (1)   Where the owner of a lot of official record in any residential
district at the time of the adoption of this chapter or his or her successor in
title does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the
minimum lot size requirements of this chapter, such a lot may be used as a
residential building site; provided, however, that the requirements of the
district are complied with or a variance is obtained from the Board of
Adjustment.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever two or more adjoining
vacant lots of record are in single ownership at any time after the adoption of
this chapter and such lots individually have less area or width than the
minimum requirements of the district in which such lots are located, such lots
shall be considered as a single lot or several lots which meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter for district in which such lots are located.
      (3)   Every lot to be built upon shall abut by at least 37.5 feet a
public street or other public way and no dwelling shall be placed or built upon
a lot which does not abut upon a public street or other public way by the same
distance, with the exception of division (B) below.
   (B)   Provisions for landlocked lots. Existing landlocked lots within the
residential zoning districts, defined as a lot that does not abut a public
street and therefore does not meet the requirements that the lot have a minimum
frontage on a public street of 37.5 feet, may be developed for one single-
family dwelling unit if the lot otherwise meets the zoning requirements of the
zone in which the lot is located provided that the lot has a recorded easement
of ingress and egress to and from a public street which is appurtenant to the
lot and which meets the following requirements:
      (1)   A private easement with a minimum continuous width of 20 feet is
acquired from intervening property owners;
      (2)   The recorded documents creating the easement shall specify that the
public service, utility and emergency personnel and vehicles shall have the
freedom of ingress and egress from the landlocked property;
      (3)   The recorded documents shall also specify that public utilities
(water, sewer, electricity, telephone, cable and the like) may be located
within the easement;
      (4)   The recorded documents shall include a maintenance agreement
specifying the party responsible for maintaining the easement and its traveled
surface;
      (5)   The easement must have an all weather surface of gravel, concrete
or asphalt with a minimum continuous width of ten feet to ensure access of
public service, utility and emergency personnel and vehicles;
      (6)   Easements existing prior to the adoption of this chapter with
widths less than 20 feet may be used to access landlocked lots provided that
such easements abut a public street or way; and
      (7)   Subdivision of landlocked parcels will require the provision of a
publicly dedicated street constructed to the town standards and must meet all
the requirements of the town’s subdivision regulations.
   (C)   Front yard for dwellings.
      (1)   The front yard requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not
apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly
or in part within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling and on the
same side of the street in the same block and use district as such lot is less
than the minimum required front yard depth.
      (2)   In such case, the setback on such lots may be less than the
required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the
aforementioned lots, or a distance of ten feet from the street right-of-way,
whichever is greater.
   (D)   Height limitation. The height limitations of this chapter shall not
apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human
occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers,
chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, television towers,
masts, aerials and similar structures, except as otherwise noted in the
vicinity of airports.
   (E)   Visibility of intersections. On a corner lot in any residential
district, no planting, structure, sign, fence, wall or obstruction to vision
more than three feet in height measured from the centerline of the street or
road shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street or road right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting
points on said street or road right-of-way line each of which is 35 feet
distance from the point of intersection.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.062 FENCES.
   Fences and walls are permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts,
provided that:
   (A)   No fence shall be constructed within or upon any street right-of-way.
   (B)   On a corner lot in any district, no fence, wall or obstruction to
vision more than three feet in height measured from the centerline of the
street or road shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed
by the intersecting street or road right-of-way lines and a straight line
connecting points on said street or road right-of-way line, each of which is 35
feet distance from the point of intersection.
   (C)   No fence or wall shall alter or impede the natural flow of water in
any stream, creek, drainage swale, or ditch.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the installation of temporary
fences related to construction sites or sediment and erosion control.
   (E )    A zoning permit is required for the installation of any fence.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ef4b13fcc3f6e293af68b2ccb7ba080d07b484e2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1059.png]
 
(Ord. passed - -)
SPECIAL REGULATIONS
§ 152.075 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Swimming pools are considered an accessory structure.
   (B)   Coops for fowl are considered accessory structures regardless of size
or dimensions. In addition to meeting the regular required setbacks for
accessory buildings, coops should also be set back 50 feet from neighboring
residences.
   (C)   The following structures are not permitted as an accessory structure
in any district:
      (1)   Manufactured homes; nor
      (2)   Tractor trailer containers, tractor trailer beds or similar
structures that were originally designed for the transportation of goods.
   (D)   Open metal (aluminum or steel) carports are permitted as an accessory
structure and shall meet the requirements for accessory structures in the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (E)   Accessory structures in the residential districts shall comply with
the following requirements:
      (1)   No accessory building shall be erected in any required front yard.
No accessory building shall be erected in any required side yard unless the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The front wall of the garage does not extend beyond the primary
front wall of the principal structure;
         (b)   The garage is separated from the principal structure according
to fire code regulations; and
         (c)   The garage is constructed of similar materials to match the
principal structure.
      (2)   In case of a corner lot, no accessory building shall extend beyond
the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from any
street line and shall be setback at least ten feet from any lot line, not a
street line.
      (4)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the principal structure is complete.
      (5)   Accessory structures shall not cover more than 30% of any rear and
side yard.
   (F)   Accessory structures in nonresidential districts shall comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Accessory structures shall be at least five feet from any other
accessory building on the same lot.
      (2)   In case of a corner lot, no accessory building shall extend beyond
the front yard line of the lots in the rear.
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be setback at least 20 feet from any
street line and shall be setback at least ten feet from any lot line, not a
street line.
      (4)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the principal structure is complete.
      (5)   Residential structures in business districts shall comply with the
following requirements:
         (a)   No accessory building shall be erected in any required front
yard. No accessory building shall be erected in any required side yard unless
the following conditions are met:
            1.   The front wall of the garage does not extend beyond the
primary front wall of the principal structure; regulations; and
            2.   The garage is separated from the principal structure according
to fire code;
            3.   The garage is constructed of similar materials to match the
principal structure.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 1-7-2013; Ord. passed 10-7-2013; Ord. passed
5-5-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.076 ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   It is recognized that there are some uses of property which, because
of their very nature, are recognized as having characteristics which impose
adverse effects on the neighborhood in which the use is located. Regulations
are necessary to minimize the adverse effects and to prevent a particular area
subject to the zoning jurisdiction of the town from a concentration of the
uses. It is not the intent of this section to conflict with state laws
regulating adult establishments, but rather to regulate the location of adult
establishments whose material or activities are legal.
   (B)   An adult establishment can include any structure or use of land that
is defined in G.S. § 160D-902 and/or including the following:
      (1)   Adult bookstore;
      (2)   Adult picture theater;
      (3)   Adult mini-picture theater;
      (4)   Adult drive-in theater;
      (5)   Adult cabaret; and
      (6)   Adult massage parlor.
   (C)   An adult establishment use shall only be allowed as a special use in
the Highway Business (H-B) and General Manufacturing (G-M) Districts.
   (D)   There shall be a spacing of 1,500 feet between adult establishment
uses. The 1,500-foot distance shall be measured on a straight line from
property line to property line, with no consideration as to intervening
structures, roads or land forms.
   (E)   No adult establishment shall be located within 1,500 feet of a church,
public or private school, child day care or nursery school, or public park. The
1,500-foot distance shall be measured on a straight line from property line to
property line, with no consideration as to intervening structures, roads or
land forms.
   (F)   The minimum setbacks, maximum building height and all other
dimensional requirements shall be the same as for uses in the Highway Business
District.
   (G)   The amount of parking spaces required shall be the same as for all
other commercial uses. Parking areas shall only be located in the front of the
principal building.
   (H)   There shall be no screening or buffers allowed in any form except when
the property abuts a residentially zoned property on the side or rear.
   (I)   Signs allowed shall be in compliance with Highway Business District
sign regulations. Any ground, wall, canopy or projection sign shall contain
only the name of the establishment. It shall not contain any advertising nor
identification of any product, service and the like.
   (J)   Customer or member entrances shall only be in the front of the
building facing the street. No side or rear entrances shall be allowed for use
by anyone patronizing an adult business.
   (K)   No printed material, slide, video, photograph, written text, live show
or other visual presentation format shall be visible from outside the
establishment.
   (L)   There shall not be more than one adult business use, either the same
or another use, located on the same property, building or structure.
   (M)   Other applicable regulations contained in this chapter shall be in
effect.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.077 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   A home occupation is permitted accessory to any dwelling unit (except
manufactured housing) in accordance with the following requirements:
   (A)   The home occupation must be clearly incidental to the residential use
of the dwelling and must not change the essential residential character of the
dwelling.
   (B)   A home occupation conducted in an accessory structure shall be housed
only in a garage or other accessory structure typically associated with a
dwelling.
   (C)   The use shall employ no more than one person who is not a resident of
the dwelling.
   (D)   A home occupation housed within the dwelling shall occupy no more than
25% of the total floor area of the dwelling.
   (E)   Signage shall be provided according to §§
152.185 through
152.197.
   (F)   There shall be no visible outside display of stock in trade which is
sold on the premises.
   (G)   There shall be no outdoor storage or visible evidence of equipment or
materials used in the home occupation, excepting equipment or materials of a
type and quantity that could reasonably be associated with the principal
residential use.
   (H)   Operation of the home occupation shall not be visible from any
dwelling on an adjacent lot, nor from a street.
   (I)   The home occupation shall not utilize mechanical, electrical or other
equipment which produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration,
heat, glare or other nuisances outside the dwelling or accessory structure
housing the home occupation.
   (J)   Home occupations shall be limited to those uses which do not draw
clients to the dwelling on a regular basis.
   (K)   All home occupations shall require a zoning permit. Permits are not
transferable from person to person or from address to address.
   (L)   Home occupations shall not be open to the public at times earlier than
8:00 a.m. nor later than 9:00 p.m.
   (M)   Home occupations shall comply with all local, state and federal
regulations pertinent to the activity pursued, and the requirements of or
permission granted by this section shall not be construed as an exemption from
such regulations.
   (N)   The following uses are permitted in a home occupation:
      (1)   Architectural, drafting and graphic services;
      (2)   Art restoration;
      (3)   Art/photography studio;
      (4)   Beauty salons;
      (5)   Child care home;
      (6)   Consulting offices;
      (7)   Contracting offices;
      (8)   Data processing;
      (9)   Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring;
      (10)   Electronic assembly and repair;
      (11)   Engineering services;
      (12)   Financial planning and investment services;
      (13)   Flower arranging;
      (14)   Gardening and landscaping services;
      (15)   Home crafts;
      (16)   House cleaning services;
      (17)   Insurance sales broker;
      (18)   Interior design;
      (19)   Jewelry making and repair;
      (20)   Locksmith;
      (21)   Mail order (not including retail sales from the site);
      (22)   Real estate sales broker;
      (23)   General sales representative;
      (24)   Tutoring;
      (25)   Furniture upholstering; and
      (26)   Any use not listed, but meeting the requirements of divisions (A)
through (M) above.
   (O)   The following uses are prohibited in a home occupation:
      (1)   Appliance and small engine repair;
      (2)   Auto repair, major and minor;
      (3)   Auto painting;
      (4)   Carpentry/cabinet making;
      (5)   Dance studios;
      (6)   Furniture construction;
      (7)   Machine shops;
      (8)   Rental businesses;
      (9)   Tow truck services; and
      (10)   Welding shops.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.078 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)    The planned unit development concept offers developers the
possibility of more efficient and flexible methods for developing property, and
provides residents of the project with larger open spaces for recreation and
other activities properly related to residential uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as a PUD by a
conditional rezoning process:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures, which are customarily and clearly
incidental to permitted principal uses and structures, excluding manufactured
homes.
      (2)   Bank, savings and loan associations and similar financial
institutions.
      (3)   Barbershops, beauty shops and similar personal service
establishments.
      (4)   Bed and breakfast inns.
      (5)   Churches, synagogues, and the like.
      (6)   Community facilities.
      (7)   Eating and drinking establishments, catering establishments and
bakeries with products sold at retail on the premises. Drive-thru facilities
are strongly discouraged and subject to board review.
      (8)   Florist.
      (9)   Home occupations as defined in §
152.077.
      (10)   Hotels.
      (11)   Laundry and dry cleaning collection stations.
      (12)   Marinas.
      (13)   Museums.
      (14)   Offices, businesses, professional, public, and non-profits.
      (15)   Photography, dance, art, and music studios.
      (16)   Printing and copy services.
      (17)   Retail establishments, not including motor vehicle sales.
      (18)   Retirement, nursing homes, and assisted living.
      (19)   Single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings, attached,
detached and semi-detached; excluding manufactured homes.
      (20)   Schools, child care centers and family care centers.
      (21)   A mixed use of the listed permitted items.
   (C)   The Town Council may approve this form of development in the districts
that allow it as a permitted or special use, provided:
      (1)   Such project is an integrated plan designed for the primary purpose
of residential or mixed use;
      (2)   The site for the total project is at least four acres and at least
two principal buildings are included in the plans;
      (3)   The total parcel of land is under single ownership or control, and
there is reasonable assurance that the project can be successfully completed
and maintained, including care and maintenance of all common open space,
recreation space and other common land area;
      (4)   The preliminary plan for the proposed planned unit development
shall first be submitted to the Town Planning Board for its review and
recommendation to the Town Council. Such recommendations may include, but shall
not be limited to, provisions for additional utilities, drainage, landscaping,
lighting and streets and accessways;
      (5)   The applicant must resubmit the plan to the Planning Board if
changes were recommended by the Town Council. If the plan is rejected by the
Town Council, the applicant will not receive consideration of the same plan for
a period of 12 months. The applicant can, however, appeal to Superior Court;
      (6)   All principal buildings and accessory buildings or uses abutting
the property lines of the project must meet the minimum yard requirement of the
district where the project is located for all yards abutting said property
lines. All height requirements shall be met for the district where the project
is located;
      (7)   The overall use of the area for buildings shall be no more than 25%
of the total land area;
      (8)   Density of development may be calculated over the entire
development rather than on an individual lot-by-lot basis, and can be no higher
than what is permitted in the district in which the development is located;
      (9)   Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of two spaces per
dwelling;
      (10)   All streets and parking areas shall be constructed and paved
according to the standards of the town; and
      (11)   The procedure for approval of a planned unit development shall
consist of the submission of a design plan to the Town Planning Board showing
how the requirements of divisions (C) (1) through (4) above will be met.
   (D)   Following study and recommendations by the Planning Board, the plan
must be submitted to the Town Council for final approval.
   (E)   Failure of the Planning Board to act on the plan within 60 days shall
constitute a favorable recommendation to the Town Council.
   (F)   An approved project must be started within 12 months after final
approval and must be completed within a reasonable time.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 05012023-2, passed 5-1-2023;
Ord. 040124-1, passed 4-1-2024)
§ 152.079 ELECTRONIC GAMING/INTERNET SWEEPSTAKES.
   Electronic gaming/internet sweepstakes shall be subject to the following:
   (A)   Minimum of 500 feet of separation between electronic gaming/internet
sweepstakes establishments, measured as a straight line distance between the
nearest exterior walls of the businesses.
   (B)   Minimum of 500 feet of separation from religious institutions,
schools, child care centers, recreation centers or parks, measured as a
straight line distance to the nearest exterior wall of the business.
   (C)   Hours of operation limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday and closed on Sunday.
   (D)   Machines must be compliant with state and federal law.
   (E)   No one under 18 years of age permitted to use the machines. Age must
be verified for all customers who use the machines.
   (F)   Electronic gaming/internet sweepstakes machines may be allowed as
accessory uses to otherwise lawful businesses in Highway Business Districts,
and therefore would only be subject to standards in divisions (D) through (F)
of this section, when two or fewer machines are located on the premises. Three
or more machines on the same premises will be treated as a primary use and will
be subject to all of the above standards for approval.
(Ord. passed 1-7-2013; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.080 LIVESTOCK AND FOWL.
   No person shall keep LIVESTOCK (defined as horse, mule, donkey, cow, sheep,
goat, or similar animal) or domesticated fowl (defined as chicken, turkey,
guinea, duck, or similar bird) within the corporate limits unless a zoning
permit is obtained and each of the following stipulations are adhered to:
   (A)   No livestock, fowl, or swine shall be permitted in platted major
subdivisions.
   (B)   No swine shall be permitted.
   (C)    All areas, including but not limited to stable, barn, and pasture,
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner to prevent odors, rodents,
and flies.
   (D)   Number of animals shall not exceed acreage restrictions in divisions
(E)(2) or (F)(3) whether by purchase, trade, or birth.
   (E)   Livestock.
      (1)   [Livestock] shall not be permitted to roam unless pastured or
staked.
      (2)   At least one-half acre is required for every two livestock animals.
      (3)   Containment areas for livestock must be at least 100 feet from
structures on adjacent properties under different ownership.
   (F)   Fowl.
      (1)   Coops and pens must be completely fenced so as to ensure that no
fowl/bird may escape. Any area that birds roam must be enclosed by a fence.
Fowl and other birds roaming at large shall not be permitted.
      (2)   Coops are regulated as accessory buildings in §
152.075, but they must also be set back 50 feet from neighboring residences.
      (3)   The number of fowl may not exceed the ratio of 48 birds per acre.
The outdoor containment area for fowl may be shared with livestock.
(Ord. passed 5-5-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.081 MICROBREWERIES, DISTILLERIES AND WINERIES.
   (A)   In the Central Business District (CBD) and Highway Business District
(HBD). Only those operations that meet federal standards may be located within
the CBD and HBD Districts provided:
      (1)   The operation is occupying no more than 10,000 square feet of
production space.
      (2)   The use shall have no more than one loading dock in Highway
Business District. The dock must be located off of the public street.
      (3)   Restroom facilities built in accordance with the North Carolina
Building Code shall be located inside facility.
      (4)   No outdoor storage is permitted, with exception to an operational
metal grain/hops storage tank with the height not to exceed 20% of the existing
building height.
      (5)   Outdoor patio type seating is permitted. This would also include
table, umbrellas, small overhead canopies, shade sails, awnings not to exceed a
total area of 60 square feet. Outdoor trash receptacles are required.
   (B)   In the General Manufacturing District (GM). Only those operations that
meet federal standards may be located within the GM District provided:
      (1)   The operation is occupying no less than 10,000 square feet of
production space.
      (2)   The use shall have no more than two loading docks. The docks must
be located off of the public street.
      (3)   Restroom facilities built in accordance with the North Carolina
Building Code shall be located inside facility.
      (4)   No outdoor storage is permitted, with exception to an operational
metal grain/hops storage tank with the height not to exceed 20% of the existing
building height.
      (5)   Outdoor patio type seating is permitted. This would also include
table, umbrellas, small overhead canopies, shade sails, awnings not to exceed a
total area of 60 square feet. Outdoor trash receptacles are required.
(Ord. passed 2-1-2016; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 152.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Mobile homes, because of their use, transportability, manufacture and
manner of construction, location and susceptibility for use in high density
concentration tend to place inhabitants of mobile homes in an unfavorable
position to obtain services necessary for a safe and healthful living
environment.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide protection to the
public against unwise and hazardous mobile home development and provide a
reasonably safe and sound environment for mobile home inhabitants and to:
      (1)   Promote public health, safety and orderly residential development;
      (2)   Prevent overcrowding of the land;
      (3)   Provide adequate open space to ensure privacy, natural light and
ventilation for each mobile home;
      (4)   Provide sufficient open space for outdoor uses essential to the
mobile home;
      (5)   Ensure the furnishing of adequate water supply and sewage disposal
systems; and
      (6)   Provide an acceptable environment for small communities of mobile
homes.
   (C)   Mobile home parks are, therefore, strictly regulated with respect to
their location, installation, provisions for services, privacy and additional
specific regulation contained herein.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.091 PERMIT FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or use any
lot or other parcel of land within the jurisdiction of the town for a mobile
home park until application has been made and a permit therefor has been issued
by the Town Council.
   (B)   The Town Council shall, prior to issuing a permit, determine if all
requirements of this chapter have been complied with. A mobile home park permit
may be revoked by the Town Council upon a finding of fact that a violation of
the requirements of this chapter exists; provided, the owner, lessor or other
responsible person is notified in writing of such violation and after the
expiration of five days from the date of such written notice.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to continue
to operate such mobile home park after one permit therefor, as required herein,
has been revoked by the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.092 CONFLICT WITH HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS.
   In the event the State or County Board of Health has adopted regulations
governing mobile homes or mobile home parks, the requirements of the State or
County Health Department, whichever is more stringent, shall govern.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.093 UTILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Water supply. An adequate and safe supply of water shall be readily
available at the mobile home park site. This requirement shall be deemed to
have been met:
      (1)   When an approved connection is made to the municipal water system;
or
      (2)   When an independent water supply has been approved by the State
Board of Health.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer. Each individual mobile home premises be required to
have a connection with a municipal sanitary sewer system. This requirement
shall be deemed to have been met:
      (1)   When an approved connection is made to the municipal sewer system;
or
      (2)   When a sewerage treatment facility is provided and approved by the
County Health Department, or the State Department of Water Resources.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.094 SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Mobile home parks shall comply with the area, location and other
dimensional requirements of this section.
   (B)   Prior to granting a permit for a mobile home park, the owner or
developer shall submit the location of the boundaries of the mobile home park
property, proposed vehicle exits, entrances and off-street parking spaces,
mobile home space layout and such other information as the Town Council may
deem necessary in order to determine if all requirements of this and other
applicable ordinances are to be met.
   (C)   Site requirements for all mobile home parks shall be as follows:
      (1)   The minimum size lot, tract or parcel of land to be used for mobile
home parks shall not be less than two acres, and such site shall have an
average width of not less than 200 feet. In no event shall more than four
mobile homes be located on an area of one acre.
      (2)   The minimum size mobile home site area or separate lot to be
occupied by one mobile home shall be 40 feet by 100 feet and such site shall be
identified by markers placed at each corner.
      (3)   No mobile home shall be placed within 15 feet of its individual
mobile home site lot line as established in division (C)(2) above, or within 30
feet of any other mobile home end-to-end.
      (4)   No mobile home shall be located within 35 feet of any street or
exterior boundary line of the mobile home park.
      (5)   Two off-street automobile parking spaces shall be provided on the
site in an approved manner for each separate mobile home unit. Such off-street
parking spaces shall be set aside in a location convenient to the occupants of
the mobile home units and shall have ingress and egress by means of a public
way. Where parking areas are provided adjacent to a public street, ingress and
egress thereto shall be made accessible only through driveways or openings not
exceeding 25 feet in width at the curb line of the street.
      (6)   Minimum required lot area for each dwelling unit: 4,000 square
feet.
   (D)   Maximum permissible impervious coverage as defined in this chapter
shall not exceed 36% of the total lot area, or 24% of the total lot area if the
lot abuts a curb and gutter street system or if the lot is located within the
WS-4 Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.095 FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Each mobile home park shall provide minimum facilities for mobile home
occupants as follows:
   (A)   Enclosed bathroom facilities. Enclosed bathroom facilities shall be
constructed which have an approved connection the required on-site water and
sanitary sewer facilities, and such facilities shall be designed in order that
two wash basins, two toilets and one shower are available for each four mobile
homes the park is designed to accommodate, and separate facilities shall be
provided for both men and women. The bathroom structure and all plumbing
installations shall conform to the applicable state or town Building and
Plumbing Codes or County Health Department.
      (1)   In lieu of installing toilet facilities as required above, a
separate sewer connection for each mobile home space within the mobile home
park shall be constructed, provided each mobile home shall be required to make
a separate connection with such sanitary sewer facilities immediately upon
occupying a mobile home site. A minimum four-inch connection shall be required
and shall have approved fittings to ensure a water-tight connection and means
for capping or closing such connection when it is not in use.
      (2)   In lieu of the wash basin and shower facilities required above,
approved water connection may be made to each mobile home, provided each mobile
home is connected to the sanitary sewer system in a manner provided for herein.
   (B)   Garbage and trash containers. One garbage and trash container (30
gallons each maximum capacity) shall be provided for each mobile home.
Containers shall be placed on racks which are approved by the County Health
Department and such racks shall be located within the mobile home park at a
point which is readily accessible for collection. The owner of the park, or his
or her authorized agent shall be responsible for containers, collection and
disposal at least once a week.
   (C)   Driveways. Access driveways shall be constructed within mobile home
parks when mobile homes are to be located more than 100 feet from a public
street or off-street parking space. Other approved access driveways may be
constructed at the option of the owner. All driveways shall be graded to a
width of 25 feet for two-way drives. All driveways shall be kept opened and
shall be constructed and maintained in such manner as to be passable to
vehicular traffic under all weather conditions.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.096 GENERAL SANITATION.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or his or her
authorized agent to keep the mobile home park in a reasonable clean and
sanitary condition at all times, and to maintain and keep in good repair all
required mobile home parks facilities. All waste water from washing machines
and other similar sources shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system
and under no circumstances shall such wastes be discharged on the ground or in
streams.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.097 PROVISIONS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   (A)   The purpose of these regulations is to promote sound neighborhood
development and appearance, protect community property values, and to preserve
the integrity and character of neighborhoods.
   (B)   Class B manufactured homes (as defined in §
152.005) are permitted on individual lots in the R-15 District under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The lot must be recorded as an individual lot in the County
Register of Deeds.
      (2)   If municipal utilities are not available, the well and/or septic
tank must be approved by the County Health Department.
      (3)   All yard dimensional requirements for the respective district must
be met.
      (4)   The lot must front on a public street or approved private street
and said street frontage will be considered the front of the lot. In cases
where a private street is proposed to be used, the zoning enforcement officer
may require that a recorded right of way exist to serve the property and the
street is paved or graveled in a manner that will facilitate safe and efficient
vehicular traffic.
      (5)   The manufactured home must meet or exceed the construction
standards established by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) that were in effect at
the time of construction. These standards became effective on July 15, 1976.
      (6)   All Class B manufactured homes (as defined in §
152.005) shall be multi-sectional, not single-wides. Class B manufactured homes
shall be at least 20 feet wide. Class C manufactured homes are permitted on
individual lots only as a hardship case as provided for in §
152.036. Class D manufactured homes (as defined in §
152.005) are not permitted on individual lots.
      (7)   The length-width ratio of the manufactured home shall not have a
length exceeding three and one-half times the width.
      (8)   All homes must measure at least 1,150 square feet of enclosed and
heated living space.
      (9)   The pitch of the main roof of the building shall have a minimum
rise of one foot for every three feet of horizontal run.
      (10)   The roof shall be finished with a type of shingle that is commonly
used in standard residential construction.
      (11)   All roof structures shall provide an eave protection of no less
than six inches which may include a gutter.
      (12)   The exterior siding shall consist predominately of vinyl or
aluminum siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of gloss white paint),
wood or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the
exterior siding used in standard residential site-built construction.
      (13)   A continuous foundation enclosure, un-pierced except for required
ventilation and access shall be installed in accordance with State Building
Codes. The enclosure shall consist of brick, concrete or block. If any masonry
other than brick is used, it must be painted in color similar to that of brick.
All materials necessary to complete the enclosure shall be located on the site
at the time of final inspection by the County Building Inspections Department.
      (14)   Permanent steps shall be constructed at all entrances to the
manufactured home. A permanent deck, porch or entrance patio measuring at least
eight feet by ten feet shall be constructed at the front entrance and a similar
structure measuring at least six feet by ten feet at the rear entrance. All
stairs, porches, decks, patios and other entrances shall be attached securely
to the home, anchored firmly to the ground, and shall be constructed in
accordance with the North Carolina Building Code. Steps constructed from loose
stacked materials shall not be construed as properly installed. All decks,
porches, patios and stairs shall be constructed using treated wood, masonry or
brick.
      (15)   The running lights, the moving hitch and undercarriage chassis
shall be removed upon final placement of the unit.
      (16)   At least two standard nine by 18 feet off-street parking spaces
shall be provided. The spaces shall not be closer than 15 feet from the road or
right-of-way in order to protect site distances of the driving public. A
driveway of at least ten feet wide shall be paved or graveled with not less
than four inches of crushed stone on a well compacted sub-base.
      (17)   All areas not used for parking, the manufactured home, accessory
buildings or required decks shall be grassed or otherwise suitably landscaped
to prevent erosion, except for agriculture, no exposed soils shall remain after
one year from the date the zoning permit is issued.
      (18)   All manufactured homes shall be placed on the lot in harmony with
the neighboring built structures. Where there are no neighboring site built
homes for comparison, it shall be sites with the front running parallel to the
lot frontage. For other odd lots, the home shall be located as determined by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer in harmony with surrounding structures.
      (19)   Each of the setup requirements in this section shall be completed
within 30 days after the final inspection by the County Building Inspection
Department. An extension of up to 60 days may be granted by the Town Council if
a personal or financial hardship is shown to exist. If no extension is
requested or the extension expires with no progress in completing the
requirements of this section, the town may use any and all remedies listed in §
152.245 through §
152.252 to enforce the requirements.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
WATERSHED PROTECTION
§ 152.110 AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT.
   The legislature of the state has, in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Planning and
Regulation of Development; and in G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 21, Water and Air
Resources, delegated the responsibility or directed local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. The town does hereby ordain and enact into law the
following as the “Watershed Protection Ordinance of the Town of Rutherford
College”.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.111 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply within the overlay zones
designated as a Public Water Supply Watershed as defined and established on the
“Official Zoning Map of Rutherford College, North Carolina” (“the zoning map”),
such overlay zones being adopted simultaneously herewith. The Watershed Map and
all explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part
of this subchapter. This subchapter shall be permanently kept on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.112 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Development activities that do not require a Sedimentation/Erosion
Control Plan are exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Existing development, as defined in this subchapter, is not subject to
the requirements of this subchapter. EXISTING DEVELOPMENT is defined as those
projects that are built or those projects that at a minimum have established a
vested right under the state zoning law as of the effective date of this
subchapter based on at least one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Having expended substantial resources (time, labor, money) based on
a good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to
proceed with the project;
      (2)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by G.S. §
160D-102;
      (3)   Having an approved site specific or phased development plan as
authorized by G.S. § 160D-102.
   (C)   Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet
the requirements of this subchapter; however, the built-upon area of the
existing development is not required to be included in the density
calculations.
   (D)   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas. Any existing building
or built-upon area not in conformance with the restrictions of this subchapter
that has been damaged or removed may be repaired and/or reconstructed, except
that there are no restrictions on single-family residential redevelopment,
provided:
      (1)   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within 12 months and
completed within two years of such damage; and
      (2)   The total amount of space devoted to built-upon area may not be
increased unless storm water control that equals or exceeds the previous
development is provided.
   (E)   If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot
owned by the same part, then that lot of record shall not be subject to the
development restrictions of this subchapter if it is developed for single-
family purposes.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.113 CLUSTER OR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   Cluster or planned unit development is allowed in all watershed areas under
the following conditions:
   (A)   Development activities shall comply with the requirements of §§
152.078 and
152.079.
   (B)   All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize storm
water runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated storm
water flow.
   (C)   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural
state. The title to the open space area shall be conveyed to an association for
management; to a local government for preservation as a park or open space; or
to a conservation organization for preservation in a permanent easement. Where
a property association is not incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be
filed with the deeds.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.114 BUFFER AREAS REQUIRED.
   (A)   A minimum 100-foot vegetative buffer is required for all new
development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise, a minimum
30 foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required along all
perennial waters indicated in the most recent versions of USGS 1:24,000 (7.5
minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government studies.
Artificial stream bank or shoreline stabilization is permitted.
   (B)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent
structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs and security lights
which result in only diminutive increase in impervious area, and public
projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical alternative
exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff
away from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of storm water best
management practices, defined as a structural or nonstructural management-based
practice used singularly or in combination to reduce non-point source inputs
receiving waters in order to achieve water quality goals.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.115 WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR AND DUTIES THEREOF.
   (A)   The Town Council shall appoint a Watershed Administrator, who shall be
duly sworn in.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Watershed Administrator to administer and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter as follows:
      (1)   The Watershed Administrator shall issue watershed protection
permits and watershed protection occupancy permits as prescribed herein. A
record of all permits shall be kept on file and shall be available for public
inspection during regular office hours of the Administrator.
      (2)   The Watershed Administrator shall serve as staff to the Watershed
Review Board.
      (3)   The Watershed Administrator shall keep records of all amendments to
the local Water Supply Watershed Protection Ordinance and shall provide copies
of all amendments upon adoption to the Water Quality Section of the Division of
Environmental Management.
      (4)   The Watershed Administrator is granted the authority to administer
and enforce the provisions of this subchapter, exercising in the fulfillment of
his or her responsibility the full zoning and police power of the town. The
Watershed Administrator, or his or her duly authorized representative, may
enter any building, structure or premises, as provided by law, to perform any
duty imposed upon him or her by this subchapter.
      (5)   The Watershed Administrator shall keep a record of variances to the
local Water Supply Watershed Protection Ordinance. This record shall be
submitted each calendar year to the Water Quality Section of the Division of
Environmental Management on or before January 1of the following calendar year
and shall provide a description of each project receiving a variance and the
reasons for granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.116 APPEAL FROM THE WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Watershed Administrator may be appealed to and decided by the Board of
Adjustment.
   (B)   (1)   An appeal from a decision of the Watershed Administrator must be
submitted to the Board of Adjustment within 30 days from the date the order,
interpretation, decision or determination is made.
      (2)   All appeals must be made in writing stating the reasons for appeal.
Following submission of an appeal, the Watershed Administrator shall transmit
to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board after
the notice of appeal has been filed with him or her, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would in his or her opinion cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a
court of record on application of notice of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and upon due cause shown.
   (D)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give
notice thereof to the parties and shall decide the same within a reasonable
time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.117 ESTABLISHMENT OF WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   There shall be and hereby is created the Watershed Review Board
consisting of the same membership as the Town Council.
   (B)   Terms for members of the Watershed Review Board shall coincide with
the membership terms for Town Council.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.118 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD AND BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall be responsible for reviewing and hearing
all minor and major watershed variance cases. When hearing minor variance
cases, the Board shall proceed as provided in §§
152.265 through
152.272 for zoning variances.
   (B)   When a variance is considered, the Board shall notify each
municipality with jurisdiction in the area and the entity using the watershed
for consumption ten days in advance.
   (C)   If the application calls for the granting of a major watershed
variance, and if the Board of Adjustment decides in favor or granting the major
watershed variance, the Board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing
with all deliberate speed. The preliminary record of the hearing shall include:
      (1)   The variance applications;
      (2)   The hearing notices;
      (3)   The evidence presented;
      (4)   Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence, and rulings on
them;
      (5)   Proposed findings and exceptions; and
      (6)   The proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be
added to the permit.
   (D)   The preliminary record shall be sent to the Environmental Management
Commission for its review as follows:
      (1)   (a)   If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that
the variance qualifies as a major variance and that:
            1.   The property owner can secure no reasonable return from, nor
make any practical use of the property unless the proposed variance is granted;
and
            2.   The variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat
to the water supply, then the Commission shall approve the variance as proposed
or approve the proposed variance with conditions and stipulations.
         (b)   The Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it
to the Board of Adjustment.
         (c)   If the Commission approves the variance as proposed, the Board
shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed variance.
         (d)   If the Commission approves the variance with conditions and
stipulations, the Board shall prepare a final decision, including such
conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed variance.
      (2)   (a)   If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that
the variance qualifies as a major variance and that:
            1.   The property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make
a practical use of the property without the variance; or
            2.   The variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to
the water supply, then the Commission shall deny approval of the variance as
proposed.
         (b)   The Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it
to the Board of Adjustment.
         (c)   The Board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as
proposed.
   (E)   Approval of all development greater than the low density option shall
be the authority of the Watershed Review Board subject to the requirements of §
152.120.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.119 APPEALS FROM THE WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD OR BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment must be filed with the Superior Court
within 30 days from the date of the decision. The decisions by the Superior
Court will be in the manner of certiorari.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.120 HIGH DENSITY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   The Watershed Review Board may approve high density development proposals
consistent with the following standards: where new development requires a
Sedimentation/Erosion Control Plan and exceeds either two dwelling units per
acre, 24% built-upon area (or three dwelling units per acre or 36% built-upon
area for projects without curb and gutter street system in the WS-4-PA),
engineered storm water controls shall be used to control runoff from the first
inch of rainfall and development shall not exceed 70% built-upon area in the
WS-4-Protected Area and 50% in the WS-4-Critical Area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.121 HIGH DENSITY DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   A high density development permit shall be required for new
development exceeding the requirements of the low density option.
   (B)   Application for a high density development permit shall be addressed
and submitted to the Town Council through the Watershed Administrator.
Application for a high density development permit shall be made on the proper
form and shall include the following information:
      (1)   A completed high density development permit application signed by
the owner of the property. The signature of the consulting engineer or other
agent will be accepted on the application only if accompanied by a letter of
authorization;
      (2)   Ten reproducible copies of the development plan within the drainage
basin including the applicable information listed in Appendix A: Application
Forms, Subdivision Plat Checklist and detailed information concerning built-
upon area;
      (3)   Ten reproducible copies of the plans and specifications of the
storm water control structure consistent with §
152.122;
      (4)   When required by law, written verification that a Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Plan has been approved by the appropriate state or local
agency; and
      (5)   Permit application fees consistent with §
152.125.
   (C)   Prior to taking final action on any application, the Board or the
Watershed Administrator may provide an opportunity to public agencies affected
by the development proposal to review and make recommendations on the
application; however, failure of the agencies to submit their comments and
recommendations shall not delay the Board’s action within the prescribed time
limit.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the Town Council shall hold a
public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing. The
notice shall state the location of the building, lot or tract in question, the
intended use of the property, the need for engineered stormwater controls and
the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant or designated
representative thereof shall appear for the purposes of offering testimony and
recommendations concerning the application. The Board shall also allot
reasonable time for the expression of views by any member of the public
attending the meeting in person or represented by an attorney provided the
testimony bears on the findings the Board must make.
   (E)   (1)   The Town Council shall issue a high density development permit
within 65 days of its first consideration upon finding that the proposal is
consistent with the applicable standards set forth in the Watershed Protection
Ordinance, and the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The use will not endanger the public health or safety, if
located where proposed and developed according to the plan as submitted and
approved;
         (b)   The use minimizes impacts to water quality through the best
management practices, cluster development and/or maximum setbacks from
perennial waters;
         (c)   The use is vital to the continued growth and economic
development of the town; and
         (d)   The use is consistent with the officially adopted land
development plans for the town.
      (2)    If the Town Council finds that any one of the above conditions is
not met, the Board shall deny the application.
   (F)   In addition to any other requirements provided by this subchapter, the
Board may designate additional permit conditions and requirements to assure
that the use will be harmonious with the area in which it is proposed to be
located and with the spirit of this chapter.
      (1)   All additional conditions shall be entered in the minutes of the
meeting at which the permit is granted, on all plans and on the permit
certificate.
      (2)   All conditions so imposed shall run with the land and shall be
binding upon the applicant and the applicant’s heirs, successors or assigns
during the continuation of the permitted use.
   (G)   The Board shall issue a written ruling and make copies available at
the office of the Watershed Administrator and the Town Clerk.
      (1)   If the Board approves the application based on its findings, such
approval shall be indicated on the permit and all copies of the site plan and
all copies of the plans and specifications of the storm water control structure
(s).
      (2)   A high density development permit shall be issued after the
applicant posts a performance bond or other acceptable security as required in
§
152.123(B)(1) and executes an operation and maintenance agreement as required
in §
152.123(C).
      (3)   A copy of the permit and one copy of each set of plans shall be
kept on file at the Watershed Administrator’s office.
      (4)   The original permit and one copy of each set of plans shall be
delivered to the applicant either by personal service or registered mail,
return receipt requested.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.122 STORM WATER CONTROL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   All storm water control structures shall be designed by a state
registered professional engineer. Other storm water systems shall be designed
by a state registered professional with qualifications appropriate for the type
of system required; these registered professionals are defined as professional
engineers or landscape architects, to the extent that the G.S. Ch. 89A allow
and land surveyors, to the extent that the design represents incidental
drainage within a subdivision, as provided in G.S. § 89C-3(7).
   (B)   All storm water controls shall use wet detention ponds as a primary
treatment system, unless alternative storm water management measures, as
outlined in division (C) below, are used. Wet detention ponds shall be designed
for specific pollutant removal according to modeling techniques approved by the
State Division of Environmental Management. Specific requirements for these
systems shall be in accordance with the following design criteria:
      (1)   Wet detention ponds shall be designed to remove 85% of total
suspended solids in the permanent pool and storage runoff from a one-inch
rainfall from the site above the permanent pool;
      (2)   The designed runoff storage volume shall be above the permanent
pool;
      (3)   The discharge rate from these systems following the one-inch
rainfall design storm shall be such that the runoff does not draw down to the
permanent pool level in less than two days and that the pond is drawn down to
the permanent pool level within at least five days;
      (4)   The mean permanent pool depth shall be a minimum of three feet;
      (5)   The inlet structure shall be designed to minimize turbulence using
baffles or other appropriate design features;
      (6)   Vegetative filters shall be constructed for the overflow and
discharge of all storm water wet detention ponds and shall be at least 30 feet
in length. The slope and width of the vegetative filter shall be determined so
as to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow through the filter for a ten-year,
24-hour storm with a ten-year, one-hour intensity with a slope of 5% or less.
Vegetation in the filter shall be natural vegetation, grasses or artificially
planted wetland vegetation appropriate for the site characteristics; and
      (7)   All storm water control structures shall be enclosed by a fence
with a minimum height of six feet.
   (C)   Alternative storm water management systems, consisting of one
treatment option or a combination of treatment options, may be used, The design
criteria for approval shall be 85% average annual removal of total suspended
solids. Also, the discharge rate shall meet one of the following criteria:
      (1)   The discharge rate following the one-inch design storm shall be
such that the runoff draws down to the pre-storm design stage within five days,
but not less than two days; or
      (2)   The post development peak discharge rate shall equal the pre-
development rate for the one-year, 24-hour storm.
   (D)   In addition to the vegetative filters required in division (B)(6)
above, all land areas outside of the pond shall be provided with a ground cover
sufficient to restrain erosion within 30 days after any land disturbance. Upon
completion of the storm water control structure, a permanent ground cover shall
be established and maintained as part of the maintenance agreement described in
§
152.123(C).
   (E)   A description of the area containing the storm water control structure
shall be prepared and filed consistent with §
152.126(A) and (B), as a separate deed with the County Register of Deeds along
with any easements necessary for general access to the storm water control
structure. The deeded area shall include the storm water control structure,
vegetative filters, all pipes and water control structures, berms, dikes and
the like, and sufficient area to perform inspections, maintenance, repairs and
reconstruction.
   (F)   Qualifying areas of the storm water control structure may be
considered pervious when computing total built-upon area; however, if the
structure is used to compute the percentage built-upon area for one site, it
shall not be used to compute the built-upon area for any other site or area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.123 POSTING OF FINANCIAL SECURITY REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally. All new storm water control structures shall be conditioned
on the posting of adequate financial assurance for the purpose of maintenance,
reconstruction or repairs necessary for adequate performance of the storm water
control structures.
   (B)   Financial assurance. Financial assurance shall be in the form of the
following:
      (1)   Security performance bond or other security. The permit applicant
shall obtain either a performance bond from a surety bonding company authorized
to do business in the state, an irrevocable letter of credit or other
instrument readily convertible into cash at face value payable to the town or
placed in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official
depository of the town. The bond or other instrument shall be in an amount
equal to one and one-quarter times the total cost of the storm water control
structure, as estimated by the applicant and approved by the town. The total
cost of the storm water control structure shall include the value of all
materials such as piping and other structures; seeding and soil stabilization;
design and engineering; and, grading, excavation, fill and the like. The costs
shall not be prorated as part of a larger project, but rather under the
assumption of an independent mobilization.
      (2)   Cash or equivalent security deposited after the release of the
performance bond. Consistent with §
152.126(C)(l), the permit applicant shall deposit with the town either cash or
other instrument approved by the Town Attorney that is readily convertible into
cash at face value. The cash or security shall be in an amount equal to 15% of
the total cost of the storm water control structure or the estimated cost of
maintaining the storm water control structure over a ten-year period, whichever
is greater. The estimated cost of maintaining the storm water control structure
shall be consistent with the approved operation and maintenance plan or manual
provided by the developer under §
152.124(A). The amount shall be computed by estimating the maintenance cost for
25 years and multiplying this amount by two fifths or 0.4.
   (C)   Operation and maintenance agreement. Consistent with §
152.121(G), the permit applicant shall enter into a binding operation and
maintenance agreement between the town and all interests in the development.
Said agreement shall require the owning entity to maintain, repair and, if
necessary, reconstruct the storm water control structure in accordance with the
operation and management plan or manual provided by the developer. The
operation and maintenance agreement shall be filed with the County Register of
Deeds by the Watershed Administrator.
   (D)   Default under the performance bond or other security. Upon default of
the permit applicant to complete and/or maintain the storm water control
structure as specifically provided in the performance bond or other security,
the town may obtain and use all or any portion of the funds necessary to
complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. The town shall
return any funds not spent in completing the improvements to the owning entity.
   (E)   Default under the cash security. Upon default of the owning entity to
maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the storm water control
structure in accordance with the operation and maintenance agreement, the town
shall obtain and use all or any portion of the cash security to make necessary
improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure of funds shall
only be made after exhausting all other reasonable remedies seeking the owning
entity to comply with the terms and conditions of the operation and maintenance
agreement. The town shall not return any of the deposited cash funds.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 5-3-2021)
§ 152.124 MAINTENANCE AND UPKEEP.
   (A)   An operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be provided by the
developer for each storm water control structure, indicating what operation and
maintenance actions are needed, what specific quantitative criteria will be
used for determining when those actions are to be taken and, consistent with
the operation and maintenance agreement, who is responsible for those actions.
The plan shall clearly indicate the steps that will be taken for restoring a
storm water control structure to design specifications if a failure occurs.
   (B)   Landscaping and grounds management shall be the responsibility of the
owning entity; however, vegetation shall not be established or allowed to
mature to the extent that the integrity of the control structure is diminished
or threatened, or to the extent of interfering with any easement to the storm
water control structure.
   (C)   Except for general landscaping and grounds management, the owning
entity shall notify the Watershed Administrator prior to any repair or
reconstruction of the storm water control structure. All improvements shall be
made consistent with the approved plans and specifications of the storm water
control structure and the operation and maintenance plan or manual. After
notification by the owning entity, the Town Engineer shall inspect the
completed improvements and shall inform the owning entity of any required
additions, changes or modifications and of the time period to complete said
improvements.
   (D)   Amendments to the plans and specifications of the storm water control
structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or manual shall be approved
by the Town Council. Proposed changes shall be prepared by a state registered
professional engineer and submitted to and reviewed by the Watershed
Administrator prior to consideration by the Town Council.
      (1)   If the Town Council approves the proposed changes, the owning
entity of the storm water control structure shall file sealed copies of the
revisions with the Office of the Watershed Administrator.
      (2)   If the Town Council disapproves the changes, the proposal may be
revised and resubmitted to the Town Council as a new proposal. If the proposal
has not been revised and is essentially the same as that already reviewed, it
shall be returned to the applicant.
   (E)   If the Town Council finds that the operation and maintenance plan or
manual is inadequate for any reason, the Board shall notify the owning entity
of any required changes and shall prepare and file copies of the revised
agreement with the County Register of Deeds, the Office of the Watershed
Administrator and the owning entity.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.125 APPLICATION AND INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   Processing and inspection fees shall be submitted in the form of a
check or money order made payable to the town. Applications shall be returned
if not accompanied by the required fee.
   (B)   A permit and inspection fee schedule, as approved by the town, shall
be posted in the Office of the Watershed Administrator.
   (C)   Inspection fees shall be valid for 60 days. An inspection fee shall be
required when improvements are made to the storm water control structure
consistent with §
152.124(C), except in the case when a similar fee has been paid within the last
60 days.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.126 INSPECTIONS AND RELEASE OF THE PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   The storm water control structure shall be inspected by the town,
after the owning entity notifies the Watershed Administrator that all work has
been completed. At this inspection, the owning entity shall provide:
      (1)   The signed deed, related easements and survey plat for the storm
water control structure ready for filing with the Register of Deeds; and
      (2)   A certification sealed by an engineer or landscape architect (to
the extent that the state statutes allow) stating that the storm water control
structure is complete and consistent with the approved plans and
specifications.
   (B)   The Watershed Administrator shall present the materials submitted by
the developer and the inspection report and recommendations to the Town Council
at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
      (1)   If the Town Council approves the inspection report and accepts the
certification, deed and easements, the town shall file the deed and easements
with the County Register of Deeds, release up to 75% of the value of the
performance bond or other security and issue and certificate of occupancy for
the storm water control structure.
      (2)   If deficiencies are found, the town shall direct that improvements
and inspections be made and documents corrected and submitted to the town.
   (C)   No sooner than one year after the filing date of the deed, easements
and maintenance agreement, the developer may petition the town to release the
remaining value of the performance bond or other security. Upon receipt of said
petition, the town shall inspect the storm water control structure to determine
whether the controls are performing as designed and intended. The Watershed
Administrator shall present the petition and findings to the Town Council.
      (1)   If the Town Council approves the report and accepts the petition,
the developer shall deposit with the town a cash amount equal to that described
in §
152.123(B)(2), after which the Town Council shall release the performance bond
or other security.
      (2)   If the Town Council does not accept the report and rejects the
petition, the town shall provide the developer with instructions to correct any
deficiencies and all steps necessary for the release of the performance bond or
other security.
   (D)   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any building within
the permitted development until the Town Council has approved the storm water
control structure, as provided in division (B) above.
   (E)   All storm water control structures shall be inspected at least on an
annual basis to determine whether the controls are performing as designed and
intended. Records of inspection shall be maintained on forms approved or
supplied by the State Division of Environmental Management. Annual inspections
shall begin within one year of filing date of the deed for the storm water
control structure.
   (F)   In the event the Watershed Administrator discovers the need for
corrective action or improvements, the Watershed Administrator shall notify the
owning entity of the needed improvements and the date by which the corrective
action is to be completed.
      (1)   All improvements shall be made consistent with the plans and
specifications of the storm water control structure and the operation and
maintenance plan or manual.
      (2)   After notification by the owning entity, the town shall inspect and
approve the completed improvements.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.127 EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall take effect and be in force on October 1, 1993.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
§ 152.140 PURPOSE AND LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the town’s authority
concerning the placement, construction and modification of wireless
telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   The town finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose
significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and
environment of the town and its inhabitants.
   (C)   The town also recognizes that facilitating the development of wireless
service technology can be an economic development asset and significant benefit
to the town and its residents.
   (D)   In order to ensure that the placement, construction or modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the town’s land use
policies, the town is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless
telecommunications facilities application and permit process.
   (E)   The intent of this subchapter is to minimize the negative impact of
wireless telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process
for review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive
review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health,
safety and welfare of the town.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.141 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Wireless Telecommunications
Subchapter for the Town of Rutherford College”.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.142 SEVERABILITY; SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, division or other
portion of this subchapter or any application thereof to any person or
circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, then
such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, division or other portion, or the
proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining
provisions of this subchapter, and all applications thereof, not having been
declared void, unconstitutional or invalid, shall remain in full force and
effect.
   (B)   Any special use permit issued under this subchapter shall be
comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled to be
invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent authority, or
is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be void in total, upon
determination by the town.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.143 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE. An accessory facility or structure serving
or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and
located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications
facilities, including, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment
storage sheds or cabinets.
   ANTENNA. A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. Such shall
include, but not be limited to radio, television, cellular, paging, personal
telecommunications services (PCS), microwave telecommunications and services
not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the town’s siting,
building and permitting authority.
   APPLICANT. Any wireless service provider submitting an application for a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
   APPLICATION. All necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant
submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
   CO-LOCATION. The use of a tower or structure to support antennae for the
provision of wireless services without increasing the height of the tower or
structure.
   COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY OR COMMERCIALLY IM PRACTICABLE. The inability to
perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce, the cause or
occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and
that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to
achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing
alone, shall not deem a situation to be COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABLE and shall not
render an act or the terms of an agreement COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION. An application that contains all information and/or
data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an
application.
   COUNCIL. The Rutherford College Town Council.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
   HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured from
the pre-existing grade level to the highest point on the tower or structure,
even if said highest point is an antenna or lightening protection device.
   NIER. Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock
company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest or
any other entity.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY. See definition for WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES, PWS, PERSONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR PCS.
Has the same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
   SITE, TELECOMMUNICATIONS. See definition for WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. The official document or permit by which an applicant is
allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted
or issued by the town.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina.
   STEALTH OR STEALTH TECHNOLOGY. Minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts
on the land, property, buildings and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding
and in generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless
telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and
physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially
impracticable under the facts and circumstances.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data
and other information by wire, radio frequency, light and other electronic or
electromagnetic systems.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE. A structure used in the provision of services
described in the definition of WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   TEMPORARY. Temporary in relation to all aspects and components of this
subchapter or something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90
days.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
      (1)   Includes a TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER and TOWER and TELECOMMUN-
ICATIONS SITE and PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (2)   A structure, facility or location designed, or intended to be used
as, or used to support, antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices.
This includes, without limit, towers of all types and kinds and structures that
employ camouflage technology, including, but not limited to, structures such as
a multi-story building, church steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other
structures that can be used to mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the
functional equivalent of such, including all related facilities such as
cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with the site.
      (3)   It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or
receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, 911, personal telecommunications
services, commercial satellite services, microwave services and services not
licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from the town's siting, building
and permitting authority, excluding those used exclusively for the town’s fire,
police or exclusively for private, non-commercial radio and television
reception and private citizen's bands, amateur radio and other similar non-
commercial telecommunications where the height of the facility is below the
height limits set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.144 OVERALL POLICY AND DESIRED GOALS FOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   In order to ensure that the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities protects the town’s health, safety,
public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the
community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life
specifically listed elsewhere in this subchapter, the town hereby adopts an
overall policy with respect to a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the
following goals:
   (A)   Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a special
use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities;
   (B)   Establishing a policy for reviewing and analyzing an application for,
and issuing, a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities
that is both fair and consistent;
   (C)   Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, alternatives to
constructing new towers, including, but not limited to, the co-location of
wireless telecommunications facilities and mitigating the visual effect of a
wireless telecommunications facility to extent not commercially impracticable;
   (D)   Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height
and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner,
including but not limited to the use of stealth technology or camouflage
techniques, to minimize adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land,
property, buildings and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in
generally the same area as the requested location of such wireless
telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least visually and
physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or commercially
impracticable under the facts and circumstances; and
   (E)   Assuring that any wireless telecommunications facilities are designed
and constructed so as to be structurally sound and otherwise safe.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.145 SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All applicants for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply
with the requirements set forth in this subchapter.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment is the officially designated agency or body
of the town to whom applications for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review,
analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting,
re-certifying or not re-certifying, or revoking special use permits for
wireless telecommunications facilities.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment may at its discretion delegate or designate
other official agencies of the town to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and
make recommendations to the Board of Adjustment with respect to the granting or
not granting, re-certifying or not re-certifying or revoking special use
permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   An application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the
person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the
information. The landowner, if different than the applicant, shall also sign
the application. At the discretion of the town, any false or misleading
statement in the application may subject the applicant to denial of the
application without further consideration or opportunity for correction.
   (C)   Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are
otherwise incomplete may be rejected by the town.
   (D)   The applicant shall include a statement in writing:
      (1)   The applicant’s proposed wireless telecommunications facilities
shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of
the special use permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief
by the town in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes,
ordinances and regulations, including any and all applicable town, state and
federal laws, rules and regulations; and
      (2)   The construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is
legally permissible, including, but not limited to, the fact that the applicant
is authorized to do business in the state.
   (E)   No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or
constructed until the application is reviewed and approved by the town, and the
special use permit has been issued.
   (F)   No tower owner or manager shall be permitted to submit an application
for a special use permit for a tower if the tower owner does not have a signed
agreement committing a commercial service provider to occupy space on the
tower.
   (G)   All applications for the construction or installation of new wireless
telecommunications facilities shall contain the information hereinafter set
forth.
      (1)   An authorized individual on behalf of the applicant shall sign the
application.
      (2)   Where a certification is called for, such certification shall bear
the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state.
      (3)   The application shall include the following information:
         (a)   Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless
telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and essentially within
the town. Such documentation shall include, but may not be limited to,
propagation studies of the proposed site and all existing, adjoining and
proposed sites;
         (b)   The name, address and phone number of the person responsible for
preparing the application;
         (c)   The name, address and phone number of the property owner,
service provider or operator, and the actual applicant, and to include the
legal form of the applicant;
         (d)   The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
         (e)   The zoning district or designation in which the property is
situated;
         (f)   Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines;
         (g)   The location of nearest residential structure;
         (h)   The location, size and height of all structures on the property
which is the subject of the application;
         (i)   The location, size and height of all proposed and existing
antennae and all appurtenant structures;
         (j)   The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping, and fencing;
         (k)   The number, type and design of the tower(s) and antenna(s)
proposed and the basis for the calculations of the tower’s capacity to
accommodate multiple users;
         (l)   The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and antenna(s);
         (m)   A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all
related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height
above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting;
         (n)   The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment;
         (o)   The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective
radiated power of the antenna(s);
         (p)   Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s);
         (q)   Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are
within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
         (r)   Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with other telecommunications devices;
         (s)   A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
         (t)   Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted, and that taking into account the subsurface and
substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, that the site is adequate to assure
the stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities on the
proposed site; and
         (u)   For a new tower, a narrative explaining how the proposed
facility is the least visually and physically intrusive means possible that is
neither commercially nor technically impracticable, along with a photographic
or other graphic representations of the proposed facility in color as may be
deemed necessary.
   (H)   In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit
a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of
existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or other structures
within the town. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall
be provided to the town in the application, along with any letters of rejection
stating the reason for rejection.
   (I)   The applicant shall certify that the wireless telecommunication
facility, foundation and attachments are designed and will be constructed to
meet all local, town, state and federal structural requirements for loads,
including wind and ice loads.
   (J)   The applicant shall certify that the wireless telecommunications
facilities will be effectively grounded and bonded so as to protect persons and
property and installed with appropriate surge protectors.
   (K)   An applicant may be required to submit an environmental assessment
analysis and a visual addendum. Based on the results of the analysis, including
the visual addendum, the town may require submission of a more detailed visual
analysis. The scope of the required environmental and visual assessment will be
reviewed at the pre-application meeting.
   (L)   The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall
include:
      (1)   A “zone of visibility map” which shall be provided in order to
determine locations from which the tower may be seen;
      (2)   Pictorial representations of “before and after” views from key
viewpoints both inside and outside of the town as may be appropriate,
including, but not limited to, state highways and other major roads; state and
local parks; other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic
sites normally open to the public; and from any other location where the site
is visible to a large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will
be provided, concerning the appropriate key viewpoints at a pre-application
meeting;
      (3)   An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires and
accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as
relates to the need or appropriateness of screening; and
      (4)   The base of the tower, any guy wires, and any associated
structures, walls or fences shall be surrounded by a landscaped buffer. A ten-
foot buffer shall be provided between the tower and the property boundaries in
all zones other than residential. In all residential zones, the buffer shall be
a minimum of 25 feet in width. The planting shall consist of deciduous or
evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs. The trees shall be planted along the full
length of the buffer strip in a triangular pattern with a maximum spacing of 25
feet on centers. The minimum height at planting for trees shall be six feet and
they shall have an expected minimum maturity height of 35 feet under normal
growing conditions. There shall also be one row of dense shrubs, spaced not
more than eight feet on centers. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet high at
planting and shall have a minimum expected maturity height of eight feet under
normal growing conditions. It is the intent of this subchapter to encourage the
use of existing vegetation in whole or in part to substantially meet this
requirement.
   (M)   The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by
drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related
facilities and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications
facilities.
   (N)   Any and all representations made by the applicant to the town on the
record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be
deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good faith by the
town.
   (O)   All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall
be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, sections, rules and
regulations of the town, including specifically, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where
appropriate.
   (P)   All applications shall contain a demonstration that the facility be
sited so as to have the least visually intrusive effect reasonably possible and
thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and the nature
and character of the community, on existing vegetation, and on the residences
in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility.
   (Q)   Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all
accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building
materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it
may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings; this shall
include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may required by
the town to the extent that it is not commercially impracticable or technically
impracticable.
   (R)   At a wireless telecommunications site, an access road, turn around
space and parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service
access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made
to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow
natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
   (S)   A person holding a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, provide for removal of,
modify or restore the permitted wireless telecommunications facilities in
strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safety-
related codes adopted by the town, state or United States, including, but not
limited to, the most recent editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and
the National Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices and recommended practices of the National Association of
Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that include, but are not
limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety, health and land
use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any of the preceding the
more stringent shall apply.
   (T)   A holder of a special use permit granted under this subchapter shall
obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable
law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and
effect, for as long as required by the town or other governmental entity or
agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
   (U)   An applicant shall submit to the town the number of completed
applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. Written
notification of the application shall be provided to the legislative body of
all adjacent municipalities and counties and to the town Planning Department.
   (V)   If a new tower is proposed, the application shall contain a commitment
to design and construct the tower to accommodate at least five additional
commercial applications or service providers, assuming antenna arrays
equivalent to those of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant’s
antenna as possible without causing interference. This requirement may be
waived, provided that the applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the
provisions of future shared use of the tower is not technologically feasible,
is commercially impracticable or creates an unnecessary and unreasonable
burden, based upon:
      (1)   The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
      (2)   The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and
structure proposed;
      (3)   The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless
telecommunications facilities spaces/sites; and
      (4)   Available space on existing and approved towers.
   (W)   The owner of the proposed new tower, and his or her successors in
interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed
tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall:
      (1)   Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a
potential shared-use applicant;
      (2)   Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use
of the new tower by other telecommunications providers, including a reasonable
rate of compensation; and
      (3)   Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications
provider agrees in writing to pay a reasonable rate of compensation. The rate
may include, but not be limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site
selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation and
all of the costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared
user without causing electromagnetic interference.
      (4)   Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds
for revocation of the special use permit for the tower.
   (X)   There shall be a site visit, if there has not been a prior site visit
for the requested site in the preceding 12 months, and a pre-application
meeting, both of which shall be prior to the submittal of any application, the
purpose of which shall be to address issues which will help expedite the review
and permitting process and any concerns regarding the site or the facility and
the treatment of such. Costs of the town’s consultants to prepare for and
attend the pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant.
   (Y)   The holder of a special use permit shall notify the town of any
intended modification of a wireless telecommunication facility and shall apply
to the town to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless telecommunications
facility.
   (Z)   In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new
telecommunication tower, the applicant shall, prior to the public hearing on
the application, hold a “balloon test”.
      (1)   The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast,
a minimum of a three-foot in diameter brightly colored balloon at the maximum
height of the proposed new tower.
      (2)   The dates, (including a second date, in case of poor visibility on
the initial date) times and location of this balloon test shall be advertised
by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a
newspaper with a general circulation in the town.
      (3)   The applicant shall inform the town, in writing, of the dates and
times of the test, at least 14 days in advance.
      (4)   The balloon test shall be flown for at least four consecutive hours
sometime between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen.
      (5)   The primary date shall be on a weekend, but to prevent delays in
the processing of the application, in case of poor weather on the initial date,
the secondary date may be on a weekday.
   (AA)   The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed
by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the tower or
existing structure intended to support wireless facilities requires lighting
under Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77. This requirement
shall be for any new tower or for an existing structure or building where the
application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis
determines that the FAA must be contacted, then all filings with the FAA, all
responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided in a
timely manner.
   (BB)   Applications shall be submitted in a three-ring binder. The
application shall contain a table of contents, which shall list each section,
subsection and the issue required to be addressed. Requests for waiver shall be
clearly set forth and indicated in the table of contents, with an explanation
for the request for waiver contained in the appropriate section of the
application. Each issue or matter addressed in the ordinance that requires a
response shall be set forth in a separate section, i.e., tab, in the
application, including requests for waiver.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.146 LOCATION OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   To protect the visual qualities of the center of the town and to
protect public safety, new towers shall be prohibited from the following areas:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of each side of Malcolm Boulevard for the area
beginning north of I-40 and extending to Talmon Street; and
      (2)   Within a 1,000 feet zone of the school property located on
Honeycutt Drive.
   (B)   Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate,
site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with
the following priorities, one being the highest priority and six being the
lowest priority.
      (1)   On existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height of the tower or structure;
      (2)   On town-owned properties;
      (3)   On properties in areas zoned General Manufacturing;
      (4)   On properties in areas zoned Highway Business;
      (5)   On properties in areas zoned Office-Institutional;
      (6)   On properties in areas zoned Central Business; and
      (7)   On properties in areas zoned Residential.
   (C)   If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed
above, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must
satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be
granted for the proposed site and the hardship that would be incurred by the
applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site.
   (D)   An applicant may not defend or justify bypassing sites of a higher
priority by claiming the site proposed is the only site leased or selected. All
applications shall address co-location as an option. If such option is not
proposed, the applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the town
why co-location is commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between
providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis for
any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the above, the town may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the town finds
that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the town and its inhabitants and will not have a negative effect on
the nature and character of the community and neighborhood.
   (F)   The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority, demonstrating
the technological reason for the site selection. If appropriate, based on
selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why
sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the
application.
   (G)   Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of
highest priority or highest available priority, the town may disapprove an
application for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
      (2)   Conflict with the historic nature or character of the community, a
neighborhood or a historical district;
      (3)   The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities
which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use
designation;
      (4)   The placement and location of wireless telecommunications
facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable
probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the
town, or employees of the service provider or other service providers; and/or
      (5)   Conflicts with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.147 SHARED USE OF FACILITIES AND OTHER STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Locating on existing towers or others structures without increasing
the height shall be preferred by the town, as opposed to the construction of a
new tower. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying
existing towers and other functionally suitable structures within four miles of
the location of any proposed new tower, unless the applicant can show that some
other distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing
tower or other suitable structure cannot be used.
   (B)   An application to co-locate on an existing tower or other suitable
structure shall contain proof of the intent of the existing owner to permit its
use by the applicant.
   (C)   Such shared use shall consist of only the minimum antenna array
technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within
the town, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.148 HEIGHT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER(S).
   (A)   The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height
of any tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefore. Such
documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the
height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the town, to
the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
   (B)   Unless otherwise granted relief or a waiver, the maximum permitted
height of a new tower shall be no taller than the applicant service provider
can prove is the minimum height necessary to provide service primarily to
provide a balanced link (both up and down link) service in the area of no
service. Such proof shall be provided using RF propagation studies showing the
height of attachment of the array, the ERP (effective radiated power) stated in
watts, the direction or azimuth of each of the maximum lobes, any designed or
intended pitch or down-tilt of any of the sector panels. At a minimum an
applicant for a tower shall provide one set of RF propagation studies on clear
acetate overly showing all existing sites adjacent to the search ring that
shows the gap in coverage. Another set of propagation studies shall be provided
showing the lowest height at which service can be provided in the search ring
and another set shall be provided computed at ten feet below the minimum height
necessary to provide service in the search ring. The town retains the right to
determine the adequacy of the needed information provided as regards the
determination of need for the requested height.
   (C)   No tower constructed after the effective date of this chapter,
including allowing for all attachments, shall exceed that height which shall
permit operation without required artificial lighting of any kind as may be
required by municipal, county, state and/or any federal statute, law,
ordinance, code, rule or regulation.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.149 APPEARANCE AND VISIBILITY OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially
lighted or marked, except as required by law.
   (B)   Towers shall be galvanized and painted with a rust-preventive paint of
an appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained
in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter and any conditions of
the special use permit.
   (C)   If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.150 SECURITY OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located,
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access.
Specifically:
   (A)   All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in
such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with.
   (B)   Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed
such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to
operate or service them.
   (C)   The base of tower facilities shall be enclosed by a decay resistant
security fence or wall at least eight feet in height unless the tower and all
guy anchors are mounted entirely on a limited access building at least eight
feet in height.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.151 SIGNAGE.
   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than
four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the
immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities
and shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s)
as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment
shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the
site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. The sign
shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation requires
lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted, unless
required by applicable law, rule or regulation.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.152 LOT SIZE AND SETBACKS.
   (A)   All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications
facility support structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded
rights-of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following
distances: a distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless
telecommunications facility structure plus 10% of the height of the tower or
structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning
district, whichever is greater.
   (B)   Any accessory structure shall be located so as to comply with the
applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on which it is
situated.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.153 RETENTION OF EXPERT ASSISTANCE AND REIMBURSEMENT BY APPLICANT.
   (A)   The town may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the
town in reviewing, analyzing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for
re-certification.
   (B)   An applicant shall deposit with the town funds sufficient to reimburse
the town for all reasonable costs of a consultant and any expert evaluation and
consultation to the town in connection with the review of any application,
including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted. The
initial deposit shall be $7,500, which deposit is not a fee. The placement of
the $7,500 with the town shall precede the pre-application site visit and
meeting. The town will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds.
Consultants shall invoice the town for services in reviewing the application,
including the construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and
the town shall use this escrow to pay the consultant.
   (C)   If at any time during the process the escrow account has a balance
less than $2,500, the applicant shall immediately, upon notification by the
town, replenish said escrow account so that it has a balance of at least
$5,000. Such additional escrow funds shall be deposited with the town before
any further action or consideration is taken on the application. In the event
that the amount held in escrow by the town is more than the amount of the
actual invoicing at the conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall
be promptly refunded to the applicant.
   (D)   The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in division (B)
above may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the completeness
of the application and other information as may be needed to complete the
necessary review, analysis and inspection of any construction or modification.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.154 EXCEPTIONS FROM A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR FACILITIES.
   (A)   As of the effective date of this chapter, no person shall be permitted
to site, place, build, construct, modify or prepare any site for the placement
or use of wireless telecommunications facilities without having first obtained
a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subchapter, no special use
permit shall be required for those non-commercial exceptions noted in the
definition of wireless telecommunications facilities in §
152.143.
   (B)   All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the
effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue as they presently
exist; provided however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility must comply with this subchapter, including making
application for such modification.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.155 PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prior to the approval of any application for a special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities, a public hearing shall be held by the
town, notice of which shall be published in the official newspaper of the town
no less than ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public
hearing. In order that the town may notify nearby landowners, the application
shall contain the names and address of all landowners whose property is located
within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new
wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to be located.
   (B)   There shall be no public hearing required for an application to co-
locate on an existing tower or other structure, as long as there is no proposed
increase in the height of the tower or structure, including attachments
thereto.
   (C)   The town shall schedule the public hearing referred to in division (A)
above once it finds the application is complete, and the town, at any stage
prior to issuing a special use permit, may require such additional information
as is deemed reasonable necessary for an informed determination and decision to
be made.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.156 ACTION ON AN APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR FACILITIES.
   (A)   The town will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this
subchapter in a timely fashion, and shall act within a reasonable period of
time given the relative complexity of the application and the circumstances
involved, with due regard for the public’s interest and need to be involved,
and the applicant’s desire for a timely resolution.
   (B)   The town may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory or
other committee for a non-binding recommendation.
   (C)   After the public hearing and after formally considering the
application, the town may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special
use permit. In a case involving co-location, conditions of the special use
permit may be addressed as an administrative procedure not requiring Board
action. The decision to grant or not grant a special use permit shall be in
writing and shall be supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record. The burden of proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon
the applicant.
   (D)   If the town approves the special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such
approval in writing within ten calendar days of the town’s action, and the
special use permit shall be issued within 30 days after such approval. Except
for necessary building permits and subsequent certificates of compliance, once
a special use permit has been granted hereunder, no additional permits or
approvals from the town, such as site plan or zoning approvals, shall be
required by the town for the wireless telecommunications facilities covered by
the special use permit.
   (E)   If the town denies the special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of such
denial in writing within ten calendar days of the town’s action.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.157 RE-CERTIFICATION OF A SPECIAL USE PERMIT FOR FACILITIES.
   (A)   Between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year anniversary
date after the effect date of the special use permit and all subsequent five-
year anniversaries of the effective date of the original special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities, the holder of a special use permit for
such wireless telecommunication facilities shall submit a signed written
request to the town for re-certification. In the written request for re-
certification, the holder of such special use permit shall note the following:
      (1)   The name of the holder of the special use permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities;
      (2)   If applicable, the number or title of the special use permit;
      (3)   The date of the original grant of the special use permit;
      (4)   Whether the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved,
re-located, rebuilt or otherwise visibly modified since the issuance of the
special use permit and if so, in what manner;
      (5)   If the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved, re-
located, rebuilt or otherwise visibly modified, then whether the town approved
such action, and under what terms and conditions, and whether those terms and
conditions were complied with;
      (6)   That the wireless telecommunications facilities are in compliance
with the special use permit and compliance with all applicable codes, laws,
rules and regulations; and
      (7)   Re-certification that the tower and attachments both are designed
and constructed and continue to meet all municipal, county, state and federal
structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads. Such re-
certification shall be by a professional engineer licensed in the state, the
cost of which shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   If, after such review, the town determines that the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities are in compliance with the special use permit and
all applicable statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations, then the town issue a re-certification of the special use permit
for the wireless telecommunications facilities, which may include any new
provisions or conditions that are mutually agreed upon, or that are required by
applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations. If, after
such review, it is determined that the permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities are not in compliance with the special use permit and all applicable
statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, then the town may
refuse to issue a re- certification special use permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities, and in such event, such wireless
telecommunications facilities shall not be used after the date that the
applicant receives written notice of the decision by the town until such time
as the facility is brought into compliance. Any decision requiring the
cessation of use of the facility or imposing a penalty shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record and shall be
promptly provided to the owner of the facility.
   (C)   If the applicant has submitted all of the information requested and
required by this subchapter, and if the review is not completed, as noted in
division (B) above, prior to the five-year anniversary date of the special use
permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries, then the applicant for the
permitted wireless telecommunications facilities shall receive an extension of
the special use permit for up to six months, in order for the completion of the
review.
   (D)   If the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities does not submit a request for re-certification of such special use
permit within the time frame noted in division (A) above, then such special use
permit and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease to exist on the
date of the fifth anniversary of the original granting of the special use
permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries, unless the holder of the special
use permit adequately demonstrates that extenuating circumstances prevented a
timely re-certification request. If the town agrees that there were
legitimately extenuating circumstances, then the holder of the special use
permit may submit a late re-certification request or application for a new
special use permit.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.158 EXTENT AND PARAMETERS OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be as follows:
   (A)   Such special use permit shall be non-exclusive.
   (B)   Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed
without the express prior written notification to the town.
   (C)   Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice
to the applicant, be revoked, canceled or terminated for a violation of the
conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material
violation of this subchapter after prior written notice to the holder of the
special use permit.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.159 APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   At the time that a person submits an application for a special use
permit for a new tower, such person shall pay a non-refundable application fee
of $5,000 to the town. If the application is for a special use permit for co-
locating on an existing tower or other suitable structure, where no increase in
height of the tower or structure is required, the non-refundable fee shall be
$2,500.
   (B)   No application fee is required in order to rectify a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless there has been a
visible modification of the wireless telecommunications facility since the date
of the issuance of the existing special use permit for which the conditions of
the special use permit have not previously been modified. In the case of any
modification, the fees provided in division (A) above shall apply.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.160 PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
   (A)   The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities property site shall, at their cost and expense,
be required, jointly if appropriate, to execute and file with the town a bond
or other form of security acceptable to the town as to type of security and the
form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000 and with such
sureties as are deemed sufficient by the town to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this subchapter and conditions of
any special use permit issued pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and
effect throughout the term of the initial special use permit. Either the
continuation of the same security or the placement of a new one will be
required as part of the required re-certification and each period of re-
certification thereafter, unless the town, in writing, permits a reduction in
the amount or its elimination. The security for the last period of re-
certification shall remain in effect until any necessary site restoration is
completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which existed
prior to the issuance of the original special use permit.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.161 RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY TO INSPECT FACILITIES.
   In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees, renters and/or licensees
of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct such facilities,
including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable technical,
safety, fire, building and zoning codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and
other applicable requirements, the town may inspect all facets of said permit
holder’s, renter’s, lessee’s or licensee’s placement, construction,
modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but not limited to,
towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed or located on
the permitted site.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.162 ANNUAL NIER CERTIFICATION.
   The holder of the special use permit shall, annually, certify to the town
that NIER levels at the site are within the threshold levels adopted by the
FCC.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.163 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance
for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance
coverage, for the duration of the special use permit in amounts as set forth
below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and
property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
      (2)   Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate; and
      (3)   Workers compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
   (B)   The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the town and its officers, boards, employees, committee members,
attorneys, agents and consultants as additional named insured.
   (C)   The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best’s
rating of at least “A”.
   (D)   The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the town with at least 30 days prior written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
   (E)   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to
the town at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such
policies are to renew or replace.
   (F)   Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of
the special use permit or any re-certification of the special use permit, the
holder of the special use permit shall deliver to the town a copy of each of
the policies or certificates representing the insurance in the required
amounts.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.164 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is
proposed for town property, pursuant to this subchapter, shall contain a
provision with respect to indemnification.
      (1)   Such provision shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted
by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless and
exempt the town, and its officers, boards, employees, committee members,
attorneys, agents and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs or
charges arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action or
award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising
therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused
by, the placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products
performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal or restoration of said facility, excepting, however, any portion of
such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of damages as may be
attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the town, or
its servants or agents.
      (2)   With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced
herein, reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultants’ fees and expert witness fees
are included in those costs that are recoverable by the town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the requirements noted in division (A) above, an
indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the
town itself applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.165 DEFAULT AND/OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   If wireless telecommunications facilities are repaired, rebuilt,
placed, moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent
or not in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter or of the special
use permit, then the town shall notify the holder of the special use permit in
writing of such violation. Such notice shall specify the nature of the
violation or noncompliance and that the violations must be corrected within
seven days of the date of the postmark of the notice, or of the date of
personal service of the notice, whichever is earlier. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in this section or any other section of this subchapter, if the
violation causes, creates or presents an imminent danger or threat to the
health or safety of lives or property, the town may, at its sole discretion,
order the violation remedied within 24 hours.
   (B)   If, within the period set forth in division (A) above, the wireless
telecommunications facilities are not brought into compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, or of the special use permit, or substantial
steps are not taken in order to bring the affected wireless telecommunications
facilities into compliance, then the town may revoke such special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities, and shall notify the holder of the
special use permit within 48 hours of such action.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.166 REMOVAL OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Under the following circumstances, the town may determine that the
health, safety and welfare interests of the town warrant and require the
removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
      (1)   Wireless telecommunications facilities with a special use permit
have been abandoned (i.e., not used as wireless telecommunications facilities)
for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-
day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which
case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days.
      (2)   Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a
state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard.
      (3)   Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located,
constructed or modified without first obtaining, the required special use
permit or modification thereof, or any other necessary authorization.
   (B)   If the town makes such a determination as noted in division (A) above,
then the town shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the
wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless
telecommunications facilities are to be removed, the town may approve an
interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the
wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (C)   The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns,
shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all
associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as
close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited
only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of
written notice from the town; however, if the owner of the property upon which
the wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any
access roadway to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do
so with the approval of the town.
   (D)   If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or
substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the holder of the special
use permit has received notice, then the town may order officials or
representatives of the town to remove the wireless telecommunications
facilities at the sole expense of the owner or special use permit holder.
   (E)   If, the town removes, or causes to be removed, wireless
telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless telecommunications
facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location
within ten days, then the town may take steps to declare the wireless
telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything in this subchapter to the contrary, the town
may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless
telecommunications facilities, for no more 90 days, during which time a
suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be developed by the holder of the special
use permit, subject to the approval of the town, and an agreement to such plan
shall be executed by the holder of the special use permit and the town. If such
a plan is not developed, approved and executed within the 90-day time period,
then the town may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless
telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.167 RELIEF.
   Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or
requirement of this subchapter may request such at the pre-application meeting,
provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the original application
for either a special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously
granted special use permit a request for modification of its tower and/or
facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete;
however, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or
exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all
costs of the town in considering the request and the relief, waiver or
exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant
demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the relief,
waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and
welfare of the town, its residents and other service providers.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.168 PERIODIC REGULATORY REVIEW BY THE TOWN.
   (A)   The town may at any time conduct a review and examination of this
entire subchapter.
   (B)   If after such a periodic review and examination of this subchapter,
the town determines that one or more provisions of this subchapter should be
amended, repealed, revised, clarified or deleted, then the town may take
whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable law in order to
accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best
interests of the town, the town may repeal this entire subchapter at any time.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above, the
town may at any time, and in any manner (to the extent permitted by federal,
state or local law), amend, add, repeal and/or delete one or more provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.169 ADHERENCE TO STATE AND/OR FEDERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt,
from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the
holder of such a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all
applicable rules, regulations, standards and provisions of any state or federal
agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically
included in this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height,
lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards.
   (B)   To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to, the
FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding
height, lighting and security are changed and/or are modified during the
duration of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities,
then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform the permitted
wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or
modified rule, regulation, standard or provision within a maximum of 24 months
of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing
entity.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.170 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Where this subchapter differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and
regulations, unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the town,
state or federal government, this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.171 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the
state and federal government.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 152.185 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is:
   (A)   To preserve the natural environment by allowing signs which are
consistent with an attractive town appearance;
   (B)   To provide for the safety of vehicular traffic by limiting visual
interference;
   (C)   To protect the general public from injury caused by distracting and/or
improperly placed signs;
   (D)   To promote the general welfare of the town by providing a pleasing
environmental setting; and
   (E)   To protect property values and to promote the economic welfare of the
town by encouraging visually appealing, non-distracting forms of information
transfer.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.186 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   No sign shall be constructed, enlarged, moved, replaced or altered
until a zoning permit has been issued by the zoning enforcement officer, except
for those signs specifically permitted in zoning districts without a zoning
permit.
   (B)   All signs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the North Carolina Building Code and North Carolina
Electrical Code and shall obtain applicable permits prior to construction.
   (C)   The Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall order the
immediate removal of any signs or supporting structures that are not
constructed or maintained safely in good repair in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter or in accordance with the applicable provisions
of the North Carolina Building Code.
   (D)   Unauthorized signs posted in the public right-of-way may be removed by
any member of the town staff or the zoning enforcement officer without notice.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.187 DEFINITION.
   (A)   Any structure, object, device or part thereof which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images.
   (B)   SIGNS do not include the flag or emblem of any nation, state, city or
any fraternal, religious or civic organizations, works of art which in no way
identify an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, or scoreboards located on athletic
fields.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.188 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any sign existing on the effective date of this subchapter which does not
conform to the requirements set forth herein will be allowed to remain if in
good repair but shall not be changed to another nonconforming sign. If a
nonconforming sign is altered, removed, moved or changed in any way, the sign
shall be brought into compliance with the regulations of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.189 REMOVAL OF TEMPORARY OBSOLETE SIGNS.
   Temporary signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the termination of
the advertised events. Property owners shall be responsible for the removal of
obsolete signs.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.190 MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA.
   (A)   The area of a sign shall be measured to include the entire sign,
including its display area, frame, border, incidental decoration and foundation
of any kind except a pole.
   (B)   Where a sign consists of letters, figures or other devices
individually mounted to a building wall, the sign area shall be the smallest
circle or rectangle that can be inscribed around the sign.
   (C)   Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be included in calculating
the display area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.191 SIGN LOCATION.
   (A)   For roadways maintained by the town the minimum setback for all new
signs shall be ten feet as measured from the outer edge of the road. If an
existing right-of-way is present that is equal to or exceeds ten feet, all new
signs must be placed just outside of the established right-of-way area.
   (B)   For applicants seeking a sign permit along a state or federal road it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain in writing from the
State Department of Transportation information on the width of the right-of-way
area.
   (C)   In the absence of a right-of-way determination by the State Department
of Transportation on any state or federal maintained road or in the event a
dedicated right-of-way does not exist on a state or local road, newly permitted
signs must be placed outside or behind any existing utility pole.
   (D)   In the event a dedicated right-of-way for a state or federal road
cannot be determined and a utility pole is not present, the setback distance
for new signs shall be a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the roadway
pavement or outer edge of curbing.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.192 ILLUMINATION.
   Where permitted, illuminated signs may be either directly lit from inside
the sign or may have an indirect light source that shines on to the surface of
the sign. Any illuminated sign shall be so designed or placed so as to prevent
direct or reflected light from being cast upon adjacent properties, the public
right-of-way or the night sky. Flashing, blinking or pulsating signs shall not
be permitted except as part of a digital or LED (light emitting diode) sign.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.193 SIGN TYPES.
   (A)   Ground sign. A sign attached directly to the ground by means of one or
more upright pillars, braces, posts, poles or foundations placed directly upon
or in the ground and not attached to any part of the building. Ground signs
must conform to the following provisions:
      (1)   The maximum area for the sign is 80 square feet.
      (2)   No ground sign shall be more than 16 feet tall, measured from the
natural ground line to the top of the sign frame.
      (3)   The sign shall not be placed closer than ten feet from the right-
of-way line.
      (4)   Only one ground sign may be erected per building, regardless of the
number of tenants, except as provided for in §
152.194.
      (5)   The sign may be illuminated.
   (B)   Wall sign. A sign attached or painted directly on the building wall,
generally on the facade, with the exposed display surface of the sign in a
plane parallel to the wall. Wall signs must conform to the following
provisions:
      (1)   The maximum area for the sign is one square foot per lineal foot of
building frontage.
      (2)   No wall sign shall be mounted more than 20 feet above the natural
ground line.
      (3)   One or more wall signs may be used on a building, as long as the
total area of the signs does not exceed the maximum permitted.
      (4)   On multiple-occupancy buildings, each occupant with a separate
outside entrance serving the public may have a separate wall sign.
      (5)   No part of a wall sign shall extend more than 18 inches from the
wall.
      (6)   The sign may be illuminated.
   (C)   Projection sign. A hanging, suspended, shingle, blade or any other
type of sign that is mounted to and projects perpendicularly from a building
wall. Projection signs must conform to the following provisions:
      (1)   The maximum area for the sign is one square foot per lineal foot of
building frontage not exceeding 40 square feet.
      (2)   The sign shall not project more than four feet from the building.
      (3)   The sign shall not extend higher than three feet above the roof of
the building.
      (4)   The sign shall have nine or more feet of vertical clearance from
the ground or sidewalk level.
      (5)   The sign may be illuminated.
   (D)   Roof sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on the roof of a
building. Roof signs must conform to the following provisions:
      (1)   The maximum area for the sign is one square foot per lineal foot of
building frontage not exceeding 40 square feet.
      (2)   The sign shall be placed a minimum of five feet from the edge of
the roof.
      (3)   The sign shall not exceed six feet in height.
      (4)   Only one roof sign shall be permitted per business.
      (5)   The sign may be illuminated.
   (E)   Canopy sign. A sign painted or otherwise affixed directly to a canopy
or awning. The signage area shall not exceed 25 square feet. The sign shall
identify only the name of the business and logo and may be illuminated.
   (F)   Window sign. A sign directly attached to windows or doors. A business
may use one or more window signs but the total sign area shall not exceed 25%
of the glass area. The sign may be illuminated.
   (G)   Temporary sign. A sign that is not permanently installed in the ground
or affixed to any structure or building and designed to be mobile or movable.
This includes, but is not limited to, portable signs, sandwich boards, banners,
wire-frame signs or signs on parked vehicles. Temporary signs must conform to
the following provisions:
      (1)   The maximum area for the sign shall not exceed 25 square feet.
      (2)   The sign is allowed without a permit but must be located in
compliance with the provisions of §
152.191.
      (3)   The sign must remain in good repair at all times.
      (4)   No sign exceeding four square feet shall be placed closer than ten
feet to the right-of-way line. A sandwich board sign may be placed in on the
sidewalk; however, any person erecting such a sign shall indemnify and hold
harmless the town and its employees from any claims arising from the presence
of the sign in the right-of-way.
      (5)   The sign may be illuminated.
   (H)   Off-premises sign. A sign, billboard or other permanent outdoor
advertising structure that directs attention to a business, commodity or
service sold, conducted or offered at a location other than the premises on
which the sign is erected. Off-premises signs shall not be permitted in the
town, except signs identifying the location of a church or house of worship.
Such signs shall not exceed four square feet and may not be illuminated. The
continued use of existing off-site outdoor advertising signs shall be allowed
consistent with the provisions of division (G) above.
   (I)   Subdivision/group development sign. A sign used to identify the
entrance to a subdivision, planned unit development, apartment or townhouse
complex, or other group development. The area of the face of the sign shall not
exceed 36 square feet but may be mounted on a larger masonry wall. The sign may
be illuminated. There may be one sign on either side of the entrance.
   (J)   Home occupation sign.
      (1)   A sign used to identify the location of a home occupation, day care
or other business permitted in a residential zoning district.
      (2)   Home occupation signs must conform to the following provisions:
         (a)   The maximum area for the sign shall not exceed ten square feet
in area.
         (b)   The maximum height for the sign shall not exceed three feet.
         (c)   The sign may be ground- or wall-mounted. The sign may not be
illuminated.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.194 NUMBER AND TYPE OF PERMITTED SIGNS IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   A single-occupancy building in the C-B, O-I, H-B or G-M zoning
districts are permitted to choose three signs from the following list: ground,
wall, projection, canopy, window, roof or temporary. The selection of more than
one sign of each type is not permitted.
   (B)   Each business or entity in a multiple-occupancy building in the C-B,
O-I, H-B or G-M zoning districts are permitted to choose three signs from the
following list: ground (one per building), wall, projection, canopy, window,
roof or temporary. The selection of more than one sign of each type is not
permitted.
   (C)   In addition to the number of signs permitted in divisions (A) and (B)
above, a building in the C-B, O-I, H-B or G-M zoning districts, situated on a
corner lot or a lot bounded by more than one street shall be permitted to
choose one additional sign per building front from the following list: ground,
wall, projection, canopy, window, roof or temporary, provided that the
additional sign area does not exceed the sign area permitted for the building
front. Additional sign area shall be used specifically for the side or rear of
the building and may be illuminated.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.195 NUMBER AND TYPE OF PERMITTED SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Any church or school located in a residential zoning district is
permitted to choose three signs from the following list: ground, wall,
projection, canopy, window, roof or temporary. The selection of more than one
sign of each type is not permitted.
   (B)   In addition to the number of signs permitted in division (A) above, a
church or school situated on a corner lot or a lot bounded by more than one
street shall be permitted to choose one additional sign per building front from
the following list: ground, wall, projection, canopy, window, roof or
temporary, provided that the additional sign area does not exceed the sign area
permitted for the building front. Additional sign area shall be used
specifically for the side or rear of the building and may be illuminated.
   (C)   Any business located in a residential zoning district is permitted to
have one home occupation sign.
   (D)   A subdivision or group development is permitted one subdivision/group
development sign per entrance. Subdivision or group development signs shall not
be less than 800 feet apart if located on the same street.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.196 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The following signs are permitted in all zoning districts without a zoning
permit, provided they are kept in good condition, do not obstruct the
visibility of the traveling public, are not located in the public right-of-way
and comply with the provisions below:
   (A)   Any sign erected by a government agency to convey information about a
public facility or service or to regulate, control or direct vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. Such signs may be illuminated, flashing or moving as
necessary for public safety.
   (B)   Signs which warn of safety hazards. Such signs may be illuminated.
   (C)   One real estate sign per street frontage on property for sale, lease
or rent. The sign(s) shall be a maximum of four square feet in size in
residential zoning districts and 32 square feet in nonresidential zoning
districts. The sign(s) shall not be illuminated.
   (D)   Signs not exceeding four square feet in area. Such signs shall not be
illuminated.
   (E)   Construction site identification signs on active construction sites.
The sign(s) shall be a maximum of four square feet in size in residential
zoning districts and 32 square feet in nonresidential zoning districts. The
sign(s) shall not be illuminated and shall be removed within 30 days of the
completion of the project.
   (F)   Incidental signs not exceeding four square feet in size or three feet
in height if located closer than five feet from the right-of-way line. An
INCIDENTAL SIGN is defined as one which carries no advertising message, directs
traffic flow, indicates the location of ingress and egress points, directs
certain activities to certain areas (e.g., parking or waiting) or provides
other incidental information. The sign(s) may be illuminated.
   (G)   Streamers, pennants, balloons and similar devices. Such devices shall
not be illuminated.
   (H)   Political and election signs displayed on private property provided
such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and may not be illuminated.
      (1)   Such signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the election or
time which the purpose of the sign ceases to exist.
      (2)   Political signs shall not be located on public property, except at
polling places on the day of the election, or in any right-of-way.
      (3)   Signs that do not conform to the terms of this subchapter may be
removed and discarded by the Zoning Enforcement Officer without notice.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.197 SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS; TABLE OF SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The following signs shall be prohibited in all districts:
      (1)   Signs or other devices that resembles traffic signals, traffic
signs, emergency vehicle flashing lights, or which are likely to be
misconstrued by the traveling public as being an official governmental sign or
emergency warning; and
      (2)   All other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter.
   (B)   The following chart details the sign regulations pertaining to each
zoning district. See following page for sign regulations chart/table.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 1-7-2013; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
Table of Sign Regulations
Zoning   Type of Signs Number of Maximum Area Front Yard  Illumination
District Permitted     Signs     Permitted    Requirement Permitted    Notes
                       Permitted
Table of Sign Regulations
Zoning         Type of     Number of Maximum
District       Signs       Signs     Area      Front Yard Requirement   Illumination Permitted                  Notes
               Permitted   Permitted Permitted
               Ground sign 1 (one of 80 sq.    10’ from behind public Direct or indirect light source (see § Maximum height 16’
                           three)    ft.       ROW                      153.192)                                maximum length 20’
                                     1 sq. ft.
                                     per
                                     lineal
                           1 (one of foot of                            Direct or indirect light source (see § Maximum height 20’
               Wall sign   three)    building  N/A                      153.192)                                maximum depth 18”
                                     frontage
                                     maximum
                                     size 40
                                     sq.
Central                              1 sq. ft.
Business,                            per
Office/                              lineal
Institutional, Projection  1 (one of foot of                            Direct or indirect light source (see § 9’ of vertical
Highway        sign        three)    building  N/A                      153.192)                                clearance; maximum
Business and                         frontage                                                                   height 4’
General                              maximum
Manufacturing                        size 40
(as well as                          sq.
schools and                          1 sq. ft.
churches                             per
located in                           lineal
residential                1 (one of foot of                            Direct or indirect light source (see § 5’ from edge of
areas)         Roof sign   three)    building  N/A                      153.192)                                roof; maximum
                                     frontage                                                                   height 6’
                                     maximum
                                     size 40
                                     sq.
               Canopy sign 1 (one of 25 sq.    N/A                      Direct or indirect light source (See    Only name and logo
                           three)    ft.                                §153.192)
                                     Not to
                           More than exceed                             Direct or indirect light source (See    May attach to
               Window sign 1         25% of    N/A                      §153.192)                              windows or doors
                                     glass
                                     area
               Home        1 ground
               occupation  or 1      10 sq.    10’ from behind public No illumination allowed                 Maximum height 3’
Residential    sign        wall-     ft.       ROW
Zoning                     mounted
Districts      Subdivision 1 on each
               and group   side of   36 sq.    10’ from behind public Direct or indirect light source (See § May be mounted on
               development entrance  ft.       ROW                      153.192)                                masonry wall
               signs
 
OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND LANDSCAPING
§ 152.210 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any building, or at
the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding
dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area; or before conversion from one
type of use or occupancy to another, permanent off-street paved parking spaces
in the amount specified by this subchapter. Such parking spaces may be provided
in a parking garage or properly graded open space.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.211 CERTIFICATION OF MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Each application for a zoning permit submitted to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer as provided for in this chapter shall include information as to the
means of entrance and exit to such space. This information shall be in
sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine whether
or not the requirements of this subchapter are met.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.212 MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Parking shall be provided a rate indicated in the following table of parking
ratios.
Table of Parking Ratios
Use Parking Requirement
Table of Parking Ratios
Use                                     Parking Requirement
Single-family, two-family, multi-family 2 per dwelling unit
dwellings
Home occupations                        2 per dwelling unit, plus 1 per home
                                        occupation
Mixed use building                      Parking ratios for individual uses
                                        apply
Animal hospitals, veterinary offices    1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
and clinics
Animal pound or shelter                 1 per 350 square feet gross floor area
Appliance and electronics repair        1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
Athletic fields and similar outdoor     20 per field
facilities
                                        1 per 7,000 square feet of outdoor
Auto, boat, recreation vehicle and      display, plus 1 per 250 square feet of
motorcycle sales                        indoor sales area, plus service and
                                        repair requirement if applicable
Automobile service, repair and body     3 per bay or similar facility
shops
Bakery (production and distribution)    1 per 500 square feet gross floor area
Banks and other financial               1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
establishments                          or 5 spaces, whichever is greatest
Barbershops and salons                  2 per chair or station
Spas                                    1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
Bed and breakfast                       1 per guest room, plus single-family
                                        requirement
Boat service and repair                 1 per service stall or similar facility
Bus station                             1 per 200 square feet of waiting area
Car wash                                2 per stall, plus 3 stacking spaces in
                                        front of stall
Cemeteries                              1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
                                        of office
Churches and other places of worship    1 per 30 square feet of seating area,
                                        including balconies
Clubs and lodges                        1 per 150 square feet gross floor area
Commercial indoor recreation            1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
establishments
Commercial outdoor recreation           1 per 200 square feet gross floor area,
establishments                          plus 1 per 550 square feet of site area
                                        open to public (excluding parking area)
Community centers                       1 per 200 square feet gross floor area
                                        1 per 100 square feet of water surface
Public community swimming pools         area, plus 1 per 80 square feet of
                                        patio area
Convenience store or gas station        1 per 150 square feet gross floor area
Day care center                         1 per 375 square feet gross floor area
Day care home (large)                   1 per 5 children, plus single-family
                                        requirement
Dry cleaning                            1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
                                        1 per vehicle involved in operation,
Emergency response facilities           plus 1 per 300 square feet (excluding
                                        bays or service area)
Family campgrounds                      1 per campsite
Family care homes                       2 per dwelling unit
Funeral homes and mortuaries            1 per 200 square feet gross floor area
Golf courses                            4 spaces per hole
Group home developments                 1 per bedroom
Heavy equipment service and repair      3 per service bay or similar facility
                                        1 per 500 square feet gross floor area,
Heavy equipment sales and rental        plus 1 per 2,000 square feet of outdoor
                                        display
Hospitals                               3 per bed
                                        1.25 per guestroom, plus 1 per 100
Hotels, inns and motels                 square feet of meeting, dining or
                                        banquet facilities
Institutional facilities, such as       1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
libraries and other non-profits
Junkyards                               1 per 8,000 square feet of storage area
Kennels                                 1 per 300 square feet gross floor area
Laundromat                              1 per 200 square feet gross floor area
Manufacturing and industrial uses       1 per 800 square feet gross floor area
Mini-storage                            1 per 25 storage units, plus office
                                        requirement
Movie theaters and performing theaters  1 per 3 seats
Museums and art galleries               1 per 700 square feet gross floor area
Offices, government, medical, business, 1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
professional and public
Photography services                    1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
Photography, dance, art and music       1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
studios
Printing and copy services              1 per 250 square feet gross floor area
Public or private parks and playgrounds 1 per 3,000 square feet of land area
Radio and TV broadcasting               1 per 400 square feet gross floor area
Railroad station                        1 per 200 square feet of waiting area
Recycling establishment                 2 per collection container, plus office
                                        requirement for office area
Restaurants (all types)                 1 per 80 square feet gross floor area,
                                        including outdoor seating area
Retail sales                            1 per 200 square feet gross floor area
Elementary and secondary schools        2.5 per room used for classroom or
                                        administration
High schools and colleges               7 per classroom
Shopping centers                        Parking ratios for individual uses
                                        apply
Skilled nursing and other assisted      1 per 3 beds
living facilities
                                        1 per 350 square feet gross floor area,
Towing service                          plus 1 per 4,000 square feet of outdoor
                                        storage area
                                        1 per 700 square feet gross floor area
                                        - if less than 50,000 square feet or 1
Warehousing and distribution            per 1,000 square feet gross floor area
                                        - if equal to or greater than 50,000
                                        square feet
Wholesale establishments                1 per 700 square feet gross floor area
 
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.213 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES.
   Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry hereafter
erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading
of vehicles off the street or public alley.
   (A)   Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall have access to an alley,
or if there is no alley available, then to a street.
   (B)   Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall have a minimum dimension
of 12 feet by 40 feet and overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the
alley or street grade.
   (C)   Loading and service areas shall be designed to ensure the safety of
pedestrians and private property.
   (D)   Such areas shall have sufficient space to be properly accessed and the
use of these areas shall not block public road rights-of-way nor hinder access
or traffic flow.
   (E)   Loading and service areas should be designed out of view from public
roads.
 
Retail operations        One loading space for each 5,000 square feet of gross
                         floor area or fraction thereof
Wholesale and industrial One loading space for each 10,000 square feet of
                         operations gross floor area or fraction thereof
 
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.214 SHOPPING CENTER PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Commercial developments with a mixture of tenants and uses shall provide
parking according to the following standards:
 
Shopping centers with less than 20,000 1 per 180 square feet of gross floor
square feet                            area
Shopping centers with 20,000 to 50,000 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor
square feet                            area
Shopping centers with greater than     1 per 225 square feet of gross floor
50,000 square feet                     area
 
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.215 MIXED USE BUILDING PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Buildings with a mixture of uses shall provide parking according to the
following standards. The portion of the building used for residential purposes
shall provide parking at the rate of two spaces per dwelling unit. The portion
of the building used for nonresidential purposes shall provide parking
according to the rates for the nonresidential use, as listed in the Table of
Parking Ratios above.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.216 STACKING/DRIVE-THROUGH RESERVOIR REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   For uses utilizing drive-throughs, stacking/reservoir space shall be
provided for a minimum of five vehicles.
   (B)   For automatic teller machines, stacking/reservoir space shall be
provided for a minimum of three vehicles.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.217 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   The following landscaping requirements shall apply:
   (A)   Within parking areas, tree planting areas shall be provided for every
ten parking spaces. Tree planting areas shall be at least eight feet wide, a
minimum of 200 square feet in area, include at least one shade tree, and be
designed to minimize damage to trees by parking or moving vehicles. The
remaining area shall be landscaped with plantings (bushes, shrubs, flower beds,
rain gardens). Pedestrian ways are permitted within parking landscaped areas
but do not count towards the area requirement.
   (B)   A vegetative strip shall be provided between public rights-of-way and
interior parking areas and where two parking areas abut. The vegetative strip
shall be at least ten feet wide and shall include a minimum of one large canopy
tree per 50 feet. Grass, shrubs, bushes, flower beds, pedestrian amenities,
decorative walls and fences, storm water retention areas, and sidewalks may be
placed in this area. Only where existing overhead utility lines prevent use of
large maturing trees may small maturing trees be substituted. Landscaping may
be provided within the required parking setback but shall not impede visibility
at corners and intersections.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.218 GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following general parking requirements shall apply:
      (1)   In all districts, parking is permitted within the required yards.
      (2)   No parking space shall be more than 300 feet from a building
entrance.
      (3)   Parking areas shall provide spaces in sufficient number and design
that are accessible for persons with disabilities in a manner compliant with
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), being 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.,
requirements or other federal, state and local laws.
      (4)   Parking shall not be closer than ten feet from the front property
line, any dedicated street or railroad right-of-way line. When no right of way
exists, then a 50-foot distance will be used to determine the setback (25-feet
on each side from the center of the road). This distance is measured from the
middle of the existing road or street.
      (5)   Parking shall not be closer than five feet from any side or rear
property line, not a street line.
      (6)   Parking spaces shall be striped to designate stalls.
      (7)   Angle parking stall dimensions: 30- to 90-degree shall be a minimum
eight feet by 18 feet. Parallel parking stall dimensions: shall be a minimum
eight feet by 22 feet.
      (8)   Parking shall be accessed by adequate egress and ingress, drives
and maneuvering space.
      (9)   Parking egress and ingress, drives and maneuvering space shall be
paved with asphalt or concrete. Pervious paving, such as porous asphalt, porous
concrete or grass pave is permitted where appropriate as determined by a
certified engineer.
      (10)   Parking areas shall be designed and constructed to dispose of all
surface water accumulated within the area in a manner that will not contribute
to the subsidence, erosion or sedimentation of the development site or off
site.
      (11)   To ensure safe sight distances where streets intersect and where
driveways intersect streets, a minimum clear vision area shall be provided at
the corners of the intersections according to NCDOT standards. No structure,
planting, sign, fence, wall or obstruction to vision that would impede
visibility shall be established in the clear vision area. Grading of land may
be required where topography impedes the required clear vision area.
      (12)   Vehicular access points to the development shall be designed
according to NCDOT standards to encourage smooth traffic flow with minimum
hazards to pedestrians, bicycles and vehicular traffic. Accommodations for
controlled turning movements into and out of the development and improvement of
the approach street shall be provided according to NCDOT requirements.
      (13)   Lighting shall be provided for the safety of individuals within
the parking area. In order to reduce the impact of lighting on neighboring
residential uses, potential safety hazards to the traveling public, and affect
on view sheds and night scapes, lighting shall meet the following requirements:
         (a)   Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed to avoid
illuminating the night sky.
         (b)   Lighting shall not illuminate neighboring residential
properties.
         (c)   Lighting shall not be directed towards or illuminate the I-40
interstate right-of-way or be directed in a manner as to distract or harm the
traveling public on road rights-of-way.
         (d)   On-site lighting may be used to accent architectural elements
and provide safety and security on pedestrian walkways, at building entrances,
and public areas between buildings, but shall not be used to illuminate entire
portions of building(s).
   (B)   In order to promote safety and security in developments, lighting
should be used at intersections, development entrances, and in parking areas.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
BUFFERS AND SCREENING
§ 152.230 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to preserve and protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the residents of the town by promoting the
environmental and public benefits of buffers.
   (B)   It is intended to improve compatibility and provide transition between
different zoning districts and preserve the character and aesthetics of an
area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.231 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Buffer strips shall be provided upon any side or rear lot line where
nonresidential use and/or nonresidential zoning districts abut residential
zones. No such buffer strip shall, however, extend nearer to a street right-of-
way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot and no such
buffer shall be required upon any yard which abuts a public street.
   (B)   A buffer strip shall be at a minimum one of or equal to the following:
      (1)   A planting strip at least ten feet in width, composed of deciduous
or evergreen trees or a mixture of each, spaced not more than ten feet apart
and not less than one row of dense shrubs, spaced not more than live feet apart
and five feet in height after one growing season;
      (2)   A six-foot high solid picket type fence with the pickets being
placed facing the adjoining property;
      (3)   A six-foot high, open type fence with dense evergreen shrubs
planted facing the adjoining property, spaced not more the five feet apart and
five feet or more in height after two growing seasons;
      (4)   A six-foot high chain link type fence with panel inserts;
      (5)   A six-foot high masonry, brick, or stucco wall;
      (6)   A earthen berm and planting combination, at least 15 feet in width,
with the berm an average of three feet in height and dense plantings, which
will, when combined with the berm, achieve a minimum height of eight feet
within two growing seasons; and/or
      (7)   In lieu of compliance with the above buffer requirements, an
applicant may submit to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a detailed plan showing
the retention of existing vegetation and natural forest growth that will
satisfy one of the above requirements.
   (C)   Manufacturing and industrial use and/or zoning shall maintain a 15
feet buffer strip and within the buffer strip there shall be planted a
continuous screen of evergreen plants with an initial height of at least six
feet by natural growth within no later than a two-year period.
   (D)   Each site plan and application for zoning permit shall include
information as to the location and type of buffer to be erected, where
required.
   (E)   No structures, buildings or parking may be located within buffer
areas, with the exception of permitted signage, pedestrian amenities and
decorative elements.
   (F)   The buffer shall be maintained, and dead and diseased plants replaced
by the owner or occupant of the premises. The outside storage of materials
shall be prohibited in the area between the planted buffer and the residential
district. The owner or occupant of the premises shall properly and continuously
maintain this area.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.232 SCREENING.
   (A)   Nonresidential uses with outdoor storage of materials, equipment,
vehicles and the like shall provide screening according the following
requirements:
      (1)   A six-foot high, fence with dense evergreen shrubs planted facing
the adjoining property, spaced not more the five feet apart and five feet or
more in height after two growing seasons; and
      (2)   Storage of materials, equipment, vehicles and the like shall be
located in the rear.
   (B)   Uses which provide dumpsters or similar trash containers shall provide
screening according the following requirements, with the exception of single-
family residential uses and temporary construction dumpsters; however, upon
completion of construction all construction dumpsters shall be removed.
      (1)   Dumpsters and similar trash containers shall be hidden by an opaque
fence or wall of sufficient height to screen the container, but not less than
six feet in height.
      (2)   The wall or fence shall enclose the dumpster on all four sides.
Gates or doors for access on one side are permitted.
      (3)   The fence or wall shall match the color and be constructed of
materials similar to the main building.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.245 ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or his or her designated representative who shall be named
by the Town Council, and is hereby empowered:
      (1)   To issue a zoning compliance permit when these regulations have
been followed, or to refuse to issue the same in the event of noncompliance.
Written notice of such determination therefore shall be given to the applicant
and property owner (G.S. § 160D-403(b)), the administrative officer may provide
their determination in print or electronic form; if electronic form is used
then it must be protected from further editing (G.S. § 160D-403(a));
      (2)   To collect the designated fees as set forth in this chapter for a
zoning compliance permit, variances and appeals;
      (3)   To make and keep all records necessary and appropriate to the
office, including record of the issuance and denial of all zoning compliance
permits and of receipt of complaints of violation of this chapter and action
taken on the same;
      (4)   To inspect any building and/or land to determine whether any
violations of this chapter have been committed or exist;
      (5)   To enforce this chapter and take all necessary steps to remedy any
condition found in violation by ordering in writing the discontinuance of
illegal uses or illegal work in progress and may institute mandamus, or other
appropriate action; and
      (6)   To keep the Board of Adjustment advised of all matters other than
routine duties pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter and to transmit
all applications and records pertaining to appeals, variances or requests for
special use approval.
   (B)   The administrative officer or other staff member shall not make a
final decision on an administrative decision required by this chapter if the
outcome of that decision would have a direct, substantial, and readily
identifiable financial impact on the staff member or if the applicant or other
person subject to that decision is a person with whom the staff member has a
close familial, business, or other associational relationship (G.S. § 160D-
109).
   (C)   The administrative officer may inspect work undertaken pursuant to a
development approval to assure that the work is being done in accordance with
applicable State and local laws and of the terms of the approval. In exercising
this power, staff are authorized to enter any premises within the jurisdiction
of the city local government at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper
credentials, provided the appropriate consent has been given for inspection of
areas not open to the public or that an appropriate inspection warrant has been
secured (G.S. § 160D-403(e)).
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.246 ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT AND BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Within the town limits, no building, sign or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to or structurally altered before a zoning compliance
permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the town or
designated representative and a building permit is issued by the County
Building Inspector.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.247 APPLICATION FOR A ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT.
   (A)   Each application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for a zoning permit
shall be accompanied by plot plans in duplicate showing:
      (1)   The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
      (2)   The size of the building to be erected;
      (3)   The location of the building on the lot;
      (4)   The location of existing structures on the lot, if any;
      (5)   The number of dwelling units the building is designed to
accommodate;
      (6)   The approximate setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots;
      (7)   The intended use of the property;
      (8)   The county tax map identification number of the property and a copy
of the metes and bounds description of the lot of record; and
      (9)   Such other information as may be essential for determining whether
the provisions of this chapter are being observed.
   (B)   Vesting. Zoning permits expire one year after issuance unless work has
substantially commenced. Expiration of a local development approval does not
affect the duration of a vested right established as a site specific vesting
plan, a multiphase development plan, a development agreement, or vested rights
established under common law. A site specific plan or planned unit development
shall remain vested for a period exceeding two years, but not exceeding five
years. A multi-phase development shall remain vested for a period of seven
years from the time a site plan is approved. For the purposes of this chapter,
a multi-phase development must contain 100 acres or more and is submitted for
site plan approval for construction to occur in more than one phase and is a
master plan that includes a requirement to offer land for public use (G.S. §
160D-108(d)).
   (C)   Revocation of development approvals. Development approvals may be
revoked by the local government issuing the development approval by notifying
the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation. The local
government shall follow the same development review and approval process
required for issuance of the development approval, including any required
notice or hearing, in the review and approval of any revocation of that
approval. Development approvals shall be revoked for any substantial departure
from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure
to comply with the requirements of any applicable local development regulation
or any state law delegated to the local government for enforcement purposes in
lieu of the state; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in
securing the permit approval. Any development approval mistakenly issued in
violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. The
revocation of a development approval by a staff member may be appealed to the
Board of Adjustment pursuant to G.S. § 160D-405. If an appeal is filed
regarding a development regulation adopted by a local government pursuant to
this chapter, the provisions of G.S. § 160D-405(e) regarding stays applies
(G.S. § 160D-403(f)).
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.248 FEES.
Every person obtaining a zoning service shall pay the fee set forth in the
town’s Zoning Fees chart set forth below.
SERVICE FEE
SERVICE                                 FEE
Town zoning permit                      $50
Sign permits (home occupation)          $25
Sign permits (commercial)               $100 for 3 ($25 for additional signage)
Annexation                              $300
Variance petition                       $300
Re-zoning petition                      $300
Text amendment                          $300
Conditional use permit                  $300
Board of Adjustment appeal              $300
Code of Ordinances book                 $350
Individual land use ordinances          $30
Comprehensive Land Use Plan             $25
Residential - plan review               $25
Non-residential - Plan review           $50
Porches/deck                            $50
Manufactured homes - single wide        $50
Modular homes                           $50
On-site consults                        $50
Renovations (up to 400 square feet)     $50
Renovations (400 - 600 square feet)     $75
Renovations (over 600 square feet)      $100
Residential additions                   $50
Accessory building                      $50
Garage - residential                    $50
Non-residential (covers total           $100
construction)
Solar farms                             $75 ($500 per megawatt)
Demolition permit                       $35
Fence permit                            $0
Perc test permit                        $0
Minor subdivisions - without new right- $50
of-way easement or road - 1-4 lots
Major subdivisions - with new right-of-
way easement or road (Town Council       
approval required)                      $100
   Preliminary plat review           $125
   Final plat review                 $225
      1-9 lots                    $275 (21+ lots includes flat fee plus
      10-20 lots                  $10 each additional lot)
      21 lots or more
 
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed 8-5-2024)
§ 152.249 VIOLATION.
   Whenever, by the provision of this chapter, the performance of any act is
required, or the performance of any act is prohibited, or whenever any
regulation or limitation is imposed on the use of any land and water, or on the
erection of a structure, a failure to comply with such provisions shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.250 LIABILITY.
   The owner, tenant or occupant of any land or structure, or part thereof, and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in,
assists, directs, creates or maintains any situation that is contrary to the
requirements of this chapter shall be held responsible for the violation and be
subject to the penalties and remedies provided herein.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.251 PROCEDURE UPON DISCOVERY OF VIOLATION.
   Notices of violation. When staff determines work or activity has been
undertaken in violation of these development regulations a written notice of
violation may be issued. The notice of violation shall be delivered to the
holder of the development approval and to the landowner of the property
involved, if the landowner is not the holder of the development approval, by
personal delivery, electronic delivery, or first class mail and may be provided
by similar means to the occupant of the property or the person undertaking the
work or activity. The notice of violation may be posted on the property. The
person providing the notice of violation shall certify to the local government
that the notice was provided and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in
the absence of fraud (G.S. § 160D-404(a)).
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.252 REMEDIES.
   If a building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter or a regulation made under authority conferred by
this chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action on proceedings to prevent the unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent
occupancy of the building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about the premises.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 152.265 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The Board shall consist of
seven members; six members shall be residents of the town, and the other (ETJ)
member shall be appointed as provided in G.S. § 160D-307. Said Board shall be
appointed by the Town Council for overlapping terms of three years. The
Planning Board may serve as the Board of Adjustment. Any vacancies in the
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
initial appointments. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for
any expenses incurred while representing the Board.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.266 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chair and a Vice-Chair from its
members who shall serve for two years. Board of Adjustment officers may be the
same as Planning Board officers. The Board shall appoint a secretary, who may
be a municipal officer, an employee of the town or a member of the Planning
Board. The Board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter and of G.S. § 160D-1-9(d). The Planning Board by-
laws may serve as the Board of Adjustment by-laws. Meetings of the Board shall
be held at the call of the Chair, and at such other times as the Board may
determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   (B)   Boards shall follow quasi-judicial procedures in determining appeals
of administrative decisions, special use permits, certificates of
appropriateness, variances, or any other quasi-judicial decision (G.S. § 160D-
406).
   (C)   Members of the Board of Adjustment shall not participate in or vote on
any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons’
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations
of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion
prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex
parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of
the matter. If an objection is raised to a Board member’s participation at or
prior to the hearing or vote on that matter and that member does not recuse
himself or herself, the remaining members of the Board shall by majority vote
rule on the objection. For purposes of this section, a CLOSE FAMILIAL
RELATIONSHIP means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or
grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships. (G.S. §
160D-109(d), (e), (f)).
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.267 COMPOSITION AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Alternate members; boards. The Council may appoint and provide
reimbursement for expenses for alternate members to serve on the Board in the
absence or temporary disqualification of any regular member or to fill a
vacancy pending appointment of a member. Alternate members shall be appointed
for the same term, at the same time, and in the same manner as regular members.
Each alternate member serving on behalf of any regular member has all the
powers and duties of a regular member. The subchapter may designate a Planning
Board or governing board to perform any of the duties of a Board of Adjustment
in addition to its other duties and may create and designate specialized boards
to hear technical appeals.
   (B)   Provisions of chapter. The Board of Adjustment hears and decides
special use permits, requests for variances, and appeals of decisions of
administrative officials charged with enforcement of the chapter. As used in
this subchapter, the term DECISION includes any final and binding order,
requirement, or determination. The Board of Adjustment shall follow quasi-
judicial procedures when deciding appeals and requests for variances and
special and special use permits. The Board shall hear and decide all matters
upon which it is required to pass under any statute or ordinance that regulates
land use or development.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to this
subchapter shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application,
or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is
the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the
owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject
of the hearing; and to any other persons entitled to receive notice as provided
by the zoning or unified development ordinance. In the absence of evidence to
the contrary, the town may rely on the county tax listing to determine owners
of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be deposited in the mail
at least ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing.
Within that same time period, the town shall also prominently post a notice of
the hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent
street or highway right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.268 APPEALS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from decisions of
administrative officials charged with enforcement of the zoning or unified
development ordinance and may hear appeals arising out of any other ordinance
that regulates land use or development, pursuant to all of the following:
   (A)   Any person who has standing under G.S. § 160D-1-2 or the town may
appeal a decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing a
notice of appeal with the Town Clerk. The notice of appeal shall state the
grounds for the appeal. The owner or other party shall have 30 days from
receipt of the written notice of the determination within which to file an
appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal has 30 days from receipt from
any source of actual or constructive notice of the determination within which
to file an appeal. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, notice pursuant
to G.S. § 160D-403(b) given by first class mail is deemed received on the third
business day following deposit of the notice for mailing with the United States
Postal Service (G.S. § 160D-405(d).
   (B)   The official who made the decision shall give written notice to the
owner of the property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who
sought the decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be
delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.
   (C)   The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the
written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing
to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source of actual or
constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.
   (D)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with standing to
appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign containing
the words “Zoning Decision” or “Subdivision Decision” in letters at least six
inches high and identifying the means to contact an official for information
about the decision is prominently posted on the property that is the subject of
the decision, provided the sign remains on the property for at least ten days.
Posting of signs is not the only form of constructive notice. Any such posting
shall be the responsibility of the landowner or applicant. Verification of the
posting shall be provided to the official who made the decision. Absent an
ordinance provision to the contrary, posting of signs shall not be required.
   (E)   The official who made the decision shall transmit to the Board all
documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from is taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the
appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal if
the appellant is not the owner.
   (F)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays
enforcement of the action appealed from unless the official who made the
decision certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been
filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in
nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the chapter. In
that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining
order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not
stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited
hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the
appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a
proposed use of property is consistent with the chapter shall not stay the
further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such
property; in these situations the appellant may request and the Board may grant
a stay of a final decision of permit applications or building permits affected
by the issue being appealed.
   (G)   Subject to the provisions of division (D) of this section, the Board
of Adjustment shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
   (H)   The official who made the decision shall be present at the hearing as
a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated
in the notice of appeal. If any party or the town would be unduly prejudiced by
the presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board
shall continue the hearing. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any
order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board
shall have all the powers of the official who made the decision.
   (I)   When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. § 160D-102 or any other appeal
in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on the record below and
the scope of review shall be as provided in G.S. § 160D-1402.
   (J)   The parties to an appeal that has been made under this section may
agree to mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution. The
subchapter may set standards and procedures to facilitate and manage such
voluntary alternative dispute resolution.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.269 SPECIAL USES; CONDITION GOVERNING APPLICATION.
   (A)   To grant in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards, permits for special uses as authorized by this chapter and set
forth as special uses under the various use districts.
   (B)   The Board shall not grant a special use permit unless and until:
      (1)   A written application for a special use permit is submitted to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer indicating the section of this chapter under which
the special use permit is sought; and
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment finds that in the particular case in
question the use for which the special use permit is sought will not adversely
affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood
of the proposed use, and will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or public improvement in the neighborhood. In granting
such a permit the Board of Adjustment may designate such conditions in
connection therewith as will, in its opinion, assure that the proposed use will
conform to the requirements and spirit of this chapter.
      (3)   Minor modifications to a special use permit may be administratively
approved by the Zoning Administrator if issues arise after the special use
permit has been approved by the Board of Adjustment that keep the applicant
from carrying out the strict interpretation of the ruling.
   (C)   If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the Board
of Adjustment finds that the conditions imposed and agreements made have not
been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the
permit shall be terminated and the operation of such a use discontinued. If a
special use permit is terminated for any reason it may be reinstated only after
a public hearing is held.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.270 VARIANCES.
   When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter
of a zoning ordinance, the Board of Adjustment shall vary any of the provisions
of the ordinance upon a showing of all of the following:
   (A)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the
ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the
variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property;
   (B)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance;
   (C)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the
property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship;
   (D)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial
justice is achieved; and
   (E)   No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. Appropriate
conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided that the conditions are
reasonably related to the variance. Any other ordinance that regulates land use
or development may provide for variances consistent with the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.271 VOTING.
   (A)   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board shall be necessary to
grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be required to decide any
other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of
certiorari. For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Board and
members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not
be considered members of the Board for calculation of the requisite majority if
there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members.
   (B)   A member of any Board exercising quasi-judicial functions pursuant to
this subchapter shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter
in a manner that would violate affected persons’ constitutional rights to an
impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations of due process include, but
are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter
that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close
familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected
person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection
is raised to a member’s participation and that member does not recuse himself
or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.272 QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISIONS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within
a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent,
material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision
shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board’s determination of contested
facts and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision
shall be signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A
quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the
Clerk to the Board or such other office or official as the chapter specifies.
The decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic
mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner, and to any
person who has submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the date the
decision becomes effective. The person required to provide notice shall certify
that proper notice has been made.
   (B)   Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by the
Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to G.S. §
160D-1402. A petition for review shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior
Court by the later of 30 days after the decision is effective or after a
written copy thereof is given in accordance with division (A) of this section.
When first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three days shall be added to
the time to file the petition.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.273 OATHS.
   The Chair of the Board or any member acting as Chair and the Clerk to the
Board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming
before the Board. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before
the Board of Adjustment, willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.274 SUBPOENAS.
   The Board of Adjustment through the Chair, or in the Chair’s absence anyone
acting as Chair, may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence.
To request issuance of a subpoena, persons with standing under G.S. § 160D-1402
may make a written request to the Chair explaining why it is necessary for
certain witnesses or evidence to be compelled. The Chair shall issue requested
subpoenas he or she determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope,
and not oppressive. The Chair shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a
subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the Chair may be appealed to
the full Board of Adjustment. If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena
issued pursuant to this section, the Board of Adjustment or the party seeking
the subpoena may apply to the General Court of Justice for an order requiring
that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue
these orders after notice to all proper parties.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.275 FEES FOR VARIANCES OR APPEALS.
   A fee of $75 shall be paid to the Town Clerk for each application for a
variance, special use permit, or appeal, to cover the necessary administrative
costs and advertising cost. If additional advertising costs, and the like,
arise, the cost will be paid by the applicant.
(Ord. passed 4-7-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
PLANNING BOARD
§ 152.280 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PLANNING BOARD.
   (A)   A Planning Board is hereby established as provided in G.S. § 106D-301.
The Board shall consist of seven members; six members shall be persons living
within the boundaries of the town who are appointed by the Town Council. One
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) member shall be appointed and an additional
ETJ alternate shall be appointed by the County Commissioners of Burke County as
defined in G.S. § 160A-362. The population estimates for this calculation shall
be updates no less frequently than after each decennial census (G.S. § 160D-
307). Said Board shall be appointed for overlapping terms of three years. The
terms of three members plus the ETJ member(s) expire every three years in
December, beginning December 2014. The terms of the remaining three members
expire every three years in December, beginning December 2015. Any vacancies in
the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
initial appointments. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for
any expenses incurred while representing the Board.
   (B)   The officers of the Planning Board shall consist of at least a Chair
and Vice-Chair. The Chair shall be one of the town members of the Planning
Board. The Vice-Chair shall be one of the town members of the Planning Board
and shall act for the Chair in his or her absence. All officers shall be
elected for a term of two years. No officer may serve in the same office for
more than two consecutive terms. Vacancies in offices shall be filled
immediately for the unexpired term by the regular election procedure detailed
in the Planning Board by-laws.
(Ord. passed 11-3-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
Editor’s note:
   G.S. § 150A-362 was repealed by S.L. 2019-111, Sec. 2.3.
§ 152.281 PROCEEDINGS OF THE PLANNING BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and of G.S. § 160D-604. Meetings of the Board shall
be held at the call of the Chair, and at such other times as the Board may
determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
   (B)   The Planning Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings (G.S. § 160D-
308). Additionally, all Planning Board members, before entering their duties,
must take an oath of office (G.S. § 160D-309).
   (C)   Members of the Planning Board shall not vote on advisory or
legislative decisions regarding a development regulation where the outcome of
the matter being considered is likely to have a direct, substantial, and
readily identifiable financial impact on the member. A Planning Board member
shall not vote on any zoning amendment if the landowner of the property subject
to a rezoning petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a person with
whom the member has a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship (G.S. § 160D-109).
(Ord. passed 11-3-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.282 DUTIES.
   Duties of the Planning Board include:
   (A)   Enforcement and/or administration of zoning ordinances, including
zoning text amendments and map amendments (rezonings);
   (B)   To prepare a Comprehensive Plan;
   (C)   To determine whether specific proposed developments, applications, or
ordinance amendments conform to the principles and requirements of the
Comprehensive Plan;
   (D)   To advise Council regarding the sub-disciplines of long-range planning
and development; and
   (E)   To perform any other duties which may be assigned to it.
(Ord. passed 11-3-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
AMENDMENTS
§ 152.285 ACTION BY THE APPLICANT.
   (A)   Initiation of amendments. Proposed changes or amendments may be
initiated by the Town Council, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or by one or
more owners or lessees of property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected.
   (B)   Application. An application for any change or amendment shall contain
a description and/or statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or
district boundary to be applied, and the names and addresses of the owner or
owners of the property. Such application shall be filed at the Town Hall with
the Zoning Enforcement Officer or a designated representative not later than
three weeks prior to the meeting at which the application is to be considered.
   (C)   Fee. A fee of $75 shall be paid to the Town Clerk for each application
for an amendment to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising
costs. If additional advertising costs and the like arise, the cost will be
paid by the applicant.
   (D)   Every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal
to this chapter shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
recommendation and report (G.S. § 160D-604(c), (e)). The owner of affected
parcels of land, and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of
land, shall be mailed a notice of the hearing on a proposed zoning map
amendment by first class mail at the last addresses listed for such owners on
the county tax abstracts. For the purpose of this section, properties are
“abutting” even if separated by a street, railroad, or other transportation
corridor.
Additionally, the town shall prominently post a notice of the public hearing on
the site proposed for rezoning the amendment or on an adjacent public street or
highway right-of-way. The notice shall be posted within 25 days prior to the
hearing until ten days prior to the hearing. When multiple parcels are included
within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is
not required, but the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable
notice to interested persons (G.S. § 160D-602).
   (E)   Plan consistency. When adopting or rejecting any zoning text or map
amendment, the Town Council shall approve a brief statement describing whether
its action is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive plan.
The requirement for a plan consistency statement may also be met by a clear
indication in the minutes of the Town Council, that at the time of action on
the amendment, the Town Council was aware of and considered the Planning
Board’s recommendations and any relevant portions of an adopted comprehensive
plan. If the amendment is adopted and the action was deemed inconsistent with
the adopted plan, the zoning amendment shall have the effect of also amending
any future land use map in the approved plan and no additional request or
application for a plan amendment shall be required. A plan amendment and a
zoning amendment may be considered concurrently. The plan consistency statement
is not subject to judicial review. If a zoning map amendment qualifies as a
“large-scale rezoning” under G.S. § 160D-6-2(b), the Town Council statement
describing plan consistency may address the overall rezoning and describe how
the analysis and polices in the relevant adopted plans were considered in the
action taken.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 11-3-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.286 ACTION BY THE PLANNING BOARD.
   The following action shall be taken by the Planning Board: the Planning
Board shall consider and make recommendations to the Town Council concerning
each proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Board may hold separate public
hearings or may sit concurrently with the public hearing held by the Town
Council.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 11-3-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.287 ACTION BY THE TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)   Town Council consideration. The Town Council shall consider changes
and amendments to this chapter as often as necessary; provided, however, that
should the Town Council deny a request for a zoning amendment, it shall not
thereafter accept any other application for the same change of zoning district
affecting the same property, or any portion thereof, until the expiration of
one year from the date of such previous denial.
   (B)   Notice of public hearing. No amendment shall be adopted by the Town
Council until after public notice and hearing. Notice of public hearing shall
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least once a
week for two successive weeks prior to hearing. Notice may also be made by
posting the property concerned or by mailing notices to the owners of
surrounding property.
   (C)   Town Council action. Before taking such lawful action as it may deem
advisable, the Town Council shall consider the Planning Board’s recommendations
on each proposed zoning amendment. If no recommendations are received from the
Planning Board within 30 days after public hearing by the Town Council, the
proposed amendment shall be deemed to have been approved by the Planning Board.
   (D)   Protests.
      (1)   In case, however, of a protest against such changes signed by the
owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed
change or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 100 feet
therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the
street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the Town
Council.
      (2)   No protest against any change in or amendment to the zoning map
shall be valid or effective unless it be in the form of a written petition
actually bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and
stating that the signers do protest the proposed change or amendment, unless it
shall have been received by the Town Clerk in sufficient time to allow the town
at least two normal working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed
change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition
(G.S. § 160D-604). A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his
or her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed
amendment.
   (D)   Generally. The Town Council may amend, supplement or change the text
regulations and zoning district lines according to the following procedures.
Under no circumstances shall the Town Council adopt such amendments that would
cause this chapter to violate the watershed protection rules as adopted by the
State Environmental Management Commission. Amendments affecting the watershed
protection portions of this chapter shall be filed with the State Division of
Environmental Management, the State Division of Environmental Health and the
State Division of Community Assistance.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 11-3-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 152.300 CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width of
size of yards, or other open space, or require a lower height of buildings, or
require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied- or impose other more
restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the
regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern.
   (B)   Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive
standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute
shall govern.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.301 TOWN ATTORNEY MAY PREVENT VIOLATION.
   If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inform the Town Attorney. In
addition to other remedies, the Town Attorney may institute any appropriate
action or preceding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such
structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in
about the premises.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.302 REPEAL OF EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCE.
   All zoning ordinances or parts of same now in effect in the town are hereby
repealed, provided, however, that all suits at law or in equity and/or all
prosecutions resulting from the violation of any zoning ordinance heretofore in
effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the
United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of
this chapter, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this
chapter had not been adopted; any and all violations of existing zoning
ordinances, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may hereafter
be filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as
to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending, and/or
which may have heretofore been instituted or prosecuted.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.303 VALIDITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity
of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-3-2021)
§ 152.999 PENALTY; REMEDIES; SANCTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Remedies.
         (a)   If any subdivision, development and/or land use is found to be
in violation of this chapter, the town may, in addition to all other remedies
available either in law or in equity, institute a civil penalty in the amount
of $50 a day, institute actions or proceedings to restrain, correct or abate
the violations; to prevent occupancy of the building, structure or land; or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises. In
addition, the State Environmental Management Commission may assess civil
penalties in accordance with G.S. § 143-215.6A. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
         (b)   If the Watershed Administrator finds that any of the provisions
of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the
person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation,
and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall order
discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of
illegal buildings or structures, or of additions, alterations or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take
any action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent
violation of its provisions. If a ruling of the Watershed Administrator is
questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the Board
of Adjustment.
      (2)   Sanctions. The Town Council may seek enforcement of this chapter by
assessing a civil penalty to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the
nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty in a prescribed period
of time after being cited for violation of this chapter. Such violation may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. The court may issue an injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the
unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by
the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the rules of civil
procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular. If the defendant fails or
refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the
time allowed by the court, the defendant may be cited for contempt and the town
may execute the order of abatement. The town shall have a lien on the property
for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s
and material man’s lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of
abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for
compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by
the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the
matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance
with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge.
Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction
issued in conjunction therewith. Enforcement of this chapter may be by any one,
all or a combination of the remedies authorized in this chapter. Each day’s
continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   (1)   In the event of a violation of §§
152.140 through
152.171 or any special use permit issued pursuant to §§
152.140 through
152.171, the town may impose and collect, and the holder of the special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities shall pay to the town, fines
or penalties as permitted by state law.
      (2)   A violation of §§
152.140 through
152.171 is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable by a fine not exceeding
that which is permitted under state law for conviction of a first offense. For
conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of
five years, the holder of a special use permit issued under §§
152.140 through
152.171 may be sanctioned by a fine of not less than $350 nor more than $700 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and, upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within
a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; however,
for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of §§
152.140 through
152.171 or of such ordinance or regulation shall be deemed misdemeanors and for
such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to
such violations. Each day after the first seven days following notification
that the violations continues, shall constitute a separate additional
violation, punishable separately and individually.
      (3)   Notwithstanding anything in §§
152.140 through
152.171, the holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other
sanctions or penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with §§
152.140 through
152.171 or any section of §§
152.140 through
152.171. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special use permit
to termination and revocation of the special use permit. The town may also seek
injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of §§
152.140 through
152.171, without limiting other remedies available to the town.
(Ord. passed 4-5-2010; Ord. passed 5-5-2014; Ord. passed 5-3-2021; Ord. passed
3-7-2022)
CHAPTER 153: MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
Section
Minimum Standards
   
153.01   Fitness for dwelling, dwelling units
   
153.02   Structural condition
   
153.03   Basic equipment and facilities
   
153.04   Ventilation
   
153.05   Space, use and location
   
153.06   Safe and sanitary maintenance
   
153.07   Control of insects, rodents and infestations
   
153.08   Rooming houses
Enforcement Procedures
   
153.20   Powers and duties of Inspector
   
153.21   Inspections; duty of owners and occupants
   
153.22   Procedure for enforcement
   
153.23   Methods of service of complaints and orders
   
153.24   In rem action by Inspector; placarding
   
153.25   Costs a lien on premises
   
153.26   Alternative remedies
   
153.27   Zoning Board of Adjustment to hear appeals
   
153.28   Conflict with other provisions
   
153.29   Violations; penalty
MINIMUM STANDARDS
§ 153.01 FITNESS FOR DWELLING, DWELLING UNITS.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit intended for use as a human habitation,
occupancy or use, or held out for use as human habitation, shall comply with
all the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation in accordance with
the applicable State Building Codes. No person shall let to another for
occupancy, or use as a place for human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling
unit, which does not comply with all the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of this division for which a valid
certificate of compliance has been issued. Unoccupied structures shall not be
deteriorated as to become a health or safety hazard. The provisions of this
code shall apply to all manufactured housing and modular-housing units used as
residential housing in excess of 30 days. Recreational vehicles (RVs) shall not
be occupied for residential housing.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.02 STRUCTURAL CONDITION.
   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joints, rafters or
other structural members shall not excessively list, lean or buckle and shall
not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks
which might admit rodents.
   (B)   Floors and roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports
shall not be deteriorated or damaged so as to dangerously reduce their intended
load-bearing characteristics.
   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts of appurtenances
shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fall or collapse.
   (E)   Adequate egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided as per
specifications of the North Carolina Residential Building Code, Volume 7.
   (F)   Interior walls and ceiling of all rooms, closets and hallways shall be
finished with suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable household
methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a
manner as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between
various spaces.
   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors, and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weather tight, and rodent proof. Roof coverings shall be maintained in
good condition. All new roofs must be installed in accordance with the State
Residential Building Code, Volume 7.
   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are in danger of
falling or in such condition or location as to constitute a fire hazard.
   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors on the
ground.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.03 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   Plumbing system. The plumbing system of each dwelling or dwelling unit
shall conform to the following:
      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and
to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal systems.
      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and an adequate supply of both cold and
hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution
system connected to a potable water supply. All water piping shall be protected
from freezing by being properly installed in protected spaces. Installations of
all water heating appliances shall be capable of supplying a continuous source
of water, on demand, to all the required fixtures at a temperature of not more
than 120° Fahrenheit and not less than 100° Fahrenheit.
      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a good state of repair
and condition and meet the standards of the State Residential Building Code,
Volume 7.
      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling
unit and be accessible to the occupants of the dwelling unit. The water closet
and tub or shower shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user.
   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling unit shall have facilities for
providing heat in accordance with either division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section as follows:
      (1)   Central and electric heating systems. Every central or electric
heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to which
it is connected with a minimum temperature of 68° Fahrenheit measured at a
point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating
system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with
sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents, whereby heating appliances
may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms with a minimum temperature
of 68° Fahrenheit measured three feet above the floor during ordinary winter
conditions.
   (C)   Electrical system. The electrical system of each dwelling or dwelling
unit shall conform to the following:
      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights
and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles installed in compliance
with the State Residential Building Code, Volume 7. There shall be installed in
every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room, and furnace room at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture in good working order. If
wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then
each habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall-type electrical
convenience receptacles.
      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not
sufficient.
      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wire shall be maintained
in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used without hazard to
property or persons.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.04 VENTILATION.
   (A)   General. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors for adequate ventilation. At least one
window in every habitable room shall be of such size and location to allow
egress by an average adult in the event of fire or other emergency. The minimum
window area, measured between stops, shall be 8% of the floor area of such
room. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top
of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal 15% of the
total floor area of such room. Exception: Less than 8% of the total floor area
is acceptable provided there is mechanical ventilation.
   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight which can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately
ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room
shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other approved equivalent
ventilation.
   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements as in
habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.
   (D)   Smoke detectors. Smoke detector(s) shall be required outside of each
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.05 SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.
   (A)   Room sizes. Every dwelling shall contain at least the minimum room
size in each habitable room as required by the State Residential Building Code.
      (1)   Every dwelling shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable
floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional
habitable area for each of the next three occupants and at least 75 square feet
of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
      (2)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposed by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
   (B)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet, six inches,
measured from the finished floor to finished ceiling.
   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of
habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling
unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The
floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than 4½
feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total
area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
   (E)   Basement. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
      (1)   The floors and walls are substantially watertight;
      (2)   The total window standards, total openable window area and ceiling
height are equal to those required for habitable rooms;
      (3)   The required minimum window standards of every habitable room are
entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window
faces a stairwell, window well or access way; and
      (4)   Every sleeping room shall have at least one window for emergency
egress, which complies with the State Residential Building Code in effect at
the time of construction.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.06 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Exterior foundation walls and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior
wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weather tight and rodent proof,
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, shall be capable of affording
privacy, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal
use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be protected with
paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of
moisture or the weather.
   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof, shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar
door and hatchway shall be substantially weather tight, watertight, rodent
proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. Minimum
size for all interior doorways shall be 30 inches for all occupied rooms
including living room, dining room, kitchen, and the like, but not including
closets, bathrooms, and the like. Doors shall be provided at all doorways
leading to bedrooms, toilet rooms and bathrooms, and all rooms adjoining a
public space. All doors leading to the exterior must have an apparatus for
opening and closing the door on both sides, a locking mechanism and shall be
kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every outside and inside stair,
porch and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair. Handrails and guardrails must be
installed per the guidelines of the State Residential Building Code, Volume 7.
   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonable impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or
utility which is required under this subchapter, shall be so constructed or
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in satisfactory condition.
   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough
drainage of surface water to prevent accumulation of stagnant water and to
allow positive drainage around the foundation of the dwelling unit.
   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property shall be kept free
of species of weeds or plant growth, which are noxious and detrimental to
health.
   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of
egress as required by the Code in force at the time of construction.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.07 CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATIONS.
   (A)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens installed or such other
approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
   (B)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or
other pests therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit
in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more
rooms of the dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (C)   Rubbish storage and garbage disposal. Every dwelling unit shall be
supplied with adequate rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall
have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers.
   (D)   Screens. For protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects,
every door intended for ventilation and opening directly from a dwelling unit
to outdoor space shall have installed screens and a self-closing device.
Windows designed to open shall likewise be supplied with screens installed so
as to not be permanently affixed to the window frame, sash, or structural
members of the dwelling unit, and shall be maintained in good condition without
rips or tears.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.08 ROOMING HOUSES.
   All provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to rooming houses and
bed and breakfast establishments, and to every person who operates a rooming
house or a bed and breakfast establishment or who operates or lets to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house or bed and breakfast
establishment, except as provided in the following divisions:
   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved
water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities are shared. All
such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall
be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more
than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water
at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar or
uninhabitable basement.
   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant, shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant
shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years
of age and over, and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant
under 12 years of age.
   (C)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and
for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house. He or
she shall further be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house
is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
   (D)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower required by division (A) of this section shall be located
within the rooming house and within a room which affords privacy and is
separate from the habitable rooms and which is accessible from any common hall
and without going outside the rooming house or through any other room herein.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
§ 153.20 POWERS AND DUTIES OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to exercise the duties and powers herein
prescribed. The Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   The Inspector or designee shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings
and dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which dwellings
and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this chapter with respect to the repair, closing
or demolition of such dwellings and dwelling units;
      (2)   To provide for an inspection of any dwelling that falls vacant or
which there is a request for utilities to be changed from one party to another.
The Inspector shall be responsible for collecting a fee for the inspection of
the dwelling units which are inspected for compliance with this code. The Town
Council shall set the amount of such inspection fee;
      (3)   To take such action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation
of housing which is deteriorated;
      (4)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
chapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed;
      (5)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (6)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections; provided such entries shall be made in accordance with Section 17
of this ordinance and state law, and shall be made in such a manner as cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (7)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and
employees as he or she deems necessary to assist in carrying out the purposes
of this chapter, and to delegate any of his or her functions and powers to such
officers, agents and employees; and
      (8)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or by the
governing body of the town.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.21 INSPECTIONS; DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and the premises associated
therewith. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house or rooming unit or the person in charge thereof shall give the Inspector
free access to such dwelling and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming
unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to
any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
 
Note: When permission to inspect a dwelling or its premises is denied, the
Inspector must obtain a warrant to inspect. G.S. § 15-27.2 provides for the
issuance of warrants for the conduct of inspections authorized by law. The N.C.
Court of Appeals, in In Re Dwelling, 24 N.C. App. 17 (1974), has held that the
consent of the tenant-occupant who was in actual possession and control of the
premises was sufficient to authorize an inspection without a warrant,
notwithstanding the fact that the owner had objected to the warrantless search.
When faced with a situation where permission to inspect is denied, inspectors
are advised to seek the advice of the Town Attorney.
 
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.22 PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is
filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of
the town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector, upon inspection that any
dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation he or she shall, if his
or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner or any parties in the interest in such
dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and containing a
notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the service of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of such hearing
shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating
to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give
evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not be controlling in hearings before
the Inspector.
   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After such notice and hearing, the Inspector
shall state in writing his or her determination whether the dwelling or
dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, and if so, whether it is
deteriorated or dilapidated.
      (1)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
deteriorated, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in
support of such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, alter, or
improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of
fitness established by this chapter within a specified period of time, not to
exceed 90 days. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and
close such dwelling or dwelling unit until such repairs, alterations, and
improvements have been made.
      (2)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling is dilapidated, he or
she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact to support such
determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order directing and requiring the owner either to repair, alter or improve such
dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards of fitness
established by this chapter, or else to vacate and remove or demolish the same
within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.
   (C)   Failure to comply with order. Violation of any provision of the code
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty as set out in this code of
ordinances.
      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or
dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector to repair,
alter, or improve or to vacate and close the same within the time specified
therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail
to comply with an order of the Inspector to repair, alter or improve or to
vacate and close and remove or demolish the same within the time specified
therein, the Inspector shall submit to the Town Council at its next regular
meeting a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the Superior Court
for an order directing such owner to comply with the order of the Inspector, as
authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).
      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated or
dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order of the Inspector
within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or
has not been granted as provided in the preceding division (C)(1), the
Inspector shall submit to the governing body of the town an ordinance ordering
the Inspector to cause such dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered,
improved vacated, closed, removed or demolished, as provided in the original
order of the Inspector, provided by G.S. § 160A-443 and Section 16 of the
ordinance.
   (D)   Appeals from order of Inspector. An appeal from any decision or any
appeal from the Inspector shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of
the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the
Inspector and with the Zoning Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal which
shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of
any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the decision to allow the person
aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall remain in force
until modified or reversed. When an appeal is from a decision of the Inspector
requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect
of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board unless the
Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him
or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which
shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of his or her requirement would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall
not be suspended except for the due cause shown upon not less than one day’s
written notice to the Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of record upon
petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and division (E) of this section.
      (1)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all
appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as in
its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all
powers of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of four members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Inspector.
The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the chapter to adapt the application of the
chapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the
chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
      (2)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.
   (E)   Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order
issued by the Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board shall have the
right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision,
to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction restraining the
Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-
446(f).
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.23 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon persons
wither personally or by registered mail. If the whereabouts of such persons are
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and
the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be made by
publishing the same at least once no later than the time at which personal
service would be required under the provisions of this chapter in a newspaper
having general circulation in the town. Where service is made by publication, a
notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.24 IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.
   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply
with an order of the Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and upon adoption by the Town Council of an ordinance authorizing and
directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5) and Section
20c of this ordinance, the Inspector shall proceed to cause such dwelling or
dwelling unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or to be vacated and closed
and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Town Council,
and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of such dwelling or dwelling
unit a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds in the county wherein the property is located, and shall be indexed in
the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5).
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.25 COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.
   As provided by G.S. § 160A-446(6), the cost of any repairs, alterations, or
improvements, or of vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to
be made or done by the Inspector pursuant to Section 19 of this ordinance shall
be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such
lien shall be filed, having priority, and be collected in the same manner as
the lien for special assessments established by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.26 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
chapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and Section 23 of this
ordinance, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent
the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.27 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.
   (A)   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the
Inspector pursuant to Section 20(d) of this ordinance shall be heard and
determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body the Board
shall have the power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to adopt
necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be
necessary for the proper discharge of its duties. The Board shall perform the
duties prescribed by Section 20(d) and shall keep an accurate journal of all
its proceedings.
   (B)   If the Zoning Board of Adjustment consists of more than five members,
the Chair shall designate five members to hear appeals under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.28 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
residents of the town shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
§ 153.29 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same or to fail to
vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector
duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such
order. Each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to Section 19 of this
ordinance, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its
vacation and closing. Each day that such occupancy continues after such
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
   (D)   In addition to the penalty established by division (C) above, and the
remedies provided by other provisions of this chapter, this chapter may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 7-14-2008)
CHAPTER 154: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
   
154.01   Statutory authorization
   
154.02   Findings of fact
   
154.03   Statement of purpose
   
154.04   Objectives
General Provisions
   
154.20   Definitions
   
154.21   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
154.22   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
154.23   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
154.24   Compliance
   
154.25   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.26   Interpretation
   
154.27   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
154.40   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
154.41   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
154.42   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.43   Corrective procedures
   
154.44   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.55   General standards
   
154.56   Specific standards
   
154.57   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
154.58   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established
floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
154.59   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
Legal Status Provisions
   
154.70   Severability
   
154.71   Effective date
 
   
154.99   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
§ 154.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article
21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article
8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local
governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the Town Council of Rutherford College, North Carolina,
does ordain as follows.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
Editor’s note:
   G.S. Ch. 160, Art. 19, Parts 3, 5, and 8 were repealed by S.L. 2019-111,
Sec. 2.3.
§ 154.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that
are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless
specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
    AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA
approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY report includes
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
if published.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the FREEBOARD
establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Ch. 130A, Article 9,
a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program;” or
      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a “Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program.”
      Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such an
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as
corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND/OR NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, or A99.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
154.22 of this chapter.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
154.40 et seq. and §§
154.55 et seq. is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.21 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable,
of the town and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing
body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.22 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the cooperating
technical state (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Burke County dated September 5, 2007 and
its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels (2742J, 2743J, 2744K, 2752J,
2753J, and 2754K), which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.23 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
154.22 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.24 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.25 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.26 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.27 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.40 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Planner or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
“Floodplain Administrator,” is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.41 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
154.22, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
154.22;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
154.22;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
154.22,
154.42, or
154.57; and
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone AE or A will be flood-proofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed;
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65)
with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited
to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures;
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
154.56(D)(3) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, and
A1-30;
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
154.56(F) and (G) of this chapter are met; and
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit;
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
154.22;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable; and
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE or A1-30.
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the
reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment of
the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven
day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (b)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and
an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of
any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to
construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold
the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   Manufactured home. If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A,
AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance
with the provisions of §
154.56(C)(2).
      (4)   Watercourse alteration. If a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation;
a professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of
the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing
the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be
submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development
permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
154.56(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
154.56(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
154.56(H) and (I).
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.42 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime Control
and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
154.59 are met.
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
154.41(C).
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of §
154.41(C).
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
154.41(C).
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
154.41(C) and
154.56(B).
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter.
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with §
154.22, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to §
154.57(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with §
154.22, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
   (N)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (O)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (P)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (Q)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (R)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
154.43.
   (S)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   (T)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with §
154.22 of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including Letters of
Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (U)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of
Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMR).
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.43 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention
ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring
the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.44 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the town, hereinafter
referred to as the “appeal board,” shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
154.20 of this chapter, provided provisions of §
154.44(I)(2), (I)(3), and (I)(5) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
154.20 of this chapter as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25
per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the State of North Carolina upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.55 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
154.41(C).
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334.
   (O)    When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation shall apply.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.56 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §
154.22 or §
154.57, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
154.55, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
154.20 of this chapter.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
154.20 of this chapter. Structures located in A, AE, and A1-30 Zones may be
floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation
provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in §
154.41(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
154.20 of this chapter.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is
above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (D) below.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local emergency management coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
   (G)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, and the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
      (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
154.55(A);
      (6)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
154.55(D); and
      (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of division (D)(3) above.
   (I)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that
satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or
floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with §
154.41(C).
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.57 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
154.22, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
154.55, shall apply:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet
each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
154.55 and
154.56.
      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a federal,
state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements
within floodway or non-encroachment areas shall also comply with the
requirements of §§
154.56 and
154.59.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such
base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with §
154.22 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
154.20. All other applicable provisions of §
154.56 shall also apply.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.58 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
154.55 and
154.56; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.59 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in §
154.22. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in §§
154.55 and
154.56, shall apply to all development within such areas:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         (b)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion
of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
154.56(C); and
         (b)   The no encroachment standard of division (B)(1) above.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 154.70 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.71 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective upon adoption.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall be fined not more than $50. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 10-4-2010; Ord. passed 3-7-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
-             - -         Grants a CATV franchise to Caldwell Cablevision, Inc.
Res. -        7-10-1995   Transfer of cable franchise from Lenoir TV Cable,
                          Inc., to Charter Communications Properties, Inc.
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1979 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section                                Code Section
1-593                                       10.05
Ch. 7A                                      154.44
                                            90.99,
                                            116.99 ,
14-4                                        131.02,  
                                            153.26,
                                            153.29
14-4(a)                                     10.99
14-113.8                                    116.02
15-27.2                                     153.21 Note
18B-1001                                    117.01
44A-1                                       93.15
47-30                                       151.30
62-3(17)                                    115.01
66-410                                      114.05
                                            151.05,
74-30                                       151.26,
                                            151.30
Ch. 89A                                     152.122
89C-3(7)                                    152.122
130A-290(a)(6)                              154.20
130A-290(a)(35)                             154.20
130A-290(a)(36)                             154.20
130A, Art. 9                                154.20
143-143.15                                  154.56
143-215.6A                                  152.999
Ch. 143, Art. 21                            152.110
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6                    154.01
Ch. 159                                     Charter, §
                                            5.3
                                            Charter, §
                                            1.1; Charter, §
Ch. 160A                                    1.3; Charter, §
                                            5.1; Charter,
                                            Appendix § 2; 153.110
160A-22                                     Charter, §
                                            2.1
160A-31                                     Charter, §
                                            1.4
160A-101                                    Charter,
                                            Appendix § 2
160A-101(9)(a)                              Charter,
                                            Appendix § 1
                                            Charter,
160A-102                                    Appendix § 1; Charter,
                                            Appendix § 2
                                            Charter,
160A-103                                    Appendix § 1; Charter,
                                            Appendix § 2
160A-175                                    10.99,
                                            132.99
160A-175(d),(e)                             132.99
160A-179                                    Ch. 116
160A-193                                    93.01
160A-193 et seq.                            92.05
160A-200.1                                  92.05
160A-303                                    93.01
160A-303.2                                  93.01
160A-319                                    111.01
160A-362 (Repealed)                         152.280
160A-371 through 160A-376 (Repealed)        151.02
160A-373 (Repealed)                         151.08
160A-443 (Repealed)                         153.22
160A-443(5) (Repealed)                      153.24
160A-446(f) (Repealed)                      153.22
160A-446(g) (Repealed)                      153.22
160A-446(6) (Repealed)                      153.25
160A, Art. 4A                               Charter, §
                                            2.1
160A, Art. 7, Part 2                        Charter,
                                            Appendix § 2
160A, Art. 8                                154.01
160A, Art. 10                               153.25
160A, Art. 19                               152.110
160A, Art. 19, Parts 3, 5, and 8 (Repealed) 154.01
160D-1-1                                    152.001
160D-1-2                                    152.268
160D-1-9(d)                                 152.266
160D-4-3(b)                                 152.268
160D-6-2(b)                                 152.285
                                            152.005,
160D-102                                    152.112,
                                            152.268
160D-105                                    152.022
160D-108(d)                                 152.247
160D-109                                    152.245,
                                            152.281
160D-109(d), (e), (f)                       152.266
160D-200                                    152.003
106D-301                                    152.280
                                            152.003,
160D-307                                    152.265,
                                            152.280
160D-308                                    152.281
160D-309                                    152.281
160D-403(a)                                 152.245
160D-403(b)                                 152.245,
                                            152.268
160D-403(e)                                 152.245
160D-403(f)                                 152.247
160D-404(a)                                 152.251
160D-405                                    152.247
160D-405(d)                                 152.268
160D-405(e)                                 152.247
160D-406                                    152.266
160D-602                                    152.285
160D-602(b)                                 152.285
160D-604                                    152.281,
                                            152.287
160D-604(c), (e)                            152.285
160D-902                                    152.076
                                            152.268,
160D-1402                                   152.272,
                                            152.274
163-292                                     Charter, §
                                            4.1
                                            
 
REFERENCES TO 1979 CODE
1979 Code Section 2013 Code Section
1979 Code Section 2013 Code Section
A-1               10.05
A-6               10.19
-1                11.01
-2                11.02
-3                11.03
-4                11.04
-5                11.05
-6                11.06
-7                11.07
C-1               50.01
C-2               50.02
C-3               50.03
C-4               50.04
C-5               50.05
D-1-1             115.01
D-1-2             115.02
D-1-3             115.03
D-1-4             115.04
D-1-5             115.05
D-1-6             115.06
D-1-7             115.07
D-1-8             115.08
D-1-9             115.09
D-1-10            115.10
D-1-11            115.11
D-1-12            115.12
D-1-13            115.13,
                  115.99
D-1-14            115.14
D-1-15            115.15
D-1-16            115.16
D-1-17            115.17
D-1-18            115.18
D-1-19            115.19
D-1-20            115.20
D-1-21            115.21
D-1-40            115.22
D-2-1             110.01
D-2-2             110.02
D-2-3             110.03
D-2-4             110.04
D-2-5             110.05
D-2-6             110.06
D-2-7             110.07
D-2-8             110.08
E-1               113.01
E-2               113.02
E-3               113.03
E-4               113.04
E-5               113.05
E-6               113.06
E-7               113.07
E-8               113.08
E-9               113.09
E-10              113.10
E-11              113.11
F-1-1             130.01
F-1-2             130.02
F-1-3             130.03
F-1-5             130.04
F-2-1             93.01
F-2-2             93.02
F-2-3             93.03
F-2-4             93.04
F-2-5             93.05
F-2-6             93.06
F-2-7             93.07
F-2-8             93.08
F-2-9             93.09
F-2-10            93.10
F-2-11            93.11
F-2-12            93.12
F-2-13            93.13
F-2-14            93.14
F-2-15            93.15
F-2-16            93.16
F-3-1             92.01
F-3-2             92.02
F-3-3             92.03
F-3-4             92.04
F-3-5             92.05
F-3-6             92.05
F-4-1             131.01
F-4-2             131.02
F-4-4             131.03
F-4-5             131.04
F-4-6             131.05
F-4-7             131.06
F-4-9             131.07
F-4-10            131.08
F-4-11            131.09
F-4-12            131.10
F-4-13            131.11
F-4-14            131.12
F-4-15            131.13
F-4-16            131.14
F-4-17            131.15
F-4-18            131.16
F-4-19            131.17
F-5-1             150.01
F-5-2             150.02
F-5-3             150.03
F-5-4             150.04
F-5-5             150.05
G-1               112.01
H-1               114.01
H-2               114.02
H-3               114.03
H-4               114.04
H-5               114.05
H-6               114.06
H-7               114.07
H-8               114.08
H-9               114.99
I-1               90.01
I-2               90.02
I-3               90.03
I-4               90.04
I-5               90.05
I-6               90.06
I-7               90.07
I-8               90.08
I-9               90.09
I-10              90.10
I-11              90.99
J-1               91.15
J-2               91.16
J-3               91.17
J-4               91.18
J-5               91.19
J-6               91.20
J-7               91.21
J-8               91.22
J-9               91.99
J-10              91.23
J-11              91.24
J-12              91.25
J-13              91.26
J-14              91.27
J-15              91.28
L-1               132.01
L-2               132.02
L-3               132.03
L-4               132.04
L-5               132.05
L-6               132.99
N-1               32.01
O-1               Charter,
                  Appendix § 1
P-1               32.02
Q-1               31.01
R-1-1             51.001
R-1-2             51.002
R-1-3             51.003
R-2-1             51.020
R-2-2             51.021
R-2-3             51.022
R-2-4             51.023
R-2-5             51.024
R-2-6             51.025
R-2-7             51.026
R-2-8             51.027
R-2-9             51.028
R-2-10            51.029
R-3-1             51.040
R-3-2             51.041
R-4-1             51.055
R-4-2             51.056
R-4-3             51.057
R-4-4             51.058
R-4-5             51.059
R-4-6             51.060
R-4-7             51.061
R-5-1             51.075
R-5-2             51.076
R-5-3             51.077
R-5-4             51.078
R-5-5             51.079
R-6-1             51.999
R-6-2             51.999
R-8               51.004
S-1-1             151.01
S-1-2             151.02
S-1-3             151.03
S-1-4             151.04
S-1-5             151.06
S-1-6             151.99
S-1-8             151.07
S-1-9             151.08
S-1-10            151.09
S-1-11            151.10
S-1-12            151.11
S-1-13            151.12
S-1-14            151.13
S-2-1             151.05
S-2-2             151.05
S-2-3             151.05
S-2-4             151.05
S-3-1             151.25
S-3-2             151.26
S-3-3             151.27
S-3-4             151.28
S-3-5             151.29
S-3-6             151.30
S-3-7             151.31
S-4-1             151.45
S-4-2             151.46
S-5-1             151.60
S-5-2             151.61
S-5-3             151.62
S-5-4             151.63
S-5-5             151.64
X-1               91.01
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        7-10-1995   TSO, Table I
-        6-5-2023    131.02
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed Description
-             - -         TSO, Table I
-             2-8-1981    112.01
                          90.01 -
-             2-9-1981    90.10,
                          90.99
                          114.01 -
-             2-9-1981    114.08,
                          114.99
                          111.01 -
-             5-9-1983    111.14,
                          111.99
                          51.001 -
                          51.004,
                          51.020 -
                          51.029,
                          51.040,
-             11-19-1984  51.041,
                          51.055 -
                          51.061,
                          51.075 -
                          51.079,
                          51.999
                          151.01 -
                          151.13,
                          151.25 -
                          151.31,
-             6- -1987    151.45,
                          151.46,
                          151.60 -
                          151.64,
                          151.99
                          132.01 -
-             7-10-1989   132.05,
                          132.99
-             5-3-1993    Charter,
                          Appendix § 1
-             8-2-1993    32.02
-             6-27-1994   31.01
                          153.01 - 152.08,
-             7-14-2008   153.20 -
                          153.29
                          152.001 -
                          152.005,
                          152.020 -
                          152.023,
                          152.035 -
                          152.037,
                          152.039 -
                          152.043,
                          152.055 -
                          152.061,
                          152.075 -
                          152.078,
                          152.090 -
                          152.097,
                          152.110 -
-             4-5-2010    152.127,
                          152.140 -
                          152.171,
                          152.185 -
                          152.196,
                          152.210 -
                          152.218,
                          152.230 -
                          152.232,
                          152.245 -
                          152.252,
                          152.285 -
                          152.287,
                          152.300 -
                          152.303,
                          152.999
                          154.01 -
                          154.04,
                          154.20 -
                          154.27,
                          154.40 -
-             10-4-2010   154.44,
                          154.55 -
                          154.59,
                          154.70,
                          154.71,
                          154.99
-             8- -2011    151.26
-             8-8-2011    Charter,
                          Appendix § 2
-             7-9-2012    152.035
-             11-5-2012   31.17
                          152.005,
                          152.035,
-             1-7-2013    152.075,
                          152.079,
                          152.197
-             4-1-2013    150.01 -
                          150.06
-             10-7-2013   152.075
-             4-7-2014    152.265 -
                          152.275
                          92.02,
                          92.04,
                          92.05,
-             5-5-2014    152.035,
                          152.075,
                          152.080,
                          152.999
                          152.280 -
-             11-3-2014   152.282,
                          152.285 -
                          152.287
                          152.005,
-             2-6-2016    152.035,
                          152.081
                          116.01 -
-             3-7-2016    116.03,
                          116.99
-             12-4-2017   117.01
-             10-1-2018   92.02
-             4-5-2021    152.037.1
                          152.001 -
                          152.005,
                          152.020 -
                          152.023,
                          152.035 -
                          152.037,
                          152.039 -
                          152.043,
                          152.055 -
                          152.061,
                          152.075 -
                          152.081,
                          152.090 -
                          152.097,
                          152.110 -
                          152.127,
                          152.140 -
-             5-3-2021    152.171,
                          152.185 -
                          152.197,
                          152.210 -
                          152.218,
                          152.230 -
                          152.232,
                          152.245 -
                          152.252,
                          152.265 -
                          152.275,
                          152.280 -
                          152.282,
                          152.285 -
                          152.287,
                          152.300 -
                          152.303,
                          152.999
-             5-3-2021    152.035
                          152.035,
-             10-4-2021   152.037,
                          152.039
                          10.99,
                          130.01,
                          131.01 -
-             3-7-2022    131.17,
                          151.99,
                          152.999,
                          154.99
-             - -         152.062
-             - -         152.080
12052022      12-5-2022   91.29
                          152.020,
05012023-2    5-1-2023    152.036,
                          152.043,
                          152.078
08072023      8-7-2023    152.041
92.05(D)(4)   11-6-2023   92.05
152.043(F)(E) 11-6-2023   152.042
-             3-4-2024    131.17
040124-1      4-1-2024    152.078
                          151.05,
040124-2      4-1-2024    151.26,
                          151.30,
                          151.31
-             8-5-2024    152.248
-             12-2-2024   92.02
                         
 
 
