Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all codifiable ordinances passed by
the Village of Simpson beginning since April 2021. The table includes links to
the ordinances (as maintained in PDF format) and to the code sections affected
(where applicable). For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to
2021, please contact the Village.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out and are not available in a PDF format for viewing.
 
Ord. No. Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No.   Adopt. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                       Amending Charter providing for electing Mayor by all
                       qualified voters
09-O-01    7-20-2009    
                       Sections affected:
                       Charter 3.2, 3.4, Adding 31.05
                       Amending ordinance 02-16-2015 regarding: Weeds,
                       Vegetation and other Public Health Nuisances
18-O-01    3-19-2018    
                       Sections affected:
                       91.20
22-O-001   2-28-2022   Adopting new Code of Ordinances
                       Amending Chapter 92 and Chapter 130 regarding pre-towing
                       notices and motor vehicle limits
22-O-002   1-24-2022    
                       Sections affected:
                       92.04, Adding 130.06
                       Amending Zoning Ordinance regarding appointment and
                       terms of Board of Adjustment members
22-O-003   4-18-2022    
                       Sections affected:
                       Chapter 152 (adopted by reference)
                       Amending Chapter 30 regarding regular meeting days
05.02.2023 5-15-2023    
                       Sections affected:
                       30.01
                       Amending Chapter 90
23-O-003   10-16-2023   
                       Sections affected:
                       90.20, 90.22, 90.23, 90.27, Repealing 90.28
                       Adding Nuisance Abatement Procedure
24-O-001   4-15-2024    
                       Sections affected:
                       Adding 91.23
                       Amending Chapter 90
25-O-001   10-27-2025   
                       Sections affected:
                       90.01 - 90.10
                      
 
 
SIMPSON, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2024 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation adopted through Ord. 24-O-002, passed 5-20-2024
State legislation current through Legislative Service, 2023 Acts, Pamphlet No.
6
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
Section
Article I. Incorporation and Corporate Powers
   
1.1   Incorporation and General Powers
   
1.2   Exercise of Powers
   
1.3   Enumerated Powers Not Exclusive
Article II. Corporate Boundaries
   
2.1   Corporate Boundaries
Article III. Mayor and City Council
   
3.1   Temporary Officers
   
3.2   Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore
   
3.3   Composition of Village Council
   
3.4   Terms; Qualifications; Vacancies
   
3.5   Compensation of Mayor and Members of Council
   
3.6   Organization of Council; Oaths of Office
   
3.7   Meeting of Council
   
3.7.1   Rules of Order
   
3.8   Quorum; Votes
   
3.9   Ordinances and Resolutions
Article IV. Election Procedure
   
4.1   Regular Municipal Elections
   
4.2   Regulation of Elections
Article V. Village Attorney
   
5.1   Appointment, Qualifications, Term, Compensation
   
5.2   Duties of the Village Attorney
Article VI. Administrative Officers and Employees
   
6.1   Village Clerk
   
6.2   Village Tax Collector
   
6.3   Village Finance Officer
   
6.4   Consolidation of Functions
   
6.5   Other Employees
Article VII. Finance
   
7.1   Custody of Village Money
   
7.2   Issuance of Bonds
   
7.3   Purchases and Contracts
   
7.4   Independent Audit
   
7.5   Taxation
Article VIII. Claims Against the Village
   
8.1   Tort Claims
Article IX. Effective Date
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS
SECTION 1.1 INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS.
   The inhabitants of the area described in Section 2.1 of this Charter:
   (a)   shall be and constitute a body politic and corporate under the name of
the Village of Simpson
   (b)   shall be vested with all property which may be acquired by the Village
and all rights herein delegated
   (c)   shall have perpetual succession
   (d)   may sue and be sued
   (e)   may contract
   (f)   may acquire and hold all such property, real and personal, as may be
devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed to, dedicated to, or
otherwise acquired by it
   (g)   may from time to time, hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same
   (h)   shall have and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all
municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every kind
and nature.
SECTION 1.2 EXERCISE OF POWERS.
   All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the Village,
its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as
provided by this Charter, or, if this Charter makes no provision, as provided
by ordinance or resolution of the Village Council and as provided by the
general Laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations.
SECTION 1.3 ENUMERATED POWERS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, or those appropriate, to the exercise of such powers, the
Village of Simpson shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to
municipal corporations by the general laws of North Carolina and all powers
which, under the Constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this
Charter specifically to enumerate.
ARTICLE II. CORPORATE BOUNDARIES
SECTION 2.1 CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.
   The corporate boundaries of the Village of Simpson until changed in
accordance with law are as follows: Located in Grimesland Township, Pitt
County, North Carolina, and particularly described as follows:
   BEGINNING at the intersection of the Southern line of the right of way of
the Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company and the Eastern line of State Highway
Number S.R. 1755 and runs from said beginning point as follows:
   Thence following the Southern right of way line of the said Norfolk and
Southern Railroad Company, North 7 5 West, 230 feet to the center line of a
ditch which divides the property of Winfield S. Tucker, conveyed to him by deed
recorded in Book Y-34 at page 167 and property conveyed to Carrie Talley
Briley, deed recorded in Book X-17 at page 592; thence following the center
line of said ditch which divides the said Tucker and Briley property and the
property owned by Mrs. W. P. Moore, the deed of which is recorded in Book S-20
at page 477, for a distance of 2450 feet to the intersection of said ditch with
the center line of Bates Branch, a corner with the said Briley and Moore lands;
thence up said Bates Branch, parsing under S.R. 1759, and following the
boundary lines between Jimmy Edwards and Mrs. Fred Edwards, also Thomas C.
Carson and Mrs. Fred Edwards, for a distance of 2,000 feet, to the point said
Bates Branch, intersects the southern property line of Jesse Lee Andrews;
thence following the Northern property line of Mrs. Fred Edwards, part of which
is the Southern boundary of the W. L. Wootton farm as shown by map recorded in
Map Book 2 at page 93, North 85-35 West, 1,550 feet to the dividing line
between Lots 10 and 11 of the said W.L. Wootton farm; thence following the
dividing line between Lots 10 and 11 and 6 and 7 of said Wootton’s farm,
crossing Jefferson Street, North 15-35 East 1359 feet to the Southern right of
way line of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company; thence following the
Southern line of the said Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company right of way,
South 74 East, 883 feet, to a point which is in the Eastern line of the said
Wootton’s Subdivision and said Railroad right of way, and which is opposite the
Southeast corner of property owned by Greenvilles Spinners, Inc.; thence North
15-35 East, crossing the right of way of the said Norfolk and Southern Railroad
Company, and following the Eastern property line of Greenvilles Spinners, Inc.,
which is the Western property line of the Mrs. C. S. Barron’s Heirs, also
following the Eastern property line of Dennis Manning, being property conveyed
to him by deed recorded in Book H-42 at page 243, 1,860 feet to a point which
is the extension of the Southern property line of Elsie Mills Porter; thence
South 79 East 800 feet, crossing S.R. 1755, to its Eastern property line, and
continuing with the Northern property line of Mrs. C. G. Barron Heirs and the
Southern property, line of Elsie Mills Porter, South 79 East, 900 feet, to the
Southeast corner of the Lucy Jane Hart property described in deed recorded in
Book A-34 at page 675 and continuing with the Southern line of said Lucy Jane
Hart and the Northern line of C. G. Barron Heirs, South 79 East, 384 feet, to
the Southwest corner of David W. Branch, deed being recorded in Book T-36 at
page 240, and continuing with the Branch Barron property line, South 79 East,
453.42 feet to the Western right of way line of S.R. 1759; thence continuing
South 79 East across the said S.R. 1759 to its Eastern property line and
continuing with the Branch-Barron property line, South 79 East 453.42 feet to
the Western right of way line of S.R. 17 59; thence continuing South 79 East,
across the said S.R. 1759 60 feet to the eastern right of way line of said S.R.
1759 which is on the property of Arden L. Tucker, thence following the-eastern
right of way of S.R. 1759 as it adjoins Arden L. Tucker, South 31-30 West 550
feet to a corner with William L. Tucker land, Deed recorded in Book Q-31 at
page 440; thence following the common boundary line between William L. Tucker
and Arlen L. Tucker, South 02 East 1325 feet to the northeasterly right of way
line of S.R. 1755; also known as Central Street in the Community of Simpson;
thence following the said Northern and Eastern right of way line of S.R. 1755,
crossing the right of way line of the said Norfolk and Southern Railroad, 244
feet to the Point of Beginning, containing 252 acres, more or less.
   The foregoing boundary lines are shown by Map prepared by Rivers and
Associates, Inc., dated March 4, 1974, being drawing Number Z - 505, and
entitled “Village of Simpson, N. C., proposed town limits.”
ARTICLE III. MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 3.1 TEMPORARY OFFICERS.
   Until the initial election provided for by Section
4.1 of this Charter,
   John T. McDonald, Jr.
   Junior Lee Dail
   Leonard Joe Hardee
   are hereby appointed Council men of the Village of Simpson, and Mayor and
Council until their successors are elected and qualify pursuant to this
Charter.
SECTION 3.2 MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   (a)   The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Village
for a term of two (2) years or until his or her successor is elected and
qualified. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Council shall
by appointment fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. The Mayor shall be the
official head of the Village government and shall preside at all meetings of
the Village Council.
      (1)   by the general laws of North Carolina
      (2)   by this Charter
      (3)   by the ordinances of the Village Council
   (b)   The council shall choose one of its members to act as Mayor Pro
Tempore, and such person shall perform the, duties of the Mayor in the Mayor’s
absence or disability. The Mayor Pro Tempore as such, shall have no fixed term
of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the remaining
members of the Council.
(Ord. 09-O-01, passed 7-20-2009)
SECTION 3.3 COMPOSITION OF VILLAGE COUNCIL.
   The Village Council shall consist of three (3) members to be elected by and
from the qualified voters of the Village of Simpson voting at large in the
manner provided by Article IV of this Charter.
SECTION 3.4 TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCIES.
   (a)   Except for the initial terms of office, the members of the Village
Council and the Mayor shall serve for terms of two (2) years, beginning the day
and hour of the organizational meeting following their election, as established
by ordinance in accordance with this Charter; provided, they shall serve until
their successor are elected and qualify.
   (b)   No person shall be eligible to be a candidate or be elected as a
member of the Village Council or as Mayor, or to serve in such capacity, unless
the person is a resident and a qualified voter of the Village.
   (c)   If any person is elected to the Council or as Mayor and shall refuse
to qualify, or if there shall be any vacancy in the membership of Council or
the office of the Mayor after the election and qualification, the remaining
members of the Council shall by majority vote appoint some qualified person to
serve for the unexpired term. Any person so appointed to the Council or as
Mayor shall have the same authority and powers as if regularly elected.
(Ord. 09-O-01, passed 7-20-2009)
SECTION 3.5 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
   The Village Council may fix its own compensation and allowances, and the
compensation and allowances of the Mayor, in such sums as may be just and
reasonable, effective following the next regular municipal election for seats
on the Village Council. The compensation and allowances of the Mayor shall not
be reduced during the then current term of office.
SECTION 3.6 ORGANIZATION OF COUNCIL; OATHS OF OFFICE.
   The Village Council shall meet and organize for the transaction of business
at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Council following each biennial
election. Before entering upon their offices, the Mayor and each member of the
Council shall take, subscribe, and have entered upon the minutes of the Council
the following oath of office:
   “I,                                  , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will support and maintain the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution and laws of North Carolina not inconsistent therewith and that I
will faithfully discharge the duties of my office as
                                    so help me God.”
SECTION 3.7 MEETING OF COUNCIL.
   The Village Council shall fix by ordinance suitable times for its regular
meetings, which shall be no less frequent than one meeting per month. Special
meetings may be held on the call of the Mayor or a majority of the members of
the Council, and those not joining in the call shall be notified in writing.
Any business may be transacted at a special meeting that might be transacted at
a regular meeting.
SECTION 3.7.1 RULES OF ORDER.
   The current issue of Robert’s Rules of Order, not inconsistent with this
Charter, shall constitute the Rules of Order of meetings of the Council.
SECTION 3.8 QUORUM; VOTES.
   (a)   A majority of the members elected to the Village Council shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of business, but a less number may adjourn
from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner as
may be prescribed by ordinance. The number required for a quorum shall not be
affected by vacancies.
   (b)   The affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Village
Council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or any resolution or motion
having the effect of an ordinance. All other matters to be voted upon shall be
decided by a majority vote of the members present and voting.
SECTION 3.9 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading or proving of ordinances shall be
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of North
Carolina not inconsistent with this Charter. The ayes and noes shall be taken
upon all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the
Council. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be:
   “BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Village of Simpson”
   All ordinances and resolutions shall take effect upon adoption unless
otherwise provided therein, or unless some provision of the General Statutes
provides otherwise.
ARTICLE IV. ELECTION PROCEDURE
SECTION 4.1 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   Regular municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday after the first
Monday in November of each odd-numbered year, beginning in 1975. In the regular
election of 1975, there shall be elected three (3) members of the Council.
Beginning in the regular election in 1975, and in subsequent elections all
terms shall be for two (2) years.
SECTION 4.2 REGULATION OF ELECTIONS.
   All municipal elections shall be conducted by the Pitt County Board of
Elections in accordance with the general laws of North Carolina relating to
municipal elections, except as otherwise herein provided. The municipal
elections shall be non-partisan and decided by a simple plurality. No primary
election shall be held.
ARTICLE V. VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION 5.1 APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS, TERM, COMPENSATION.
   The Village Council shall appoint a Village Attorney who shall be an
attorney at law licensed to engage in the practice of law in North Carolina and
who need not be a resident of the Village during tenure. The Village Attorney
shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Council and shall receive such
compensation as the Council shall determine.
SECTION 5.2 DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to prosecute and defend suits
for and against the Village; to advise the Mayor, Village Council and other
village officials with respect to the affairs of the Village; to draw all legal
documents relating to the affairs of the Village; to draw all proposed
ordinances when requested to do so; to inspect and pass upon all agreements,
contracts, franchises and other instruments with which the Village may be
concerned; to attend meetings of the Village Council when requested; and to
perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position of
Village Attorney.
ARTICLE VI. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION 6.1 VILLAGE CLERK.
   The Village Council shall appoint a clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Council and to maintain in a safe place all records and
documents pertaining to the affairs of the Village and to perform such other
duties as may be required by law or as the Council may direct.
SECTION 6.2 VILLAGE TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Village Council shall appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes,
licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the Village subject to the
provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the Village, and shall
diligently comply with and enforce all the general laws of North Carolina
relating to the collection, sale, and foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.
SECTION 6.3 VILLAGE FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Village Council may appoint a Village Finance Officer to perform the
duties of the Finance officer as required by the Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act.
SECTION 6.4 CONSOLIDATION OF FUNCTIONS.
   The Village Council may in its discretion consolidate the functions of any
two or more of the positions of Clerk, Tax Collector and Finance Officer, or
may assign the functions of any one or more of these positions to the holder or
holders of any other of these positions. The Council may also, in its
discretion, designate a single employee to perform all or any part of the
functions of any of the named positions in lieu of appointing several persons
to perform the same.
SECTION 6.5 OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   The Village Council may create and fill by appointment such other positions
as it deems advisable to ensure the efficient administration of the Village’s
affairs, and may, in its discretion appoint a person to supervise all Village
departments and may delegate such person the power of appointment and removal
of department heads and employees, other than the Village Attorney.
ARTICLE VII. FINANCE
SECTION 7.1 CUSTODY OF VILLAGE MONEY.
   All monies received by the Village for and in connection with the business
of the Village government shall be paid promptly into the Village depository.
Such institution shall be designated by the Village Council in accordance with
such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits
and interest thereon as may be established by the General Statutes of North
Carolina. All interest on monies belonging to the Village shall accrue to the
benefit of the Village. All monies belonging to the Village shall be disbursed
only in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act.
SECTION 7.2 ISSUANCE OF BONDS.
   The Village may issue bonds for the purposes and in the manner prescribed by
the General Statutes of North Carolina relating to the issuance of bonds by
municipalities.
SECTION 7.3 PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS.
   Purchases of apparatus, supplies, materials, and equipment, and contracts
for construction or repair work, shall be made in accordance with the General
Statutes of North Carolina relating thereto.
SECTION 7.4 INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an independent
audit shall be made of all books and accounts of the Village Government by a
certified public accountant or an accountant certified by the Local Government
Commission who shall have no personal interest directly or indirect ly in the
affairs of the Village or any of its officers. The Village Council shall select
the public accountant and the results of such, audit shall be made available
for inspection by any interested citizen of the Village and may be published if
so ordered by the Village Council.
SECTION 7.5 TAXATION.
   The territory within the corporate limits, and its citizens and property,
shall be subject to municipal taxes levied by the Village for the fiscal year
1975-76 and subsequent years. The Village may obtain from Pitt County, and the
Pitt County Tax Supervisor shall provide upon request, a record of property
within the corporate limits which was listed for taxation as of January 1,
1975.
ARTICLE VIII. CLAIMS AGAINST THE VILLAGE
SECTION 8.1 TORT CLAIMS.
   All claims or demands against the Village arising in tort shall be presented
to the Village Council in writing, signed by the claimant or attorney or agent
for claimant within ninety (90) days after such claim or demand is due or the
cause of action accrues. No suit or action shall be brought on such a claim or
demand within thirty (30) days or after the expiration of twelve (12) months
from the time such claim or demand is presented. Unless the said claim or
demand is so presented within ninety (90) days and unless suit is brought
within twelve (12) months thereafter, any action thereon shall be barred.
ARTICLE IX. EFFECTIVE DATE
   This Charter shall be effective at twelve o’clock noon on the fourteenth day
of April, 1975.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   VILLAGE STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Village of Simpson shall be
designated as the Code of Simpson, North Carolina, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Village of Simpson, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and, if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The Mayor and Council, or governing body, of the Village of
Simpson, North Carolina.
      COUNTY. The County of Pitt, North Carolina.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the village unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the village.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the village and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Simpson, in the County of Pitt, North Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the village shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the village for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
village or any evidence of the village’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the village;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any village officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the village;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or public way in
the village;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the
village;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the village not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
village; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new code by the village.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, Village of Simpson, North Carolina, is hereby amended as
follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Village of Simpson, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter or chapter
number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the village, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history
by “(Prior Code, §       ).” The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of the
provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   A person may not be found responsible or guilty of a violation
punishable pursuant to division (A) of this section if, when tried for that
violation, the person produces proof of compliance with the provisions of this
code of ordinances through any of the following:
      (1)   No new alleged violations of the provision within 30 days from the
date of the initial alleged violation.
      (2)   The person provides proof of a good-faith effort to seek assistance
to address any underlying factors related to unemployment, homelessness, mental
health, or substance abuse that might relate to the person's ability to comply
with the provisions of this code of ordinances.
(G.S. § 14-4(a), (c))
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
CHAPTER 11: VILLAGE STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Village seal
§ 11.01 VILLAGE SEAL.
   (A)   The village seal shall be a circle, within which and following the arc
at the top shall be the words “Village of Simpson” and following the arc at the
bottom shall be the initials “N.C.”; and within such circle shall be an inner
circle with words and figures, “INCORPORATED 1975” together with a
representation of a scroll, depicting the Village Charter.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall be custodian of the village seal.
   (C)   The village seal shall be affixed to all documents which are required
by law or by the Village Council to be attested thereby.
(Prior Code, § 1-8)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE COUNCIL
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
33.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
34.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Days for regular meetings
   
30.02   Order of business at regular meetings
   
30.03   Called meetings
   
30.04   Conduct of meetings generally; duty of Mayor at meetings
   
30.05   Rules of order
   
30.06   Majority vote required for appropriation of money or enactment,
alteration of ordinance and the like at other than regular meetings
   
30.07   Committees
§ 30.01 DAYS FOR REGULAR MEETINGS.
   There shall be a regular meeting of the Village Council on the third Monday
in each month beginning at 7:00 p.m. There shall not be regular meetings held
during the months of July and August; July and August meetings are held if
necessary.
(Prior Code, § 2-7) (Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 30.02 ORDER OF BUSINESS AT REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The order of business at a regular meeting of the Village Council
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Reading of the minutes of the last regular and intervening meetings
and correcting and improving such minutes;
      (2)   Unfinished business;
      (3)   Communications, resolutions and grievances;
      (4)   Report of committees;
      (5)   Report of Village Clerk;
      (6)   Report of Mayor; and
      (7)   Motions, resolutions and ordinances.
   (B)   If the Village Council directs any matter to be the special business
of a future meeting, such matter shall have precedence over all other business
at such meeting.
   (C)   The Mayor, in advance of the regular meetings of the Council, shall
prepare and deliver to each member of the Council an agenda of matters coming
before the Council at such meeting, and the Mayor shall direct the order of
business.
(Prior Code, § 2-8)
§ 30.03 CALLED MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore or any two members of the Village
Council may, at any time, call a special meeting by causing a written notice,
signed by the person calling the meeting, stating the time of such meeting and
the purposes thereof, to be delivered in hand to each Council member or left at
his or her usual dwelling place six hours before the time of such meeting.
   (B)   Meetings of the Village Council may also be held at any time when all
members of the Council are present and consent thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-9)
§ 30.04 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS GENERALLY; DUTY OF MAYOR AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   At the hour appointed for the meeting of the Village Council, the
Mayor shall take the chair and direct a call of the members by the Village
Clerk who shall note those present and absent.
   (B)   If a quorum is not present, the Mayor shall send for the absentees
and, upon the appearance of a quorum, shall call the meeting to order and
proceed with the dispatch of business, but if a quorum shall fail to attend,
the meeting shall stand adjourned.
   (C)   The Mayor shall preserve order and decorum and shall decide all
questions of order, subject to the right of appeal of any member of the
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-10)
§ 30.05 RULES OF ORDER.
   Except as may be provided otherwise by rule or resolution of the Village
Council in any particular instance, Robert’s Rules of Order, current edition,
shall govern the parliamentary procedure of the Village Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-11)
§ 30.06 MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED FOR APPROPRIATION OF MONEY OR ENACTMENT,
ALTERATION OF ORDINANCE AND THE LIKE AT OTHER THAN REGULAR MEETINGS.
   No proposition to appropriate money, to alter or repeal any ordinance or
rule of the Village Council or to establish any new ordinance or rule shall be
made or decided at any other than a regular meeting of the Council, except by a
majority vote of all the members of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-12)
§ 30.07 COMMITTEES.
   The Village Council, by resolution from time to time, may provide for the
establishment of standing and special committees of the Council, with such
powers and duties as the Council may consider appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 2-13)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Appointment and terms
   
31.02   Bonds required of certain personnel; blanket fidelity bonds
   
31.03   Ordinances and resolutions; entered into book; notation of amendments,
repeals
   
31.04   Contracts for construction and repair work; purchases of supplies and
the like
   
31.05   Mayor
Superintendent of Public Works
   
31.15   Control of work in and on streets; street maintenance, garbage, refuse
and vegetation selection
   
31.16   Cemetery maintenance
   
31.17   Trimming trees on sidewalks
   
31.18   Trucks, equipment and the like owned by the village
   
31.19   Powers as special police officer; power to arrest
   
31.20   Monthly report to Mayor; duty to give information
   
31.21   Collecting garbage
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERMS.
   The Village Council, at its first regular meeting in December, shall appoint
a Village Clerk and a Village Attorney who shall hold their positions at the
pleasure of the Council. Except as otherwise provided by the Charter or by law,
all other officers and employees of the village shall be appointed by the
Village Council to serve at its pleasure.
(Prior Code, § 2-1) (Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 31.02 BONDS REQUIRED OF CERTAIN PERSONNEL; BLANKET FIDELITY BONDS.
   (A)   Every officer, employee or agent of the village who handles or has
custody of more than $100 of the village’s funds at any time shall, before
assuming the duties as such, be required to enter into bond with good sureties,
in an amount sufficient to protect the village (as determined by the Village
Council), payable to the village and conditioned upon, the faithful performance
of the duties and a true accounting for all funds of the village which may come
into the hands, custody or control, which bond shall be approved by the Village
Council and deposited with the village; except that, such bond of any employee
or employees may, in the discretion of the Village Council, be conditioned only
upon a true accounting for funds of the village; provided that, the Village
Council may, by resolution, adopt a system of blanket faithful performance or
honesty bonding as an alternative to individual bonds, except as to the Village
Clerk.
   (B)   Village police officers and village personnel having authority to make
arrests, carry weapons or to make inspections shall be bonded as provided in
division (A) above, and a condition of such bond shall be to save harmless the
village against all actions, suits, claims and demands whatever by reason of
any act or omission of the bonded person in the performance of official duty.
   (C)   In addition to the approval required by division (A) above, all bonds
shall be approved as to form by the Village Attorney.
   (D)   The premium on official bonds shall be paid by the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-2)
§ 31.03 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; ENTERED INTO BOOK; NOTATION OF AMENDMENTS,
REPEALS.
   (A)   Ordinances entered in book.
      (1)   The Village Clerk shall enter in a well-bound book copies of all
ordinances passed by the Council.
      (2)   The book in which ordinances are thus entered shall be known as the
“Ordinances at Large of the Village of Simpson, North Carolina”, and shall be
indexed.
(Prior Code, § 2-3)
   (B)   Notation of amendments and repeals. The Village Clerk shall write on
the first page of every ordinance which has been amended or repealed, as the
case may be, the word “amended” or “repealed”, with a reference to the page of
the ordinance book where the amending or repealing ordinance can be found.
(Prior Code, § 2-4)
   (C)   Certain resolutions to be entered in book; notation of amendments and
repeals.
      (1)   The Village Clerk shall enter in a well-bound book copies of all
resolutions of the Village Council which are of general and permanent nature.
The book in which such resolutions are entered shall be known as the “General
Resolutions of the Village Council of the Village of Simpson, North Carolina”,
and shall be indexed.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall write on the first page of every such
resolution which has been amended or repealed, as the case may be, the word
“amended” or “repealed”, with reference to the page of the resolutions book
where the amending or repealing resolution can be found.
(Prior Code, § 2-5)
§ 31.04 CONTRACTS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR WORK; PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES AND
THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall prepare rules and regulations for the letting of
contracts for construction and repair work which is to be done for the village
under contract, and for the purchase or rental by the village of apparatus,
supplies, materials and equipment; provided that, no contract for construction
or repair work or for the purchase or rental of apparatus, supplies, materials
or equipment involving the expenditure of public money in the amount of $500 or
more, but less than $2,500, shall be made until after informal bids have been
secured; and, provided further that, all such contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder, taking into consideration quality, performance and
the time specified in the bids for the performance of the contract; and,
provided further that, such rules and regulations, as they apply to contracts
or purchases amounting to $2,000 or more, shall be consistent with the
provisions of G.S. § 143-129.
   (B)   Rules and regulations made pursuant to division (A) above, when
approved by resolution of the Village Council and promulgated by the Village
Council, shall have the force and effect of an ordinance.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each village officer entering into a contract
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Village Council to keep a record
of all bids submitted, and such record shall be subject to public inspection
during all regular office hours.
(Prior Code, § 2-6)
§ 31.05 MAYOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to:
   (A)   Keep himself or herself informed as to the village's business;
   (B)   Preside over the meetings of the Village Council;
   (C)   Cause all provisions of this code and the other ordinances of the
village to be enforced;
   (D)   Vote on questions before the Council only in the case of a tie vote
deadlocking a decision of the Village Council;
   (E)   Sign all contracts, agreements or paper-writings authorized by the
Village Council;
   (F)   Appoint the committees and outline their powers and duties as he or
she deems necessary with the direction of the Village Council to properly care
for the affairs of the Village; and
   (G)   Make the recommendations as he or she deems necessary or expedient to
the Village Council.
(Ord. 09-O-01, passed 7-20-2009)
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 31.15 CONTROL OF WORK IN AND ON STREETS; STREET MAINTENANCE, GARBAGE, REFUSE
AND VEGETATION SELECTION.
   The Superintendent of Public Works, under the supervision and direction of
the Mayor, shall have full control of the work in and upon the streets of the
village with full authority and power to hire and discharge labor, and do all
things that may be necessary from time to time for the proper maintenance of
village streets, subject always to the approval of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-34)
§ 31.16 CEMETERY MAINTENANCE.
   The Superintendent of Public Works, subject to the orders and directions of
the Mayor, shall keep the cemeteries free and clear of all rank vegetation and
undergrowth, maintain the walks thereof in good condition, and hire all labor
necessary for the proper maintenance of the cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 2-35)
§ 31.17 TRIMMING TREES ON SIDEWALKS.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall keep the shade trees on the
sidewalks properly trimmed, so that they may not interfere with the rights of
pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 2-36)
§ 31.18 TRUCKS, EQUIPMENT AND THE LIKE OWNED BY THE VILLAGE.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have full charge and control of all
trucks, sweepers, tractors, tools, machinery and other implements owned by the
village and shall, by duly prescribed administrative procedure, obtain all
things necessary for the proper maintenance of such trucks, sweepers, tractors,
tools and the like and keep the same in good condition, under the direction of
the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-37)
§ 31.19 POWERS AS SPECIAL POLICE OFFICER; POWER TO ARREST.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall be invested with the powers of a
special police officer and shall have the right and power to arrest, within the
police jurisdiction of the village, any person guilty of violation of any of
this code or other ordinance or regulation enacted by the village or of any law
of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2-38)
§ 31.20 MONTHLY REPORT TO MAYOR; DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall render to the Village Council,
prior to each regular monthly meeting of the Council, a report of all services
he or she has rendered and all amounts that he or she has expended and, at all
times, he or she shall give such information pertaining to his or her several
duties as he or she may be called upon to give from time to time by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-39)
§ 31.21 COLLECTING GARBAGE.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall collect and supervise the
collection of garbage, refuse and vegetation and shall employ such assistants
and labor as needed, subject always to the approval of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-40)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
   
32.01   Payment of money from Village Treasury; order of Council
   
32.02   Warrants to state purpose; signing warrants
   
32.03   Monthly statement of Village Clerk as to special taxes collected
   
32.04   When annual taxes to be levied
§ 32.01 PAYMENT OF MONEY FROM VILLAGE TREASURY; ORDER OF COUNCIL.
   No money shall be paid out of the Village Treasury unless by order of the
Village Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-14)
§ 32.02 WARRANTS TO STATE PURPOSE; SIGNING WARRANTS.
   (A)   All warrants for the payment of money from, the Village Treasury shall
state, upon the face thereof, the nature of the claim for which drawn and shall
be signed by a member of the Village Council and the Village Clerk.
   (B)   In the absence of or disability of either or both a member of the
Village Council and the Village Clerk, the person or persons designated by the
Village Council to act in the stead of the person or persons, absent or
disabled, shall sign warrants upon the Village Treasury.
(Prior Code, § 2-15) (Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 32.03 MONTHLY STATEMENT OF VILLAGE CLERK AS TO SPECIAL TAXES COLLECTED.
   The Village Clerk shall, at each regular meeting of the Village Council,
file a statement of all licenses and other special taxes collected for the
preceding month.
(Prior Code, § 2-17)
§ 32.04 WHEN ANNUAL TAXES TO BE LEVIED.
   The annual taxes of the village shall be levied by the Village Council in
accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2-18)
CHAPTER 33: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   When deemed to exist
   
33.02   Proclamation by Mayor; imposition of curfew
   
33.03   Curfew; where and to whom to be made applicable
   
33.04   Curfew violation prohibited
   
33.05   Termination of emergency and curfew
Continuity of Government
   
33.20   Purpose and authority
   
33.21   Short title
   
33.22   Designation of emergency interim successors to officers
   
33.23   Officers for whom successors to be designated
   
33.24   Emergency interim successors; qualifications; status; term; replacement
   
33.25   Filing and publication
   
33.26   Notification of other public authorities
   
33.27   Information from other jurisdictions
   
33.28   Assumption of powers and duties of principal by emergency interim
successors
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 WHEN DEEMED TO EXIST.
   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, the village public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety or
property within the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-19)
§ 33.02 PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR; IMPOSITION OF CURFEW.
   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the
lives, safety, health or welfare of the people within the village or
threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of such state of emergency and, in order more effectively
to protect the lives, safety and property of people within the village, to
define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of
the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-20)
§ 33.03 CURFEW; WHERE AND TO WHOM TO BE MADE APPLICABLE.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of
such a curfew to any specific area designated and described with the village
and to specific hours of day or night; and to exempt from the curfew police
officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as
may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary
to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people with the village.
(Prior Code, § 2-21)
§ 33.04 CURFEW VIOLATION PROHIBITED.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency when a curfew has
been imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to such curfew:
   (A)   To be or travel upon any public street or upon public property, unless
in search of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary
to sustain the well-being of himself or herself or his or her family or some
member thereof;
   (B)   To possess, off one’s own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise
transfer or dispose of any explosive, firearm, ammunition or dangerous weapon
of any kind;
   (C)   To sell beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any kind, or to
possess or consume the same off one’s own premises;
   (D)   To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum product, or any other
inflammable substance, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the
curfew imposed; and
   (E)   To violate any other provision of such proclaimed curfew.
(Prior Code, § 2-22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.05 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY AND CURFEW.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency and the curfew
as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Village
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-23)
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 33.20 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   Because of existing possibility of an attack upon the United States of
unprecedented size and destructiveness, including the inevitable hazards of
radioactive contamination, and in order, in the event of such an attack, to
assure the continuation of effective, legally constituted leadership, authority
and responsibility in the offices of the government of the village, it is found
and declared by the Village Council to be necessary to provide for emergency
interim officers who can exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
key executive, administrative, legislative and judicial offices of the village
in the event that the incumbents thereof are unable to perform the duties and
functions of their offices; and this subchapter is, therefore, enacted pursuant
to the authority conferred by G.S. Ch. 162B.
(Prior Code, § 2-24)
§ 33.21 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Continuity of
Government Ordinance of the Village of Simpson”.
(Prior Code, § 2-25)
§ 33.22 DESIGNATION OF EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS TO OFFICERS.
   Within 30 days following each general village election and after first
entering upon the duties of office, the Village Council shall, in addition to
any duly authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency interim
successors to village officers and specify their rank in order of succession
after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors of combination thereof for
each duly elective and appointive office in the village government.
(Prior Code, § 2-26)
§ 33.23 OFFICERS FOR WHOM SUCCESSORS TO BE DESIGNATED.
   Offices within the purview of this subchapter shall include Mayor, each
member of the Village Council, Village Clerk, Village Treasurer, Village
Attorney and such others as the Village Council may deem prudent to be
included.
(Prior Code, § 2-27)
§ 33.24 EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS; QUALIFICATIONS; STATUS; TERM;
REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim
successor unless he or she may, under the Constitution and statutes of the
state, the Village Charter and this code, hold the office of the person to
whose powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed; but no provision of
this code or other ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of the village
from holding another office shall be applicable to an emergency interim
successor.
(Prior Code, § 2-28)
   (B)   A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that
designation at the pleasure of the designator; provided that, the person must
be replaced if removed. The person retains this designation as emergency
interim successor until replaced by another appointed by the authorized
designator.
(Prior Code, § 2-29)
§ 33.25 FILING AND PUBLICATION.
   The name and address in order of succession of each duly authorized deputy
and emergency interim successor shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The
Village Clerk shall keep on file all such data regarding duly authorized
deputies and emergency interim successors and it shall be open to public
inspection.
(Prior Code, § 2-30)
§ 33.26 NOTIFICATION OF OTHER PUBLIC AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   The name and address, in order of succession, of each authorized
deputy and emergency interim successor shall be certified by the Village Clerk
and forwarded by the Clerk to the public officers mentioned in division (B)
below as soon as practicable after the Village Council meeting following each
regular village election, and thereafter from time to time as changes occur.
   (B)   Officers to whom such names and addresses shall be supplied shall be
the Secretary of State of this state, the Clerk of Superior Court of the county
and such other federal, state or municipal officers as may at any time be
designated by the Village Council, the Mayor, the Village Attorney or the
Village Clerk, on the basis of a possible need to know.
(Prior Code, § 2-31)
§ 33.27 INFORMATION FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   The Village Clerk, within the capabilities and limitations of the office,
shall endeavor to collect and file information as to deputies and emergency
interim successors of the county and state government, and such federal
agencies, if any, with which the village transacts business.
(Prior Code, § 2-32)
§ 33.28 ASSUMPTION OF POWERS AND DUTIES OF PRINCIPAL BY EMERGENCY INTERIM
SUCCESSORS.
   If, in the event of an attack any officer named in §
33.23 of this chapter is unavailable, the senior available emergency interim
successor shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties or such officer.
An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these
duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer becomes available
or a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected and qualified as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-33)
Statutory reference:
   Providing that “no person, as a prerequisite to the exercise of the powers
or discharge of the duties of an office to which he succeeds, shall be required
to comply with any other provision of law (other than oath of office) relative
to taking office”, see G.S. § 162B-10
CHAPTER 34: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
   
34.01   Municipal elections; absentee voting
   
34.02   Construction contracts; participation by minority-owned businesses
   
34.03   Disposing personal property
§ 34.01 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS; ABSENTEE VOTING.
   Absentee voting shall be permitted in municipal elections in the village,
including primary, general elections or referendums.
(Res. passed 8-1-2007)
§ 34.02 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS; PARTICIPATION BY MINORITY-OWNED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   The village shall have a verifiable goal of 10% for participation by
minority businesses in building construction contracts awarded pursuant to G.S.
§ 143-128.2.
   (B)   (1)   The official, employee or agent responsible for advertising such
contracts shall compile a list of minority businesses within the bidding area,
using information obtained from the state’s Department of Economic and
Community Development, Minority Business Development Agency or from other
institutions or agencies providing such information.
      (2)   This list shall be updated on an annual basis and shall be
available so that minority businesses will have the opportunity to add their
names to the list. Copies of the resolution codified herein shall be
transmitted to the businesses on the list as soon as practicable along with the
name of the official, employee or agent who shall serve as the contact person
for minority businesses and be responsible for answering project related
questions posed by minority businesses.
   (C)   For each building contract put out for bids under the separate
specification or the single prime contract systems, notice of the contract
shall be transmitted to minority businesses on the above list.
   (D)   For each building contract put out for bids under the separate
specification or single prime contract systems, documents related to the
contract shall be available for inspection at a convenient and accessible
location of which minority businesses shall receive notice.
   (E)   For each building contract put out for bids under the separate
specification or single prime contract systems, the contract person designated
pursuant to division (C) above shall hold a pre-bid conference to orient
contractors and subcontractors to the policy expressed in this section as well
as bid procedures and regulations. Minority businesses on the list obtained and
maintained as provided herein shall be notified of and invited to these pre-bid
conferences.
   (F)   For each such building contract put out for bids under the separate
specifications or single prime contract system, published notice of the
contract shall include a summary of this section.
   (G)   For any such building contract put out for bids under the separate
specification contract system, the contact person designated herein shall
maintain records with respect to:
      (1)   Those contractors or subcontractors notified of the project and the
number of these contractors and subcontractors that are minority businesses, as
defined in G.S. § 143-128, appearing on the list of minority businesses
maintained pursuant to division (G)(2) below;
      (2)   Those contractors or subcontractors that bid or otherwise respond
to notice of the project and the number of these that are on the maintained
list of minority businesses;
      (3)   Those contractors or subcontractors awarded contracts as part of
the project and the number and identity of those that are on the list of
minority businesses; and
      (4)   The percentage of work on the project that is to be performed by
minority businesses appearing on the list maintained pursuant to this section.
   (H)   For any such building contract put out for bids under the single prime
contract system, the single prime contractor shall:
      (1)   Notify those minority businesses appearing on the list of minority
businesses maintained pursuant to division (B) above of the portion of the
project which will be subcontracted by the single contractor and solicit bids
from those minority businesses;
      (2)   Submit with his or her bids records with respect to:
         (a)   Those subcontractors notified of the project and of those
elements of the project for which subcontracts will be let and the number of
these subcontractors that are minority businesses, as defined in G.S. § 143-
128, appearing on the list of minority businesses maintained pursuant to
division (B) above; and
         (b)   Those subcontractors that bid or otherwise respond to notice of
the project and the number of these that are on the maintained list of minority
businesses.
      (3)   Those subcontractors awarded contracts as part of the project and
the number and identity of those that are on the maintained list of minority
businesses; and
      (4)   The percentage of work on the project that is to be performed by
minority businesses appearing on the list maintained pursuant to this section.
   (I)   These policies shall be a part of the request for proposals for any
such contract, and non-compliance by any single prime bidder shall be grounds
for declaring the bid non-responsive.
(Res. passed 2-18-2008)
§ 34.03 DISPOSING PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to dispose of any surplus personal
property owned by the village, whenever he or she determines, in his or her
discretion, that:
      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than
$2,500;
      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and
      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interests of the village would best be served by disposing of
the property.
   (B)   The Mayor may dispose of any such surplus personal property by any
means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest
attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including, but not
limited to, the methods of sale provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 12. Such sale
may be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting
period.
   (C)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the
highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the village
if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Mayor is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no offers
are received within a reasonable time, the Mayor may retain the property,
obtain any reasonably available salvage value or cause it to be disposed of as
waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any individual or
organization, except by resolution of the Village Council. No surplus property
may be purchased by the Mayor or his or her family or by other employees of the
village and their families, except by resolution of the Village Council.
   (D)   The Mayor shall keep a record of all property sold under authority of
this section and that record shall generally describe the property sold or
exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and the amount of money
or other consideration received for each sale or exchange.
(Ord. 18-O-2, passed 4-16-2018)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 50: WATER AND SEWER
Section
   
50.01   Schedule of fees and charges
§ 50.01 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.
   The village will adopt a schedule of water and sewer fees and charges that
equals or exceeds 1.5% of the median household income for a residential
customer consuming 5,000 gallons per month.
(Res. passed 12-8-2008)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   VEHICLE REGISTRATION; LICENSE PLATES
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: VEHICLE REGISTRATION; LICENSE PLATES
Section
   
70.01   Registration of vehicles; fee
   
70.02   Issuance; duplicates
   
70.03   Transferability
   
70.04   Display
   
70.05   Operation without plate; use of plate on another vehicle
§ 70.01 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES; FEE.
   (A)   Every resident motor vehicle operated in the village, except motor
vehicles temporarily operated for a period of time not exceeding a total of 14
days during any one year, and except motor vehicles operated for display or
exhibition purposes by manufacturers or dealers and displaying dealers’ license
plates issued by the state, shall be registered with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The period of registration shall include the 12 months from January 1
to December 31.
   (C)   The fee for registration shall be $2, which shall be added to the ad
valorem tax bill due to the village by the resident.
(Prior Code, § 6-1) (Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 70.02 ISSUANCE; DUPLICATES.
   (A)   For every motor vehicle registered as required by this chapter, the
Village Clerk shall issue to the person registering such vehicle an appropriate
license plate.
   (B)   Upon satisfactory evidence that any such registration number has been
lost or destroyed, the Village Clerk shall issue to the owner or operator of
such registered vehicle a duplicate thereof, for which there shall be paid a
fee of $0.50.
(Prior Code, § 6-2)
§ 70.03 TRANSFERABILITY.
   A license plate issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferred
from one vehicle to another and shall not be used by any person upon any motor
vehicle, except the one for which it was issued, nor shall it be used upon such
vehicle, except as long as such vehicle remains the property of the person to
whom it belongs at the time of registration and in whose name it was
registered; provided that, where a motor vehicle has been fully registered and
the license plate has been properly issued for such vehicle, the owner of such
vehicle may, upon the sale or exchange thereof, transfer the license plates
assigned to such vehicle to the purchaser of such vehicle by registering such
transfer with the Village Clerk and upon such transfer, the transferee of such
license plate shall be entitled to use the same upon the vehicle purchased.
(Prior Code, § 6-3)
§ 70.04 DISPLAY.
   There shall be displayed on every motor vehicle driven or operated, for
which registration under this chapter is required, the license plate issued
therefor, in such manner as to be visible at all times. Every such license
plate shall be displayed throughout the current year for which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 6-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.05 OPERATION WITHOUT PLATE; USE OF PLATE ON ANOTHER VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon or over the streets of
the village without a license plate issued pursuant to this chapter. It shall
be unlawful to use or display any such license plate, whether the original or a
duplicate, on or upon any other motor vehicle than that for which such plate
was issued. Each day such plate is misused or such vehicle is operated upon any
streets of the village without a proper village license plate shall constitute
a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Golf Carts
   
71.01   Purpose
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Rules and regulations; safety requirements
   
71.04   Registration, inspection and fees
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GOLF CARTS
§ 71.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter shall be to establish a golf cart
ordinance within the village to promote the health, safety and welfare of
persons operating golf carts or carts within the village. Golf carts,
hereinafter sometimes referred to as “carts”, are not designed or manufactured
to be used on public streets and roads, and the village in no way advocates or
endorses their operation on streets and roads.
   (B)   The village, by regulating such operation, is merely trying to address
obvious safety issues, and adoption of this subchapter is not to be relied upon
as a determination that operation on streets or roads is safe or advisable if
done in accordance with this subchapter.
   (C)   All persons must be observant of, and attentive to, the safety of
themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists
and pedestrians.
   (D)   (1)   Any person who owns, operates or rides upon a golf cart on a
public street, road or highway within the village does so at his or her own
risk and peril and assumes all liability resulting from the operation of the
golf cart.
      (2)   The village has no liability under any theory of liability for
permitting carts to be operated on roads under special legislation granted by
the state legislature.
      (3)   Any person who operates a cart is responsible for procuring
liability insurance sufficient to cover the risk involved in using a cart on
the streets and roads of the village.
(Ord. 19-O-05, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. For
purposes of this subchapter, those definitions set out in G.S. § 20-4.01 shall
also apply throughout.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license issued to operate a motor vehicle issued
by North Carolina or any other state.
   GOLF CART. Sometimes referred to as a CART, a vehicle designed and
manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational
purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 mph. The definition
is republished here for convenience only and the definition set out in G.S. §
20-4.01(12b), as amended from time to time, is controlling for all purposes.
   OPERATOR. Only persons over 16 years of age and holding a valid driver’s
license may operate a golf cart.
(Ord. 19-O-05, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 71.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS; SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Carts may be driven on roads only from official sunrise to official
sunset unless the cart is equipped with two operating headlights (one on each
side of the front of the golf cart) and two operating taillights with brake
lights (one on each side of the rear of the golf cart) which are visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet.
   (B)   Carts must be equipped with:
      (1)   A rear vision mirror;
      (2)   A rear triangle reflector of the same type required by state law,
or a reflective “slow moving sign” or “flag” on the rear of the cart;
      (3)   The brakes provided by the manufacturer of the golf cart that are
in proper working order; and
      (4)   The golf cart must have all of the standard safety features
provided by the manufacturer and must not have been modified to exceed a speed
of 20 mph, nor otherwise modified in any way that creates a hazard regarding
the speed of the cart.
   (C)   No golf cart may be operated at a speed greater than reasonable and
prudent for the existing conditions, and in any instance at a speed greater
than 20 mph.
   (D)   Children must be properly seated while the golf cart is in motion and
may be not transported in a negligent manner.
   (E)   Cart drivers must have a valid driver’s license issued in their names
to operate carts on the roads and streets of the village.
   (F)   Cart drivers shall stay to the far right of the traveled portion of
the road and yield the right-of-way to overtaking vehicles.
   (G)   The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number
of persons for whom individual seating is installed and provided on the golf
cart. The operator and all occupants shall be seated in the golf cart and no
part of the body of the operator or occupant shall extend outside the perimeter
of the golf cart while the golf cart is in motion.
   (H)   All applicable state laws and traffic flow patterns shall be adhered
to, including the possession and use of alcoholic beverages.
   (I)   The operator of a golf cart shall comply with all traffic rules and
regulations adopted by the state and the village which governs the operation of
motor vehicles.
   (J)   Carts shall not be operated on sidewalks.
   (K)   Carts shall not be operated on private property without the permission
and consent of the property owner.
   (L)   No golf cart shall be operated on any village street with a posted
speed limit of greater than 35 mph. However, carts may cross over roads that
have a posted speed limit of greater than 35 mph.
   (M)   Golf carts may only be parked in the same manner and at the same
places designated for the parking of motor vehicles. The stopping, standing or
parking of golf carts in areas where parking is not allowed or in any place
that impedes the flow of traffic, pedestrian walkways or passageway is
prohibited.
   (N)   Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of towing another cart,
trailer or vehicle of any kind including a person on roller skates, skateboard
or bicycle.
   (O)   ATVs, four-wheel utility vehicles and other similar utility vehicles
which are not manufactured for operation on a golf course and golf carts which
have been modified so that they no longer meet the definition of a golf cart
may not be registered as a golf cart, nor shall such vehicles be operated on
the public roads, streets and highways within the village, unless such vehicles
are otherwise registered with and allowed under the motor vehicle laws of the
state.
(Ord. 19-O-05, passed 10-21-2019) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 REGISTRATION, INSPECTION AND FEES.
   (A)   No golf cart may be operated on any public street, road or highway
within the village or on property owned or leased by the village unless the
golf cart has first been registered with the village, as required herein.
   (B)   To evidence the registration, the owner shall be issued a permit which
shall be displayed in a prominent, visible place on the front windshield or
rear fender of the golf cart or at such other place as may be approved by the
Village Clerk (“permit”). The permit may contain a registration number assigned
for the particular golf cart. Permits will be issued annually and are valid
from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
   (C)   Permits issued to operators/owners of golf carts are done so by the
Village Clerk. A registration fee in the amount of $10, or such other amount as
may be established and published in the Schedule of Fees and Charges adopted by
the Village Council from time to time, as amended, shall be paid to the village
at the time the application for registration is filed with the Village Clerk.
The golf cart owner must complete the registration application which will be
maintained by the village. Should a golf cart previously receiving registration
approval from the village change ownership, the new owner of said cart shall
apply for registration in his or her name and pay the associated registration
fee stated herein above.
   (D)   To obtain approval of an application for registration, each owner must
have proof of ownership, proof of liability insurance for the cart and its
operators and a completed disclaimer of liability releasing the village, its
employees and affiliates from all liability that may arise as a result of
operating a cart in the village. The disclaimer of liability must be renewed
annually.
   (E)   Lost or stolen permits are the responsibility of the owner. A written
report detailing the occurrence must be filed with the Village Clerk in the
event of a lost or stolen permit. The Village Clerk will have the discretion in
determining whether a permit may be reissued in this instance. If no record can
be found of a previous application or the receipt of a permit, the Village
Clerk may direct the applicant to reapply and also resubmit any and all fees
necessary before a permit is issued.
   (F)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall inspect the golf cart
presented for registration to ensure that the safety requirements set forth in
§
71.03 of this chapter are met, and every golf cart operating on village streets
or roads must have the safety equipment and minimum standards stated in the
same. Any cart presented for registration that does not meet said requirements
shall not be approved for operation upon the streets, roads and highways of the
village. The Village Clerk retains the right to refuse to issue and to revoke
any permit issued for any golf cart at any time and for any reason that he or
she feels is appropriate to ensure the safety and well-being of the citizens of
the village.
(Ord. 19-O-05, passed 10-21-2019) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who operates a cart in the village and fails to
obtain and properly display a permit, or who fails to maintain his or her
previously registered and approved cart in compliance with §§
71.01 through
71.04 of this chapter, will be subject to all applicable state laws, in
addition to being in violation of §§
71.01 through
71.04 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any act constituting a violation of §§
71.01 through
71.04 of this chapter or a failure to comply with any of its requirements shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty not to exceed $50 or such other amount
as shall be set forth in the Schedule of Fees and Charges adopted by the
village from time to time, as amended. Each day that any of the provisions of
§§
71.01 through
71.04 of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 19-O-05, passed 10-21-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL
      
91.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
92.   ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED VEHICLES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Running at large or tethering in streets, lots and the like
   
90.02   Keeping hogs and livestock
   
90.03   Dead animals and fowl; removal
   
90.04   Wholesale poultry yards
   
90.05   Sanitary, inoffensive conditions where animals or fowl kept
   
90.06   Responsibility of owners
   
90.07   Cruelty to animals
   
90.08   Stray animals or suffering animals; disposition
   
90.09   Animal sanitation
Dogs
   
90.20   Definitions
   
90.21   Enforcement generally; police powers of Animal Warden
   
90.22   Tethering, keeping and penning
   
90.23   Rabies vaccination and tag
   
90.24   Restraint
   
90.25   Public nuisance
   
90.26   Muzzles required
   
90.27   Impoundment; redemption of impounded animals; fees
   
90.28   Reserved
   
90.29   Investigations
   
90.30   Interference prohibited
   
90.31   Records
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 RUNNING AT LARGE OR TETHERING IN STREETS, LOTS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any animal or fowl
to roam at large to be tethered in any of the streets or public lots of the
village.
(Prior Code, § 3-1) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 KEEPING HOGS AND LIVESTOCK.
   It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to keep live hogs, horses,
goats, chickens or cows within the village.
(Prior Code, § 3-2) (Ord. passed 6-20-1994) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 DEAD ANIMALS AND FOWL; REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning an animal or fowl of any kind or
description, which shall die within the village, to neglect or refuse to
dispose of the carcass thereof in accordance with the regulations of the
county’s Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-3) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 WHOLESALE POULTRY YARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a wholesale poultry yard,
wherein quantities of fowl of any and all description are gathered and kept for
call or shipment, within any residential district of the village or within 80
feet of any place of human abode within the corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 3-4) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 SANITARY, INOFFENSIVE CONDITIONS WHERE ANIMALS OR FOWL KEPT.
   All owners and persons in possession or control of stables, corrals, pens,
coops, warrens and other places where animals or fowl are kept shall maintain
such places in a clean, sanitary and unoffensive condition at all times, and in
such manner as meets with approval of the county’s Health Department; and shall
remove all manure therefrom and spray such places with suitable disinfectant at
least once each week.
(Prior Code, § 3-5) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.
   (A)   Any person owning, harboring or keeping an animal or fowl shall be
responsible for the acts thereof and accountable for any nuisance committed by
such animal or fowl upon the property of another and for injury to another’s
person or property.
   (B)   Persons owning, harboring or keeping an animal or fowl shall provide
humane shelter from heat, cold, rain, wind and snow, and shall provide food and
water adequate to keep the animal or fowl in good health and comfort, and
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, if such veterinary care is
available. Animals requiring exercise shall be given reasonable opportunity
therefor, as needed.
(Prior Code, § 3-6) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully overdrive, overload, wound,
injure, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat,
needlessly mutilate or kill or cause or procure to be overdriven, overloaded,
wounded, injured, tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance,
cruelly beaten, needlessly mutilated or killed as aforesaid any useful beast,
fowl or animal. In this section, the words “animal” and “dumb animal” shall be
held to include every living creature; the words “torture”, “torment” or
“cruelly” shall be held in include every act, omission or neglect whereby
unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted; but
such terms shall not be construed to prohibit lawful shooting of birds and game
for human food.
(Prior Code, § 3-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 STRAY ANIMALS OR SUFFERING ANIMALS; DISPOSITION.
   Whenever the Animal Warden encounters a stray animal suffering pain, he or
she shall take the animal to a veterinarian where the cost of any care or
treatment shall be borne by the owner of such animal. If ownership of the
animal cannot be determined, the Warden shall act in accordance with
instructions from the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 3-8)
§ 90.09 ANIMAL SANITATION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following restrictions shall apply.
   (A)   Any person owning, harboring, walking, in possession of or in charge
of a dog which defecates on public property, public park property, public
right-of-way or any private property without the permission of the private
property owner, shall remove all feces immediately after it is deposited by the
dog. All feces removed in accordance with this section shall be placed in a
suitable bag or other container that closes and disposed of in a lawful manner.
   (B)   Any person, while harboring, walking, in possession of or in charge of
a dog on public property, public park property, public right-of way or any
private property without the permission of the private property owner, shall
have in his or her possession a hag or other container that closes, which is
suitable for removing feces deposited by the dog.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to blind persons using
dogs as guides.
(Ord. passed 5-2-2011)
DOGS
§ 90.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises designated by action of the village for the
purposes of impounding and caring for any animal found in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The person or persons employed by the village as its
enforcement officer(s). It also includes any employee of the county charged
with the responsibility for animal control in the county.
   COMMERCIAL BREEDER. Any person, group of persons, corporation or entity that
owns, has custody of or maintains female dogs for the purpose of breeding
offspring to sell or trade.
   GENDER CLAUSE. The designations OWNER, PERSON, HIM, HER and CORPORATION or
any derivative thereof as used herein shall include singular, plural,
masculine, feminine or neuter as required by context.
   HUMANE SOCIETY. The Pitt County Humane Society.
   KENNEL.
      (1)   Any person, group of persons, or corporations engaged in the
commercial business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding five or more dogs.
      (2)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain more
than three dogs on any lot or parcel of land within the village limits having
less than 20,000 square feet, and an additional 7,000 square feet shall be
required for each additional dog; provided, however, that, this limitation
shall not apply to dogs which are less than five months of age, not to boarding
facilities, kennels or veterinary hospitals.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to
maintain such dog in quarters not sanitary.
   NUISANCE. A dog is deemed a public nuisance and a threat to public health,
welfare and tranquility if it habitually chases bicycles, snaps at pedestrians,
bites persons not trespassing on the dog owner’s property, roams in packs,
disturbs garbage by scattering it outside of the container in which it was
placed, disturbs clothes and other objects hanging, damages gardens, flowers or
vegetables, fouls public areas (sidewalks and other public ways), engages in
frequent, habitual howling, yelping, barking, fighting or the making of other
noises which disturb the neighborhood, or is a female dog running at large
while in heat. The presence of any stray dog within the limits of village is
hereby declared to be a PUBLIC NUISANCE. Such animals are a threat to the
health of the community and the safety of persons and property alike.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons or corporation that possesses, owns,
keeps, has charge of, shelters, feeds or takes care of a dog or dogs.
   RESTRAINT. A dog is under restraint within the meaning of this subchapter if
it is:
      (1)   Controlled by a leash;
      (2)   At “heel” beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s
commands;
      (3)   On or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street and
unable to bite persons outside the vehicle; or
      (4)   Harbored in the manner as to keep the dog(s) exclusively upon the
premises of the owner.
   RUNNING AT LARGE or STRAY. Any dog shall be deemed to be at large or stray
when he or she is off the property of his or her owner and not under control of
a competent person, or which is not cared for nor harbored, or does not wear a
tag or emblem, or which as not been vaccinated as required by this subchapter.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Simpson.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-27-2009; Ord. 23-O-003, passed 10-16-2023)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY; POLICE POWERS OF ANIMAL WARDEN.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by the
Animal Warden in order to abate the problems of dogs running at large, stray
dogs and dogs deemed to be public nuisances.
      (1)   The Animal Warden shall be charged with the responsibility of
investigating all complaints with regard to dogs covered by this subchapter and
enforcing within the village all state laws and ordinances enacted by the
village for the care, custody and control of dogs located within the village.
      (2)   Except as may otherwise be provided by statute, local law or
ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the village, or of the county,
charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter or
applicable law, shall be personally liable for any damage that may be incurred
by persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of such duties unless he or she acted with actual malice.
      (3)   The Animal Warden or his or her authorized representative is
authorized to issue civil citations to the owner of any dog(s) which is found
to be a public nuisance or found unrestrained or at large under this subchapter
and may also impound the dog(s), or both.
   (B)   Police powers of Animal Warden.
      (1)   In the performance of his or her duties, the Animal Warden shall
have the power and authority in regard to enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter which relate to the care, treatment and impounding of dogs for
violations of such provisions.
      (2)   The Animal Warden shall have the authority to enter upon any
property to enforce the provisions of this subchapter or other applicable state
law if the violation of such law has been committed in the presence of such
Animal Warden.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Warden or his or her authorized
representative to take up and impound in the animal shelter dogs which are
found or kept contrary to the provisions of this subchapter. The Animal Warden
or his or her authorized representative is authorized to go upon unenclosed
lots of land when necessary to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.22 TETHERING, KEEPING AND PENNING.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to restrain a dog using a
chain, wire or other type of tethering device on vacant, unoccupied or
uninhabited property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or commercial breeder to keep,
pen or kennel a dog on vacant, unoccupied, uninhabited property or a property
that does not contain a properly zoned and occupied residence. The owner or
custodian of any dog must reside on the parcel of land where that dog is
tethered, kept, permitted or kenneled. This section shall apply to the owners
of a commercial breeder.
      (3)   Tethered dogs shall have access to adequate food, water and
shelter. Dogs must have adequate shelter that protects them from injury and the
weather, including rain, direct sunlight, heat above 90 degrees, and cold below
32 degrees, flooding, tornadoes, thunderstorms, tropical storms and hurricanes.
It must have a solid floor and be large enough for the dog to lie in
comfortably. Dogs must always have access to fresh water in a clean and durable
container and must be provided with nutritious food on a daily basis. Any
shelter must be kept in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of an
animal's owner or keeper, to knowingly and intentionally harbor or keep in
possession by confinement any animal that does not belong to him or her. Any
person in possession of a stray animal shall contact the Village of Simpson
within 24 hours to provide notice of the stray animal's description and
location or to arrange for impoundment. It shall also be unlawful for any
person other than the owner or keeper of an animal to remove its collar or
rabies tag.
   (C)   No more than three dogs, over six months old, shall be kept on any
residential or commercial parcel of land in town containing one-half an acre or
less. No more than five dogs, over six months old, shall be kept on any
residential or commercial parcel of land in town containing more than one-half
acre.
   (D)   No dog pen or enclosure shall be within 30 feet of the dwelling or
house of any person other than the dog's owner, unless by permission of the
neighbor in writing. No pen shall be built for the purpose of maintaining more
than five dogs within 500 feet of the town limits. This section shall also
apply to commercial breeders.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any commercial breeder to keep and maintain
more than three female dogs, over six months old, at their kennel.
(Ord. 23-O-003, passed 10-16-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 RABIES VACCINATION AND TAG.
   All dogs within the village limits shall be inoculated against rabies and
shall wear a collar to which is attached a current rabies vaccination tag and a
tag identifying current owner for notification.
(Ord. 23-O-003, passed 10-16-2023) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 RESTRAINT.
   It shall be unlawful for a person owning or having the possession, charge,
care, custody or control of any dog to fail to keep such dog or dogs
exclusively upon his or her premises only if it is under control of a competent
person and restrained by a chain or leash or other means of actual physical
control.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.25 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to keep or have within the city
a dog that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, strays, runs at large,
attacks or barks at pedestrians, flowers or vegetables or to permit a female
dog to run at large while in heat as set out in §
90.20 of this chapter.
   (B)   If a dog is reported as being a nuisance as set out in §
90.20 of this chapter, the Animal Warden shall investigate to determine whether
the dog(s) in question falls within the definition of nuisance in §
90.20 of this chapter. If he or she finds that the dog(s) is a nuisance, he or
she shall order the owner to keep the dog(s) under restraint at all times. The
owner shall not permit the dog(s) to be at large. It shall be unlawful for the
owner to allow a dog that is a nuisance as defined in §
90.20 of this chapter to be at large after receipt of this order.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 MUZZLES REQUIRED.
   The owner of every fierce, dangerous or vicious dog shall confine the dog
within a building or secure enclosure and not take it out of the building or
secure enclosure unless it is securely muzzled.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.27 IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS; FEES.
   (A)   Impoundment. Dogs found in violation of this chapter shall be taken by
the Animal Warden and impounded in the shelter designated as the “Pitt County
Animal Shelter.”
      (1)   As soon as he or she impounds a dog that violates this chapter
whose owner is known to the Animal Warden, the Animal Warden shall send a
registered, certified notice, return receipt requested, to its owner, informing
him or her that his or her dog has been impounded and how he or she may regain
custody of the dog.
      (2)   Impounded dogs shall be confined in a humane manner for not less
than three days; and, if not claimed, may thereafter be disposed of in the
humane manner.
      (3)   The Animal Warden may transfer any animal held at the animal
shelter to the Humane Society or other organization or person interested in
providing a home for the animal after the legal detention period has expired if
the animal has not been claimed by its owner.
   (B)   Redemption of impounded animals.
      (1)   The owners may reclaim his or her impounded dog when he or she
complies with the provisions of this chapter and pays the impoundment fees set
forth in division (C) below.
      (2)   The owner of an animal impounded and not reclaimed within the
required holding period shall be responsible for the fees incurred, whether of
not the animal is reclaimed.
   (C)   Impoundment fees. An owner may reclaim his or her impounded dog when
he or she pays the Animal Warden the $10 per dog, plus $4 for each day the dog
is kept. All fees set forth herein shall be collected by the Animal Warden.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 23-O-003, passed 10-16-2023)
§ 90.28 RESERVED.
§ 90.29 INVESTIGATIONS.
   To discharge the duties imposed by this subchapter and to enforce its
provisions, the Animal Warden, any agent of the Animal Warden or any police
officer may obtain and administrative search warrant to enter any premises
where a dog is kept or harbored and may require the dog’s owner to show its
license.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.30 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal Warden or his or
her agents in performing any of his or her duties or seek to release any animal
from the custody of the Animal Warden or his or her agents, except as herein
provided.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.31 RECORDS.
   (A)   The Animal Warden shall keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed
records of all moneys collected by him or her under §
90.27(A) of this chapter. These records shall be open to inspection at
reasonable times by whoever is for similar records of the village annually in
the same manner than other village records are audited.
   (B)   The Animal Warden shall keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed
records of all bite cases reported to him or her and his or her investigation
of these bites.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.08 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a
fine not exceeding $25. If the violation is continued, each day’s violation
shall be a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any requirement of §
90.09 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and fined $25 for the
first offense, $50 for a second offense and $75 for third and subsequent
offenses.
   (D)   Any person who violated any provision of §§
90.20 through
90.31 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and published by
a fine not exceeding $15, except as otherwise noted in division (D)(1) below.
If the violation is continued, each day’s violation shall be a separate
offense:
      (1)   (a)   Public nuisance (§§
90.20,
90.25 of this chapter): $25; and
         (b)   Lack of restraint (§
90.24 of this chapter): $25.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) above, the provisions of §§
90.20 through
90.31 of this chapter may be enforced through equitable remedies issued by a
court or competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 5-2-2011)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Garbage, Refuse and Vegetation
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Unlawful deposits of refuse
   
91.03   Removal of garbage and refuse
   
91.04   Receptacles; interference with contents
   
91.05   Landlords, tenants and storekeepers; duty
   
91.06   Tree limbs, cuttings and shrubbery
   
91.07   Empty cartons and the like to be flattened for pick-up service
   
91.08   Semi-annual weeding, tidying and the like of premises required; notice
to comply; remedial action by Council; cost; lien
Weeds, Vegetation and Other Public Health Nuisances
   
91.20   Weeding and tidying premises required
   
91.21   Enforcement
   
91.22   Nuisances prohibited; enumeration
   
91.23   Nuisances abatement procedure
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND VEGETATION
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, from houses,
kitchens, restaurants, hotels, hospitals and the like, and it comprises chiefly
waste food. GARBAGE does not include moisture that may be drained in the sewer.
   REFUSE. Ashes, tin cans, dirty rags, trash, house sweepings, paper cups,
shavings, bottles and other rubbish.
(Prior Code, § 4-1)
§ 91.02 UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS OF REFUSE.
   No person shall throw, place or deposit any discarded paper, cups, rags,
boxes, bottles, glass or chinaware, cans or any other animal, vegetable or
mineral waste matter, rubbish or refuse matter of any kind, on or upon any of
the public streets, sidewalks and other public places within the village,
unless it shall be placed or deposited in a receptacle provided and maintained
for that purpose and in accord with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   No person, other than one under the direction of the Mayor, shall haul away
or remove any garbage or refuse set out for collection as in this subchapter
provided, except by the written consent of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 4-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04 RECEPTACLES; INTERFERENCE WITH CONTENTS.
   (A)   All householders shall provide receptacles for all garbage and refuse
for removal by the village. All proprietors of businesses shall be responsible
for the storage and removal of all garbage and refuse produced by said
business. The following rules and regulations shall be observed.
      (1)   Receptacles shall be made substantially of metal and provided with
tight-fitting covers and strong handles. The covers shall be kept on
receptacles at all times except when being filled or emptied. Receptacles shall
not have more than 25-gallon capacity each. If one is not sufficient to hold
the quantity of garbage or refuse accumulated between collections, a sufficient
number of similar receptacles shall be provided.
      (2)   Business establishments may place refuse in wooden containers with
tops.
(Prior Code, § 4-4)
   (B)   No person shall overhaul, molest or interfere with the contents of any
garbage or refuse receptacle set out for removal by the village unless by
permission of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 4-5) (Ord. passed 6-20-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 LANDLORDS, TENANTS AND STOREKEEPERS; DUTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each landlord, tenant or storekeeper to see
that all garbage and refuse receptacles, and the contents as in this chapter
provided for, are set out at such place and time as may be fixed by the Mayor.
   (B)   No employee of the village shall assist in any way in the performance
of what, in this subchapter, is set out as the duty of the landlord, tenant or
storekeeper.
(Prior Code, § 4-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.06 TREE LIMBS, CUTTINGS AND SHRUBBERY.
   Tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery and the like of more than one-half load will
be hauled at such time as trucks are available; provided that, such limbs,
cuttings, shrubbery and the like are cut in four-foot lengths and tied in
bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds and placed on the front corner of the
owner’s or tenant’s property nearest the street or public alley. Lawn trimmings
and leaves shall not be placed in the gutter.
(Prior Code, § 4-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.07 EMPTY CARTONS AND THE LIKE TO BE FLATTENED FOR PICK-UP SERVICE.
   No person shall place or permit to be placed any empty cardboard box, carton
or container in any garbage or refuse receptacle or outside any such receptacle
for collection by the garbage department until and unless any such box, carton
or container has been flattened for pick-up by the Garbage Collection
Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.08 SEMI-ANNUAL WEEDING, TIDYING AND THE LIKE OF PREMISES REQUIRED; NOTICE
TO COMPLY; REMEDIAL ACTION BY COUNCIL; COST; LIEN.
   (A)   Every person owning any real property within the village is hereby
required to cut and remove therefrom at least twice annually all noxious weeds,
bushes and grass, and to keep such property free from trash or other refuse
matter at all times.
(Prior Code, § 4-9)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Mayor, whenever ordered to do so by
the Village Council, to serve notice on every property owner who shall fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of division (A) above requiring such
property owner to cut and remove from such property all noxious weeds, bushes
and grass and to remove all trash or other refuse matter therefrom within ten
days from the date of such notice.
      (2)   If any property owner served with such notice shall fail or refuse
to cut and remove all noxious weeds, bushes and grass, and remove all trash or
other refuse matter within ten days after such notice shall have been given and
served, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to notify the Village Council of such
refusal or failure of the property owner to comply with such notice.
      (3)   The Mayor shall proceed to have cut and be removed from the
property in question all noxious weeds, bushes and grass, and all trash or
other refuse matter thereon.
(Prior Code, § 4-10)
   (C)   The Mayor shall make a written report of the actual costs incurred by
the village in the cutting and removal of the noxious weeds, bushes and grass,
and the removal of all trash and other refuse matter from any lot pursuant to
this subchapter, and shall deliver such report to the village’s Tax Collector.
(Prior Code, § 4-11)
   (D)   (1)   The owner of any lot upon which any noxious weeds, bushes and
grass shall be cut and removed, or upon which any trash or other refuse matter
shall be removed therefrom under the direction and supervision of the Mayor,
and after the required notice shall have been given to the property owner as
provided in division (A) above, shall be liable to the village for the actual
costs incurred by the village in such cutting and removal.
      (2)   Such costs shall be charged against the property owner and shall be
collected in the same manner and at the same time as the ad valorem taxes of
such owner are collected, and such costs shall be a lien on the real property
subject only to the lien of the village and county ad valorem taxes thereon.
(Prior Code, § 4-12)
WEEDS, VEGETATION AND OTHER PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES
§ 91.20 WEEDING AND TIDYING PREMISES REQUIRED.
   Any person owning real property within the village is hereby required to:
   (A)   Maintain the property, including the adjoining right-of-way, such that
grass, weeds and other lawn vegetation does not exceed a height of 8 inches;
   (B)   Keep the property and right-of-way free from trash and refuse matter
at all times; and
   (C)   Keep the property and right-of-way free from the conditions enumerated
in §
91.22 of this chapter.
(Ord. 02-16-2015, passed 2-16-2015; Ord. 18-O-1, passed 3-19-2018)
§ 91.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor of the village shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The Mayor, and his or her designee, is authorized to exercise the
powers as may be necessary to carry out the intent and provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 02-16-2015, passed 2-16-2015)
§ 91.22 NUISANCES PROHIBITED; ENUMERATION.
   The following enumerated and described conditions are hereby found, deemed
and declared to constitute a detriment, danger and hazard to the health and
safety of the inhabitants of the village; and are found, deemed and declared to
be public nuisances whenever the same may exist, and the creation, maintenance
or failure to abate any nuisances is hereby declared unlawful:
   (A)   Any condition that has become, or will become if not corrected, a
breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, rats or other pests;
   (B)   A place of heavy growth of weeds, grasses, vines or other vegetation
over eight inches in height;
   (C)   A place of growth of vines, shrubs or other vegetation, when the
condition is causing a breeding ground for rodents, or is a focal point for any
other nuisance enumerated in this section;
   (D)   A place of growth of poison sumac, poison ivy, poison oak or other
noxious vegetation;
   (E)   An open place of collection of stagnant water where insects tend to
breed;
   (F)   Any concentration of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes,
paper, automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash, refuse, brush, old clothes,
rags or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature;
   (G)   A collection place for lumber, brick, concrete, nails, masonry, and/or
building materials, unless the conditions are temporary in nature and caused by
current construction in progress pursuant to a lawfully issued building permit;
   (H)   An open place of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or
any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; however, nothing in this
division shall be construed to prevent the generally accepted use of a properly
maintained compost pile, or storage of animal manure being used as fertilizer
for lawns and gardens, and for other agricultural or horticultural purposes;
   (I)   Any household or office furniture, appliances, or other metal products
of any kind kept in open places, or any indoor upholstered furniture kept
outside in a location exposed to the weather;
   (J)   Any products that have jagged edges of metal or glass, or areas of
confinement kept in open places;
   (K)   Any open places of concentration of trash, refuse, discarded bottles,
cans or medical supplies;
   (L)   Any condition whereby any fence, sign, billboard, shrubbery, bush,
tree, mailbox, or other object or combination of objects that obstruct the view
of motorists using any street, private driveway, or approach to any street
intersection adjacent to and abutting such, and so as to constitute a traffic
hazard as a condition dangerous to public safety upon the street, private
driveway, or at any street intersection;
   (M)   Any building, structure, fence, or retaining wall declared to be
unsafe by the County Building Inspection Officer or his or her designee, and
which is in danger of collapse so that it may fall and injure members of the
public or damage public or private property;
   (N)   Any improper or inadequate drainage, as determined by the Mayor or his
or her designee, on private property, which causes flooding, interferes with
the use or endangers in any way the streets, sidewalks, parks or other
municipally-owned property of any kind;
   (O)   Any condition, as determined by the Mayor or his or her designee,
which blocks, hinders, or obstructs in any way the natural flow of branches,
streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches, or drains;
   (P)   Any storm water retention or impoundment device that is operating
improperly, as determined by the Mayor or his or her designee; and
   (Q)   Any other condition declared to be dangerous or prejudicial to the
public health or public safety and a public nuisance by the Village Council.
(Ord. 24-O-002, passed 5-20-2024)
§ 91.23 NUISANCES ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   When any public nuisance, as set out in §
91.22 of this code, is found to exist on any property, including rights-of-way
and easements, within the village, the following procedures shall be followed:
   (A)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, shall notify the owner of the
premises where the nuisance is located that conditions exist which constitute a
public nuisance, and unless the condition is abated within ten days from the
mailing of the notice, which shall be sent by registered or certified mail, the
conditions constituting a nuisance will be abated, and the cost of abatement,
including an administrative fee, shall constitute a lien against the premises.
   (B)   The Mayor, or his or her designee, is hereby given full power and
authority to enter upon the premises involved, for the purpose of abating the
nuisance found to exist as herein set out. If any property owner served with
notice shall fail or refuse to correct or eliminate the condition causing the
nuisance within ten days after the notice has been given, the Mayor, or his or
her designee, may proceed to abate the nuisance by utilization of town forces
or an outside contractor. The Mayor may allow the owner additional time to
correct or eliminate the condition causing the nuisance, if he or she
determines that the failure to correct or abate the condition was caused by
weather conditions or other factors not within the control of the owner.
   (C)   After the abatement of the nuisance, the Mayor, or his or her
designee, shall make a written report of the actual cost incurred by the
village, and shall deliver the report to the Finance Officer. The owner of the
premises shall be liable to the village for the actual cost incurred by the
town in the nuisance abatement, including an administrative fee. The cost shall
be charged against the property owner, and shall be collected in the same
manner and at the same time as the ad valorem taxes of the owner are collected.
The cost shall be a lien on the real property, subject only to the lien of the
town and county ad valorem taxes thereon.
(Ord. 24-O-001, passed 4-15-2024)
CHAPTER 92: ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED VEHICLES
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Administration
   
92.03   Abandoned, nuisance and junk vehicles prohibited; removal authorized
   
92.04   Pre-towing notice requirements
   
92.05   Exceptions to prior notice requirements
   
92.06   Post-towing notice requirements
   
92.07   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition
   
92.08   Redemption during proceedings
   
92.09   Unclaimed vehicles; sale and disposition
   
92.10   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
92.11   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
92.12   Exceptions
   
92.13   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned for
the purpose of this chapter if:
      (1)   It has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   It is left on property owned or operated by the village for longer
than 24 hours;
      (3)   It is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two hours; or
      (4)   It is left on any public street or highway in the village for
longer than seven days.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department of
the Inspections Department of the city, respectively, designated to authorize
the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a junked motor
vehicle if it is an abandoned motor vehicle and also:
      (1)   It is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   It cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move;
      (3)   It is more than five years old and worth less than $100; or
      (4)   It does not display a current license plate.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful,
including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidences by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from
the inside, such as trunks/hoods and the like;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste or any other rotten matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a
public nuisance by the Inspections Department.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Mayor and his or her designee shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Mayor or his or her
designee shall be responsible for administering the removal ad disposition of
vehicles determined to be “abandoned” on the public streets and highways within
the village limits and on property owned by the village.
   (B)   The Mayor and his or her designee shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of “abandoned”, “nuisance” or “junked
motor vehicles” located on private property. The village may contract with
private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose
of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles in compliance with this chapter
and applicable state laws.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.03 ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the
term is defined in this chapter. Upon investigation, the Mayor or his or her
designee may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the
vehicle removed.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled
to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the
real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle
to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
      (2)   Upon investigation, the Mayor or his or her designee may determine
or declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle,
as define above, and order the vehicle removed.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled
to possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle, as
defined herein, on the premises of public or private property. Single,
permitted junked motor vehicles must strictly comply with the location and
concealment requirements of this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to
comply with the location requirements or the concealment requirements of this
section.
      (4)   The Mayor or his or her designee, upon investigation, may order the
removal of a junked motor vehicle, as defined herein, after finding, in
writing, that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the
burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such findings shall be based on
a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community,
neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other relevant factors,
may be considered:
         (a)   Protection of property values;
         (b)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;
         (c)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
         (d)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community;
and
         (e)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of
area residents.
      (5)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor:
         (a)   One junked motor vehicle in its entirety can be located in the
rear yard, as defined by the zoning ordinance if the junked motor vehicle is
entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from abutting
premises by an acceptable covering;
         (b)   The Mayor or his or her designee has authority to determine
whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed from public view from
a public street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The
covering must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The
covering or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives sought to be
obtained in this chapter; and
         (c)   More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked vehicle(s)
must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a complete
enclosure so that the junked motor vehicles(s) cannot be seen from a public
street or abutting property. A garage or building structure means either a
lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected pursuant to
the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been constructed in
accordance with all zoning and building code regulation.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
92.05 of this chapter, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be
removed shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a
junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered
owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee
or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be
ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given
first by certified mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a
written record to show the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and date
mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or the vehicle to be
removed is an abandoned vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the
windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating
that the vehicle will be removed by the village on a specified date (no sooner
than seven days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the
vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven
days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the
owner or legal possessor to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice required to be given, if the
registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle,
but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a
nuisance vehicle or, in the case of a junked motor vehicle, that the aesthetic
benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be
made to the Mayor or his or her designee in writing, and further proceedings to
remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.05 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The requirement that notice be given to the removal of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing
official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for
prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and
protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be
entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records.
   (B)   Circumstance justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice
include:
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on streets. For vehicles left on public streets
and highways, the Mayor or his or her designee may determine that immediate
removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in loading zones;
         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
under code sections.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on village-owned property other than streets and
highways and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation such
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to
pose a traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public or private
property.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.06 POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the village, be removed to a storage garage or area
by a tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform such services
for the village. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing city
official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the
vehicle such notice to include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The village shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known address,
unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her
agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered vehicle within 72 hours from the removal of the
vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed,
and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the
authorizing village official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking
the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner
of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in
divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.07 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION.
   After removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining it probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for the hearing must be filed in writing with the Mayor
or his or her designee for the city.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.08 REDEMPTION DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges that may have been incurred. Upon
regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the
possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further violations of
the chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.09 UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; SALE AND DISPOSITION.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the village and in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 44A, Art. 1.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.10 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   As a general policy, the village will not remove a vehicle from
private property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have
the vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the village from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle
is a nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by
the Mayor or his or her designee.
   (B)   The village may require any person requesting the removal of
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles from private property to indemnify
the village against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the
removal, storage or sale thereof.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.11 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.12 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle which is:
   (A)   Located in a bona fide “automobile graveyard” or “junkyard”, as
defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, being
G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq.;
   (B)   In an enclosed building;
   (C)   On the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful
place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the village.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994)
§ 92.13 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the village any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provision of the chapter unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due have been paid.
(Ord. passed 6-20-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Park regulations
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PARK REGULATIONS.
   The following are rules and regulations for use of the village park:
   (A)   Park hours for public use shall extend from sunup until sundown;
   (B)   No alcohol allowed in the village park;
   (C)   No littering or dumping;
   (D)   No stereos or radios;
   (E)   No loud noise which would constitute a nuisance to other users of the
park; and
   (F)   No trespassing is allowed in the village park during closed hours.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any of the regulations for use of the village park, per §
93.01 of this chapter, will be considered a violation of the village ordinance
and punishable in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 5-16-1994)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   General provisions
   
110.03   Application; permit; standards for issuance
   
110.04   Fees; rules
   
110.05   Exhibition of identification
   
110.06   Standards for revocation
   
110.07   Appeal process
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires otherwise.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any merchant, other than a merchant with an established
retail store in the city who transports an inventory of goods to a building,
vacant lot or other locations in the city and who, at that location, displays
the goods for sale and sells the goods at retail. A merchant who sells goods,
other than farm products, in the city for less than six consecutive months is
considered an ITINERANT MERCHANT, unless he or she stopped selling goods in the
city because of death or disablement, the insolvency of his or her business, or
the destruction of his or her inventory by fire or other catastrophe.
   PEDDLER. Any person who carries from place to place any goods, wares or
merchandise, subscriptions, services and/or discount coupons (hereinafter
referred to as “wares”), or without traveling from place to place, selling or
offering for sale any goods from any vehicle or device, and offers to sell or
barter the same or actually sells or barters the same, except such person who
is a wholesale dealer selling only to merchants for resale.
   PERSON. Natural persons, corporations and all business or other entities of
any kind.
   SOLICITOR. Any person traveling from place to place, taking or offering to
take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery, or for personal services
to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is
collected in advance; and using or occupying any building or premises for the
sole purpose of taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for
future delivery, or for personal services to be performed in the future,
whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR. Any person engaging in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, and for this purpose, using or occupying any building or
premises; provided that merely associating a transient business with a
permanently established business does not exclude it from this definition.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   A person deemed an itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient
vendor shall apply and procure from the Village Mayor, or his or her designee,
a town permit for the privilege of transacting such business, and shall pay the
required permit fee as hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or
peddle wares upon the public streets or public parking lots of the town, or to
engage in business as an itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient
vendor anywhere in the town, without first having applied for and obtained a
permit to do so from the Mayor, or his or her designee. For the purposes of
this chapter, ANY PERSON or EACH PERSON means an individual and shall be
considered in the singular. Each person working for or acting as an agent or in
any capacity for an individual, a partnership, a corporation, a company or a
business of whatever nature or kind, must apply for and obtain a penult as set
out herein.
   (C)   Any person who sells or offers to sell any wares from his or her
possession, a cart, truck, automobile or other vehicle operated over and upon
the streets and highways within the town, shall be deemed an itinerant
merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient vendor within the meaning of this
chapter, Nothing in this section shall apply to the sale of farm products
raised on the premises owned or occupied by the person, or his or her bona fide
agent or employee selling the same.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to solicitation for charitable, civic,
religious or patriotic purposes by persons who serve without compensation or
remuneration; nor shall it apply to persons engaging in door-to-door advocacy
of a religious, political or other cause where money or other valuable
consideration is not being solicited; nor shall it apply to the distribution of
religious or political handbills or pamphlets. Further, this chapter shall not
apply to any person under the age of 18 years old who desires to offer a
service only and who does so solely as a means of earning money for his or her
own personal or family use on a short-term, temporary basis, such as and by
example only, mowing lawns and raking leaves.
   (E)   This chapter shall not apply where town merchants and/or proprietors
of stores display goods adjacent to their businesses for sale in front of their
stores; nor shall this chapter apply to any individual, business or
organization displaying goods for sale as part of a duly town-authorized
festival or public event for which such goods are authorized to be sold.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.03 APPLICATION; PERMIT; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   Application. Each person desiring a permit to engage in business as an
itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient vendor within the town
shall make written application to the Mayor, or his or her designee, at least
five working days before that person seeks to sell that person’s wares. The
application shall contain the following;
   (A)   The name, address, date of birth and Social Security number of the
applicant, and a vehicle description and tag number of the vehicle to be used
by the applicant (if applicable);
   (B)   The name and address of the person and/or company, if any, that the
applicant represents;
   (C)   An accurate and detailed description of the kind of wares offered for
sale. No wares reasonably deemed dangerous or likely to cause damage by
releasing projectiles or substances shall be permitted;
   (D)   Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept or
receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
   (E)   The period of time the applicant wishes to engage in the business
within the village;
   (F)   The applicant is responsible to providing certified copy of his or her
criminal record for local or state criminal records. This will provide
acceptable evidence that the applicant has no state criminal record that would
prohibit the issuance of a permit. If the applicant is found to have an out-of-
state criminal history, the applicant will be responsible for providing a
certified copy to the Mayor or designee. The following will constitute valid
reasons for disapproval of an application:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertaining to
itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts;
      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of contracts; or
      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character.
   (G)   Information concerning whether the applicant is on, or has been on,
parole or probation in the state, any other state, or the federal government;
and
   (H)   A list of any criminal offenses, other than minor traffic offenses,
for which the applicant has been charged within the past five years. For
purposes of this division, a MINOR TRAFFIC OFFENSE is an offense that is a
violation of G.S. Ch. 20, and that is punishable as, or would be punishable as,
an infraction in the state.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.04 FEES; RULES.
   (A)   Fee. A non-refundable fee of $25 must be paid before an application
can be processed, provided that payment of this fee is not a guarantee or
promise that the application will be approved.
   (B)   Rules. Each individual person desiring to engage in the activity of an
itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient vendor, as defined herein,
must obtain a permit. A permit is not transferable and cannot be used for the
activity of another person working or acting on behalf of an applicant for a
permit.
   (C)   Falsification. Falsification of any matter on or provided as part of
the application for a permit shall be grounds for immediate denial of the
permit.
   (D)   Issuance. No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
chapter until the applicant has complied with all the provisions and
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Denial. A permit can be denied for the same reasons that it can be
revoked as set out in this chapter.
   (F)   Permitted hours. A person issued a permit pursuant to this section
shall not engage in the activity of an itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor
or transient vendor between the hours of 8:00 p.m. through 9:00 a.m. and not at
any time on Sundays, in residential areas; except in ballparks during
recreational events, but no later than 15 minutes after the event, except in
town parks, venues and facilities during town-sponsored or approved events.
   (G)   Duration. A permit shall be issued for the period requested in the
application or for as long as the information on the face of the application is
unchanged, provided, however, no permit shall be issued for a period not
exceeding 30 days or one calendar month. Upon expiration of the permit due to
time or to change in information, the applicant may apply for a renewal of the
permit, upon a form designated by the Mayor, or his or her designee, which
shall indicate what changes, if any, have occurred since the date the original
application was completed. The Mayor, or his or her designee, may renew and
extend the permit for an additional term not to exceed three calendar months.
Each renewal or change in the application shall carry the same application fee
of $25.
   (H)   Contents. Each permit issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be signed by the Mayor, or his or her designee, shall be dated as of the
date of its issuance, and shall state its duration or term on its face. Any
permit not dated and signed as required in this section, or which was issued in
violation of this section, shall be void.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.05 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Display. Every itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient
vendor issued a permit under the provisions of this chapter, and doing business
within the town, shall wear and display a town-approved permit in a manner
clearly visible to anyone that person is approaching for the purpose of selling
or attempting to sell the wares of that itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor
or transient vendor.
   (B)   Possession and display of identification. Any person, while engaged in
the activity of an itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient vendor
as set out in this chapter, shall, in addition to displaying a valid permit,
possess a current, verifiable form of photographic identification, and must
present that identification, upon either the request of a law enforcement
officer or upon the request of any person approached by the itinerant merchant,
peddler, solicitor, or transient vendor attempting to sell or selling his or
her wares to the person requesting the identification. For purposes of this
division, a VERIFIABLE FORM OF PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION shall include, but
not be limited to, a valid driver’s license, passport, state-issued
identification card, or student identification card containing a recent
photograph of the person identified.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Revocation. Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked by the Mayor, or his or her designee, for the violation by the
itinerant merchant, peddler, solicitor or transient vendor permit holder of any
applicable provision of this chapter, state law or town ordinance, rule or
regulation applicable to peddlers, or for the violation of any state or federal
law as denoted below.
   (B)   Grounds for issuance or denial of a permit. A permit shall be issued
or renewed if the applicant satisfies the following requirements, and the
application shall be denied otherwise:
      (1)   The applicant’s criminal record shall be free of any convictions of
criminal offenses involving crimes of violence, the possession, use or sale of
weapons, sexual offenses, prostitution, offenses involving the transportation,
sale or possession of alcohol or controlled substances for sale, indecent
exposure, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, and fraud;
      (2)   The applicant shall not be a registered sexual offender;
      (3)   The application must be free of any fraud, misrepresentation or any
false statement;
      (4)   The applicant (or employer) must pay any privilege tax or business
license fee;
      (5)   The applicant (or employer) must pay all fees associated with the
application;
      (6)   The applicant (or employer) must satisfy all zoning requirements if
activities take place on privately owned land; and
      (7)   The applicant must provide a certified copy of applicant’s state
criminal record.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.07 APPEAL PROCESS.
   An applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a permit by submitting a
written notice of appeal to the Mayor, or his or her designee, specifying with
particularity the grounds upon which the appeal is based. An appeal shall be
submitted no later than ten days from the date of the denial or revocation of
the permit in question. If the denial or revocation is made by the Mayor, then
the appeal will be heard by the Village Council. The Mayor, or his or her
designee, shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, shall give
due notice to all parties, and shall render a decision within a reasonable
time. The Mayor, his or her designee or the Village Council’s decision shall be
the village’s final decision.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Misdemeanor. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a
Class 3 misdemeanor by a fine of $250 for the first offense, and a fine of $500
for the second and subsequent offenses.
   (B)   Other licenses or permits. The provisions of this chapter shall not
exempt the applicant from obtaining any other license or permit.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Cellars, excavations and the like; draining or filling
   
130.02   Grade and drainage system establishment; duty of property owner
   
130.03   Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
   
130.04   Dangerous weapons
   
130.05   Firearms, air rifles, spring guns and similar devices
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 CELLARS, EXCAVATIONS AND THE LIKE; DRAINING OR FILLING.
   All cellars, excavations, ditches or open spaces therein in which water, at
any time, stagnates or arises or which are damp, and in which foul and
unwholesome gases are generated, and all premises therein on which water shall
pond, shall, upon written notification by or through the county’s Health
Officer, be provided with proper drainage by the owner thereof, or be filled up
with sand, gravel or some other imperishable material, but not in such manner
as to obstruct proper drainage of water.
(Prior Code, § 5-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 GRADE AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM ESTABLISHMENT; DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER.
   Upon the establishment of grades by the village for a drainage system, it
shall be the duty of all property owners to conform thereto and to make
provisions at their respective premises to abate and prevent nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 5-2) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 LOUD, DISTURBING AND UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or
assist in creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in
the village. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be
detrimental to the public health, welfare and peace is hereby prohibited.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are hereby declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create
any unreasonable loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, or the use of any gong or siren
upon any vehicle other than a police, fire or other emergency vehicle;
      (2)   The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in
such manner or with such volume, particularly during hours between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person
in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence;
      (3)   The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by causing frequent or
long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (4)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair,
so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise;
      (5)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler
or engine, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of danger;
      (6)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (7)   The conducting, operating, or maintaining of any garage or service
station in any residential area so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be
emitted therefrom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or
on Sundays;
      (8)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, or court while the same are in session, or
within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably and unnecessarily
interferes with the working of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs
are displayed in such streets indicating that such area is a school, court or
hospital area;
      (9)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
      (10)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only with a permit from
the Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days
or less while the emergency continues;
      (11)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
      (12)   The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale or display of merchandise; and
      (13)   The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes, except where
specific license is received from the Council.
(Ord. passed 7-19-1982) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. The following items, as defined herein, are hereby declared
to be DANGEROUS WEAPONS for the purposes of this section.
      BILLY CLUB. Any stick, bat, or similar device having a blunt end, being
constructed of wood, metal, or similar material, and which may inflict serious
injury when used as a club or bludgeon, and which is commonly referred to as a
BILLY CLUB.
      NUNCHAKUS. Any device constructed, manufactured or assembled so as to be
made of pieces of wood or other material joined together by a section of cord,
rope, chain or other similar material, having no other purpose except to be
used a weapon, and commonly known as a NUNCHAKUS.
      STAR. Any star-shaped device made of tin, iron, or other metal, with
pointed or abrasive tips, designed to be aerodynamically stable in flight and
to inflict bodily harm when thrown against the person of another.
      SWITCHBLADE. Any knife having a spring-loaded blade in excess of three
inches in length and which is commonly referred to as a “switchblade knife”.
   (B)   Possession prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have in his or her
possession or within his or her immediate access a dangerous weapon as defined
in division (A) of this section when going upon the public streets or other
public ways, and when a person is within or upon the premises of any
establishment which is open to the public within the corporate limits of the
village.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the carrying of any of the dangerous
weapons defined above in an unlocked glove compartment, upon the dashboard, or
under or upon the front and rear seats of an automobile shall be defined as
being “within the immediate access” of the owner or occupant of any automobile
in which any of the enumerated dangerous weapons are found.
   (C)   Exception. Any member of a law enforcement agency or department of the
state or any municipal government created by the said state shall have the
authority to confiscate any such dangerous weapon as described in this section.
(Ord. passed 7-19-1982) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 FIREARMS, AIR RIFLES, SPRING GUNS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   (A)   Discharge prohibited. It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited
for any person to shoot or discharge within the corporate limits of the village
any gun or pistol, air rifle, spring gun or pistol, compressed air rifle or
pistol or other similar device which impels, with force, a shot or pellet of
any kind. It shall be unlawful to discharge bows and arrows and crossbows
inside the village limits.
   (B)   Confiscation authorized. The Chief of Police or any member of the
Police Department is hereby authorized to seize and hold, subject to order of
the court, any such gun or pistol, air rifle, spring gun or pistol, compressed
air rifle or pistol or other similar device which impels, with force, any shot
or pellet of any kind which shall be used, shot or discharged within the
village in violation of this section.
(Ord. passed 7-19-1982; Ord. passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
130.03 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not to exceed 30
days. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
130.05 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined or imprisoned as provided by statute.
(Ord. passed 7-19-1982; Ord. passed 7-19-1982; Ord. passed 7-19-1982)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM
      
151.   SIGNS
      
152.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM
Section
   
150.01   Numbering map
   
150.02   Numbering system
   
150.03   Owners to purchase numbers
   
150.04   Numbers for future buildings
   
150.05   Unlawful to deface number
§ 150.01 NUMBERING MAP.
   The property numbering map entitled “Property Numbering Map, dated 19
January 1981, Village of Simpson, North Carolina”, is hereby adopted as the
official property numbering map of the village and all property numbers
assigned shall be assigned in accordance with the numbering map and no other
property numbers shall be used or displayed in the village, except numbers
assigned in accordance with official numbering map. The property numbering map
shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. passed 1-19-1981)
§ 150.02 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   On the property numbering map, the Norfolk and Southern Railroad
(Southern Railway System) is hereby designated as the north-south axis and
Queen Street is hereby designated as the east-west axis and all avenues,
streets and alleys running generally north and south shall be numbered from the
east-west axis consecutively to the corporate limits or the extremity of such
avenue, alley or street. Avenues, streets or alleys running generally east and
west shall be numbered from the north-south axis in the same manner. Whenever
possible, one hundred numbers shall be allowed to each block so that the number
of each consecutive block shall commence with consecutive hundreds and one.
   (B)   One whole number shall be assigned for every 50 feet of ground whether
improved property or vacant lot on every street within the corporate limits.
Odd numbers shall be assigned to the west side of the street on all north-south
streets and even numbers on the east side. On east-west street, odd numbers
shall be assigned to the south side of the street and even numbers to the north
side.
(Ord. passed 1-19-1981)
§ 150.03 OWNERS TO PURCHASE NUMBERS.
   Every property owner of improved property shall on or before 5-1-1981
purchase and display in a conspicuous place on said property the number
assigned.
(Ord. passed 1-19-1981)
§ 150.04 NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS.
   All residence and business buildings erected after the adoption of this
chapter shall be assigned a number in accordance with the property numbering
map and shall purchase and display such number as provided in §
150.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-19-1981)
§ 150.05 UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any number
placed on any property in accordance with this chapter, except for repair or
replacement of such number.
(Ord. passed 1-19-1981) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 151: SIGNS
Section
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   General provisions
   
151.03   Signs not requiring a permit
   
151.04   Signs requiring a permit
   
151.05   Permit procedure
   
151.06   Miscellaneous regulations
   
151.07   Table of sign requirements
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires otherwise.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign that has either not been maintained (see §
151.06(F)) or a sign referring to a business, entity, and the like, which no
longer exists and has not for a period in excess of 90 days.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign placed at a construction site identifying or
announcing the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor,
financier, or others involved in the development of the project. A CONSTRUCTION
SIGN may not contain leasing or sales information.
   DETACHED SIGN. Any sign that is not affixed or attached to a building and is
securely mounted on the ground. Such sign may be a ground mounted or pole
mounted sign for the purposes of this chapter.
   DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATION SIGN. A sign with a directional arrow and the name
and/or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy, for example, phone
number, hours of operation, and the like.
   DIRECTORY SIGN. A secondary sign on which the names and locations of
occupants or the use of a building or property is identified.
   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ). An area adjacent to and outside of a
municipality in which the municipality has authority to exercise planning,
zoning, building inspections, sign regulations and subdivision regulations.
   FLAG. A piece of durable fabric of distinctive design attached to a
permanent pole that is used as a symbol or decorative feature.
   FLASHING SIGN. A sign that uses an intermittent or flashing light source to
attract attention.
   GROUND MOUNTED SIGN. A sign which extends from the ground or which has a
support which places the bottom thereof less than two feet from the ground. A
MONUMENT SIGN shall be considered to be a GROUND MOUNTED SIGN.
   GOVERNMENT SIGN. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained for
any governmental purpose.
   IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign which displays only the name, address, and/or
crest, or insignia, trademark, occupation or profession of an occupant or the
name of any building on the premises.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign either internally or externally illuminated.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. Small non-freestanding signs, emblems or decals of two
square feet or less identifying or advertising associated goods, products,
services, or facilities available on the premises. Such incidental signs
include, but are not limited to, information related to credit cards accepted,
brand names, price signs, or hours of operation.
   MONUMENT SIGN. See GROUND MOUNTED SIGN.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with
applicable code provisions and maintained prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and
restrictions of this chapter.
   ON-PREMISES SIGN. A sign that is located on the same premises with the
business, service, commodity, and the like, to which it is directing attention.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign other than an ON-PREMISES SIGN. Includes outdoor
advertising.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign used in conjunction with an approved
planned residential, office, business, industrial or mixed use development.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A sign that advertises a candidate or issue to be voted upon
on a definite election day.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign that is not permanently attached to either the ground,
a structure or a building, nor was it ever intended to be so attached, that can
easily be moved from one location to another. It may be equipped for towing or
possess an axle, wheel or wheel mechanism.
   PROJECTED/SUSPENDED SIGN. A sign, other than a wall sign, which extends
outward for more than 12 inches from the facade of any building and is rigidly
affixed to the building.
   PUBLIC INTEREST SIGN. A sign on private property that displays information
pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general public such as
warning and no trespassing signs.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign that is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent the
premises upon which such sign is placed.
   SIGN. Any form of publicity, visible from any public highway directing
attention to any individual activity, business, service, commodity or product
and conveyed by means of words, figures, numerals, lettering, emblems, devices,
designs, trademarks or other pictorial matter designed to convey such
information. Such may be displayed by means of bills, panels, posters, paints,
or other devices erected on an open framework, or attached or otherwise applied
to posts, stakes, poles, buildings or other structures or supports. Neither
newspaper delivery boxes nor mailboxes are considered to be signs.
   SIGN FACE AREA. The area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of characters, lettering, logos, illustrations, or
ornamentations, together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the display or to differential the sign from the background to which it is
placed. Structural supports bearing no sign copy shall not be included in the
sign area. If a sign is attached to an entrance wall or fence, only that
portion of that wall or fence onto which the sign face or letters are placed
shall be calculated in the sign area. Only one side of a sign shall be included
in the calculation.
   SIGHT PRESERVATION TRIANGLE. That portion of area off the paved road surface
occurring at intersections that must be kept clear of all signs except as
specifically allowed in this chapter. The sight preservation triangle is
measured as set forth below:
   SPECIAL EVENT. An activity sponsored by and for the benefit of a nonprofit,
noncommercial, or governmental organization such as bake sales, fairs,
carnivals, and the like.
   SUBDIVISION SALES SIGN. Signage located within a subdivision for the purpose
of selling lots, houses or units within the subdivision.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is not permanently installed in the ground or
affixed to any structure or building, and which is erected for a period of 30
days or less.
   TEMPORARY AGRICULTURAL SIGN. A sign, either on- or off-premises, the display
of which is directly related to the harvesting and subsequent sale of seasonal
agricultural and horticultural products.
   TEMPORARY PROJECT DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign that pertains to the development
of a new subdivision, planned multifamily development, planned shopping center,
industrial, office, or business park, or similar land parcel.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building or
dependent upon a building for its support with its exposed face parallel or
approximately parallel to the plane of the wall or structure on which the sign
is affixed. Signs directly painted on walls shall be considered WALL SIGNS.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign attached to or directly applied onto a window or glass
door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of such building.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The following provisions relate to all temporary off-premises planned
development, individual real estate, auction, garage/yard sale, and political
signs unless specifically exempt from one or more provisions.
   (A)   Temporary off-premises signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be
located within a public street right-of-way.
   (B)   Temporary off-premises signs that pose a hazard to traffic through
reflectivity or blocking views shall be considered in violation of this chapter
and removed by the village.
   (C)   Temporary off-premises signs, inclusive of the supports, frames, and
embellishments thereto, shall not be attached, affixed, or painted upon trees,
rocks, buildings, structures, existing signs, utility poles, or any other
neutral object except where specifically permitted by this chapter.
   (D)   Prohibited signs and signs in violation of the specifically stated
provisions will be subject to penalties set forth in §
151.99 of this chapter, and removal and disposal by the village.
   (E)   No more than four off-premises signs are permitted at any standard
intersection. Each event, subject, company, or commercial interest shall have
no more than one sign per intersection. Posting shall be limited to one sign
per comer. Political signs are exempt from this provision only and do not count
in totaling the number of signs at an intersection.
   (F)   Upon removal of sign, land must be returned to its natural form.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.03 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Certain types of signs do not require a sign permit, however, these signs
are still subject to all other regulations contained within this chapter unless
specifically stated otherwise. No permits are required for the following.
   (A)   Signs placed by the state Department of Transportation;
   (B)   Incidental signs;
   (C)   Non-illuminated signs not exceeding two per lot nor two square feet in
area per sign of a noncommercial nature and bearing only property
identification numbers and names, post office box numbers and names of
occupants of the premises;
   (D)   Flags and insignia and signs of any government, when displayed in
connection with a noncommercial activity. One flag of the United States (not to
exceed six feet by ten feet) displayed in connection with a commercial
activity;
   (E)   Legal notices, identification and informational signs and traffic
directional signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body;
   (F)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights;
   (G)   On-premises signs directing and guiding traffic on private property,
not exceeding two square feet each. Examples are “Enter”, “Exit”, and the like;
   (H)   Subdivision sale signs, not exceeding 32 square feet in area and
limited to two single-faced signs or one double-faced sign at each point of
ingress/egress, giving the name of residential subdivision, multiple family
housing development, or mobile home court, the pricing information and name,
address, and phone number of sales agent/developer. Such signage must be
removed when certificates of occupancy have been issued for 95% of the
subdivision’s units;
   (I)   Lighted or unlighted on-premises signage for noncommercial, nonprofit
type organizations including but not limited to churches, civic organizations,
and the like, in number and size as follows: secondary signs in an amount equal
to the same number of abutting streets, not to exceed six square feet per sign
and to be placed one per street;
   (J)   Real estate signage, as follows.
 
Temporary on-site real estate signage for all real estate:
Lot or Tract Size Maximum Sign Face Area Square Placement
                  Footage For All Signs
Two acres or less 4 square feet                 Discretion of user
Two to ten acres  16 square feet                No more than 1 sign per
                                                abutting street
                  A base of 16 square feet,     Discretion of user, however, in
                  however, an additional 16     no event will the total amount
Ten acres or more square feet are permitted for of square footage on any road
                  every 800 feet of road        exceed 32 square feet
                  frontage
 
   (K)   Temporary on-premises signs, as follows.
      (1)   On-site temporary signs used to promote any event of a temporal
nature are allowed in any zoning district;
      (2)   Temporary construction signs, one per site not exceeding 32 square
feet in area. May contain in its message identification of the project, its
owner and/or developer, architect, engineer, land planner, landscape-architect,
contractor and subcontractor. Such signs shall not be erected prior to
preliminary plat approval when the development comes under the village
subdivision regulations. When the project is not under such regulation, the
letting of contracts will be the point in time at which such signs may be
posted;
      (3)   (a)   Temporary agricultural signs, if on-premises, do not require
a sign permit. They are, however, subject to area requirements as follows: the
sign may not exceed 16 square feet, nor exceed six feet in height, nor be
illuminated. These signs are to be erected no sooner than one week prior to the
beginning of the harvest season and must be removed immediately upon the end of
the harvest season.
          (b)   Temporary agricultural sign.
 
Temporary Agricultural Sign Permit Requirements
Located on-premises No permit required
 
      (4)   Unless specified otherwise, all temporary signs must be removed
within ten days from the date the purpose of the sign ceased to exist.
   (L)   Signs for home occupations and rural home occupations as follows:
      (1)   Home occupation: one non-illuminated sign not to exceed six square
feet and located in the Table of Sign Requirements in §
151.07 of this chapter; and
      (2)   Temporary Off-Premises Signs. The purpose of this section is to
control and limit the amount of off-premises signs allowed in the village and
its ETJ. The result of this chapter will control clutter within the village
limits and prevent obstructions in the sight line along roadways.
         (a)   Temporary off- premises signs advertising real estate, auctions,
special events, political candidates or referenda, and garage/yard sales will
be allowed only when the following conditions are met.
         (b)   Off-premises signs not specifically listed in this section are
strictly prohibited.
   (M)   Planned development signs, as follows:
      (1)   Up to two signs advertising any planned development located within
all or part of the village’s jurisdictional area. Subdivisions that are not
entirely or partially located within the village’s jurisdictional area are
prohibited from placing signs within said jurisdictional area;
      (2)   Signs shall be placed only at street intersections;
      (3)   Signs shall be placed at no more than two street intersections
within one mile of an entrance to subject subdivision, or at the nearest
intersection of a major thoroughfare;
      (4)   Signs shall not exceed six square feet in size;
      (5)   Signs shall not exceed four feet in height measured from the top of
natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign;
      (6)   Signs may be posted between the hours of 12:00 p.m. on Friday and
7:00 a.m. the following Monday; and
      (7)   All components of the sign, including the sign face, stakes, posts,
frames or any other supporting element must be removed from the property when
signs are collected by 7:00 a.m. Monday.
   (N)   Directional signs for individual parcels for sale, rent, or lease, as
follows:
      (1)   Signs shall not exceed three square feet in size;
      (2)   Signs shall not exceed three feet in height measured from the top
of natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign; and
      (3)   When property is no longer for sale, all components of the sign,
including the sign face, stakes, posts, frames or any other supporting element
must be removed from the property within 48 hours.
   (O)   Auctions, as follows:
      (1)   Up to two signs advertising a one-time auction of real estate or
personal or business items may be erected up to 15 days prior to the advertised
date of the auction located within all or part of the village’s jurisdictional
area;
      (2)   Signs shall be posted not more than one mile from auction site or
at the nearest intersection of a major thoroughfare;
      (3)   Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size;
      (4)   Signs shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the top of
natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign; and
      (5)   Upon conclusion of the auction, all components of the sign,
including the sign face, stakes, posts, frames or any other supporting element
must be removed from the property immediately and the land returned to its
previous state.
   (P)   Special events, as follows:
      (1)   Advertising for special events shall be limited to nonprofit,
noncommercial organizations such as religious institutions, civic
organizations, and schools;
      (2)   Up to two signs advertising a one-time special event may be erected
up to 15 days prior to the advertised date of a special event located within
all or part of the village’s jurisdictional area;
      (3)   Signs shall be posted not more than one mile from special event
site or at the nearest intersection of a major thoroughfare;
      (4)   Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in size;
      (5)   Signs shall not exceed six feet in height measured from the top of
natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign; and
      (6)   Upon conclusion of the special event, all components of the sign,
including the sign face, stakes, posts, frames or any other supporting element
must be removed from the property immediately and the land returned to its
previous state.
   (Q)   Garage/yard sales, as follows:
      (1)   Up to two signs advertising individual or neighborhood sales are
permitted up to 48 hours prior to the advertised time of the sale located
within the village’s jurisdictional area;
      (2)   Signs shall not exceed six square feet in size;
      (3)   Signs shall not exceed four feet in height measured from the top of
natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign; and
      (4)   Upon conclusion of the garage/yard sale, all components of the
sign, including the sign face, stakes, posts, frames and/or any other
supporting element must be removed from the property within 48 hours.
   (R)   Political signs, as follows:
      (1)   All political signs must adhere to policies and regulations of
Board of Elections. If any of the following provisions are in conflict with
regulations set forth by the Board of Elections, the stricter of the
regulations shall apply with no effect to the remaining regulations;
      (2)   Sign may not exceed six square feet;
      (3)   Sign shall not exceed four feet in height measured from the top of
the natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign;
      (4)   Political signs may be displayed during a period beginning 45 days
prior to an election and removed seven days after the election. In the event of
a runoff election, political signs for the candidates involved may remain on
display until seven days after the runoff election;
      (5)   Upon conclusion of the election, all components of the sign,
including the sign face, stakes, posts, frames or any other supporting element
must be removed from the property and the land returned to its previous state;
and
      (6)   All portable or roof-mounted political signs are prohibited.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.04 SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   (A)   On-premises signage.
      (1)   On-premises signage is allowed in the various zoning districts of
the village of and its ETJ as set forth in Table of Sign Requirements located
in §
151.07 of this chapter. It may be either freestanding signage or attached to
principal and accessory buildings. When attached, it is considered a part of
the structure and is subject to the height and setback regulations governing
the building.
      (2)   On-premises signs shall be constructed of rigid, durable material
(masonry, metal, or wood that is primed and painted) that will not rust, fade,
rot or become structurally unstable,
      (3)   (a)   On-premises signs shall receive routine maintenance
including, but not limited to, painting, cleaning, and replacement of damaged
components, to remain in good repair.
         (b)   Should such signs fall into disrepair, the sign applicant shall
be found in violation of the standard listed above and subject to both the
penalties set forth in §
151.99 of this chapter and the requirements set forth in §
151.07(F).
   (B)   Permanent off-premises directional signs. Off-premises signs within
the village jurisdiction directing the public to any nonprofit organization
shall be allowed only when the following conditions are met.
      (1)   Permanent off-premises directional signs shall be limited to
nonprofit organizations such as religious institutions, civic organizations,
and schools;
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a zoning compliance permit for an off-
premises sign, a NCDOT permit must be issued by the District 2 Engineer’s
office;
      (3)   A location site plan shall be required to ensure sign placement
will not encroach in the NCDOT right of way and sight distance triangle (The
site plan shall be drawn to scale showing the property dimensions as well as
the NCDOT right of way);
      (4)   Where two or more organizations operate from the same building or
site, a total of two off-premises directional signs shall be allowed;
      (5)   Signs shall not exceed six square feet in size;
      (6)   Signs shall not exceed four feet in height measured from the top of
natural grade to the uppermost part of the sign;
      (7)   Sign shall not be lighted;
      (8)   Sign may bear the name of the organization and/or its logo, and a
directional arrow only;
      (9)   Permanent off-premises directional signs are to be constructed of
rigid, durable material (masonry, metal, or wood that is primed and painted)
that will not rust, fade, rot or become structurally unstable.
         (a)   Off-premises signs shall receive routine maintenance including,
but not limited to, painting, cleaning, and replacement of damaged components,
to remain in good repair; and
         (b)   Should signs fall into disrepair, the sign applicant shall be
found in violation of the standard listed above and subject to both the
penalties set forth in §
151.99 and the requirements set forth in §
151.07(F).
      (10)   All components of the sign, including the sign face, stakes,
posts, frames or any other supporting element must be removed from the property
upon permanent cessation of the business operation.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.05 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Sign permits are obtained from the office of the Zoning Administrator
or Village Clerk and run with the life of the sign.
   (B)   Additionally, all signs require a building permit from the County
Inspections Department.
   (C)   Those signs which are illuminated also require an electrical permit,
also available from the Inspections Department.
   (D)   The applicant must bring a drawing of the sign showing size and
location.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)
§ 151.06 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Height. All signs that do not have specific height requirements set
forth in §
151.07 of this chapter shall follow the height limitations of the underlying
zoning district’s regulation for accessory structures.
   (B)   Illumination. 
      (1)   No flashing or intermittent illumination shall be used on an
advertising sign or structure.
      (2)   Time and temperature signs are excluded from this definition.
      (3)   All illuminated signs or structures shall be placed so as to
prevent the light rays or illumination therefrom being cast directly upon any
residential dwelling or road right-of-way.
      (4)   Furthermore, continuously illuminated neon signs may only be
located behind a window of the principal use with which is associated.
   (C)   Imitation traffic signs. No sign shall be illuminated, constructed, or
displayed in any manner which simulates official traffic or public notice signs
or signals.
   (D)   Restrictions on direct illumination, banners, streamers, and the like.
No source of illumination on a sign, such as floodlights, spotlights,
unshielded bulbs, and the like, shall be directly visible from any public
right-of-way, from any residential district or from adjacent premises.
   (E)   Prohibited locations for signs.
      (1)   Except where specifically permitted by this chapter, signage,
inclusive of the supports, frames and embellishments thereto, shall not be
located within the public right-of-way, or sight preservation triangle as
defined in this chapter.
      (2)   No sign shall be attached, affixed or painted upon any utility
poles, any tree, rock or other neutral object. No sign shall be permitted on
the side street frontage of a corner lot, if such sign is located within 100
feet of a residential district.
   (F)   Maintenance of signs/removal of abandoned signs. All signage in the
village’s jurisdiction is to be kept in good, presentable condition. Paint is
to be intact, neither peeling nor faded. Signs are also to be kept structurally
sound capable of standing erect or remaining securely attached. Once a sign is
deemed abandoned the owner shall remove it and, furthermore, no new sign permit
shall be issued for a new use until the abandoned sign is removed or brought up
to standard.
   (G)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, or relocate a sign within the village and its ETJ thereon
without having first obtained a permit from the Zoning Administrator or Village
Clerk unless otherwise exempted in this chapter.
   (H)   Inspection. Every sign erected in the village and its ETJ shall be
subject to the inspection of the Zoning Administrator/Inspector to assure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Signage with electrical wiring
is to be inspected and approved prior to connection to the power source.
   (I)   Illegal signs. Any sign erected in violation of the provisions of this
chapter is an illegal sign and shall be removed.
   (J)   Failure to comply. Failure to comply with any of the provisions herein
will be handled as a violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of
§
151.99.
   (K)   Emergency removal. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to
cause the immediate removal of any sign found to be unsafe or defective to the
extent it creates a hazard to persons or property.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)  Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.07 TABLE OF SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
Sign Type Number Allowed Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Sign Location
Ground sign
Sign Type       Number Allowed  Maximum Sign    Maximum Height  Sign Location
                                Area
Ground sign
Individual      1 per street    32 square feet  6 feet
business        frontage
                                32 square feet
Combined        1 per street    plus 8 square
development     frontage        feet per        10 feet
                                additional
                                tenant
Subdivision and 1 per entrance
MHP entrance    road            32 square feet  6 feet
sign
Apartments and  1 per entrance  32 square feet  6 feet          Outside street
condominiums                                                    right-of-way
Group care                                                      and sight
facilities,                                                     triangle
boarding
houses, bed and 1 per premise   16 square feet  4 feet
breakfasts,
inns, and
similar uses
Churches,
schools, public 1 per premise   16 square feet  4 feet
buildings, and
similar uses
Home occupation 1 per premise   Six square feet 4 feet
Wall Sign
Individual                                      Not to extend
business and    1 per street                    above or beyond
combined        frontage        50 square feet  any wall
development                                     (includes
                                                window area)    N/A
                May be
Canopy and/or   substituted for 20 square feet  N/A
awning signs    allowed wall
                sign
 
(Ord. passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Mayor or his or her designee shall be the enforcement authority
for the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All signs requiring a permit must be permitted by the appropriate
authority as described in this chapter.
   (C)   The village retains the right to pursue violators of this chapter
through civil penalties as allowed by state law. In addition to any procedures
allowed under state law, the village has the right to impose penalties as
follows.
      (1)   First citation: $25 fine;
      (2)   Second citation for same offense: $50 fine; and
      (3)   Third citation for same offense: $200 fine.
      (4)   The subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person, entity
or firm, for the same offense shall be cumulative for the purposes of
determining penalties.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2007)   
CHAPTER 152: ZONING
Section
   
152.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 152.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The village’s zoning ordinance, and any and all amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 3-19-1990; Ord. passed 11-15-2004; Ord. passed 5-
19-2008; Ord. passed 1-13-2014; Ord. passed 10-16-2017; Ord. 19-O-1, passed 3-
18-2019; Ord. 19-O-2, passed 3- 18-2019; Ord. 20-O-4, passed 10-19-2020; Ord.
21- O-02, passed 4-19-2021)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   REZONINGS
      
II.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
      
III.   STREETS
TABLE I: REZONINGS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Adopting the rezoning of certain property (parcel #s:
19-O-04       9-16-2019   36619; 36620; and 39292) from Neighborhood
                          Residential to General Business
                          Rezoning certain property (parcel #s: 36619; 36620;
19-O-06       9-16-2019   and 39292) from Neighborhood Residential to General
                          Business
                          Rezoning certain described tracts of land (parcel #s:
                          77304; 77305; 77306; 77307; 77308; 77309; 77310;
20-O-3        7-30-2020   77311; 77312; 77313; 77314; 77315; 77316; 77317;
                          45792; 45793; 06685; 09648) from Agricultural-
                          Residential to Office and Institutional
21-0-01       - -         Rezoning certain property (parcel # 41152) from
                          Agricultural-Residential to General Business
                         
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Granting a cable system franchise to Frontier Vision
             11-15-2004  Operating Partners, l/k/a Adelphia Cable
                          Communications
                         
 
TABLE III: STREETS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
R. -          1-19-1981   Designating the name of Pine Street to Moore Street
-             1-19-1981   Designating prefixes for certain streets and parts
                          thereof
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Cites Code Section
G.S. Cites        Code Section
1-593             10.05
14-4              93.99
14-4(a), (c)      10.99
Ch. 20            110.03
20-4.01           71.02
20-4.01(12b)      71.02
Ch. 44A, Art. 1   92.09
136-143           92.12
143-128.2         34.02
143-129           31.04
Ch. 160A, Art. 12 34.03
160A-175          10.99
Ch. 162B          33.20
162B-10           33.28
164-7             10.14
                  
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2021 Code
Prior Code 2021 Code
1-8        11.01
2-1        31.01
2-2        31.02
2-3        31.03
2-4        31.03
2-5        31.03
2-6        31.04
2-7        30.01
2-8        30.02
2-9        30.03
2-10       30.04
2-11       30.05
2-12       30.06
2-13       30.07
2-14       32.01
2-15       32.02
2-17       32.03
2-18       32.04
2-19       33.01
2-20       33.02
2-21       33.03
2-22       33.04
2-23       33.05
2-24       33.20
2-25       33.21
2-26       33.22
2-27       33.23
2-28       33.24
2-29       33.24
2-30       33.25
2-31       33.26
2-32       33.27
2-33       33.28
2-34       31.15
2-35       31.16
2-36       31.17
2-37       31.18
2-38       31.19
2-39       31.20
2-40       31.21
3-1        90.01
3-2        90.02
3-3        90.03
3-4        90.04
3-5        90.05
3-6        90.06
3-7        90.07
3-8        90.08
4-1        91.01
4-2        91.02
4-3        91.03
4-4        91.04
4-5        91.04
4-6        91.05
4-7        91.06
4-8        91.07
4-9        91.08
4-10       91.08
4-11       91.08
4-12       91.08
5-1        130.01
5-2        130.02
6-1        70.01
6-2        70.02
6-3        70.03
6-4        70.04
6-5        70.05
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        1-19-1981   TSO Table III
-        8-1-2007    34.01
-        2-18-2008   34.02
-        12-8-2008   50.01
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       90.20—
                       90.21;
                       90.24—
-          - -         90.27;
                       90.29—
                       90.31;
                       90.99
-          - -         152.01
-          1-19-1981   150.01—
                       150.05
-          1-19-1981   TSO Table III
                       130.03—
-          7-19-1982   130.05;
                       130.99
-          3-19-1990   152.01
-          5-16-1994   93.01;
                       93.99
                       30.01;
-          6-20-1994   31.01;
                       32.02
-          6-20-1994   70.01
-          6-20-1994   90.02;
                       91.04
-          6-20-1994   92.01—
                       92.13
-          6-16-2003   130.05
-          11-15-2004  152.01
-          11-15-2004  TSO Table II
                       151.01—
-          4-16-2007   151.07,
                       151.99
-          5-19-2008   152.01
-          1-27-2009   90.20
                       Charter
09-O-01    7-20-2009   3.2;
                       3.4;
                       31.05
-          5-2-2011    90.09;
                       90.99
-          1-13-2014   152.01
02-16-2015 2-16-2015   91.20;
                       91.21
-          10-16-2017  152.01
18-O-1     3-19-2018   91.20
18-O-2     4-16-2018   34.03
19-O-1     3-18-2019   152.01
19-O-2     3-18-2019   152.01
19-O-06    9-16-2019   TSO Table I
19-O-04    9-16-2019   TSO Table I
                       71.01—
19-O-05    10-21-2019  71.04;
                       71.99
20-O-3     7-30-2020   TSO Table I
20-O-4     10-19-2020  152.01
                       110.01—
-          12-14-2020  110.07;
                       110.99
21-O-01    - -         TSO Table I
21-O-02    4-19-2021   152.01
                       90.20;
23-O-003   10-16-2023  90.22;
                       90.23;
                       90.27
24-O-001   4-15-2024   91.23
24-O-002   5-20-2024   91.22
                      
 
 
