TROUTMAN, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 42-25, passed 12-11-2025, and
State legislation current through 2024 Legislative Service Pamphlet No. 2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 20-24
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE
TOWN OF TROUTMAN, NORTH CAROLINA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING
CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the present, general and permanent ordinances of the Town of
Troutman, North Carolina are inadequately arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the public
peace, health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality and for the
proper conduct of its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the legislature of the State of North Carolina empower
and authorize the Town of Troutman to revise, amend, restate, codify, and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form: and
   WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Troutman has authorized a general
compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the Town of
Troutman of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in
book form; and
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF TROUTMAN,
NORTH CAROLINA OF IREDELL COUNTY:
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town of Troutman as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Troutman, North
Carolina."
   Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:
            TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
               10. General Provisions
            TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
               30. Employees, Officers, and Organizations
               31. Public Safety
               32. Town Policies
               33. Schedule of Fees
            TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
               50. Water and Sewers Generally
               51. Water
               52. Sewers
               53. Garbage and Refuse
            TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
               71. Parking Rules
               70. Traffic Regulations
            TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
               90. Animals
               91. Fire Prevention
               92. Abandoned Vehicles
               93. Nuisances; Health and Sanitation
               94. Parks and Recreation
               95. Special Events
            TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
               110. Peddlers and Solicitors
               111. Alcohol
            TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
               130. General Offenses
            TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
               150. Building Regulations
               151. Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Property
               152. Telecommunication Facilities
               153. Zoning
            TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
               Reserved
            PARALLEL REFERENCES
               References to North Carolina General Statutes
               References to Prior Code
               References to Ordinances
            INDEX
   Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred, or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance. Nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing, or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature, or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approved by the Troutman Town Council, and the Clerk of the Town
of Troutman, North Carolina is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of
such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effective upon the day of
adoption, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved, and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Troutman, North Carolina on this
8th day of August, 2024.
    //signed
   Teross W. Young, Jr., Mayor
ATTEST:
//signed
Kimberly H. Davis, Town Clerk
 
CHARTER
Section
Section 1.
Article I.
Incorporation and Corporate Powers.
   
1.1   Incorporation and general powers
   
1.2   Powers
Article II.
Corporate Boundaries.
   
2.1   Corporate limits
Article III.
Mayor and Town Council.
   
3.1   Town governing body
   
3.2   Composition of Town Council
   
3.3   Mayor
   
3.4   Mayor Pro Tempore
   
3.5   Terms; qualifications; vacancies
   
3.6   Organization of Town Council
   
3.7   Meetings of Town Council
   
3.8   Ordinances and Resolutions
Article IV.
Elections.
   Chapter 1. Municipal Elections.
   
4.1   Regular municipal elections
   
4.2   Election of Mayor
   
4.3   Election of Town Council
   Chapter 2. Recall of Elected Officials.
   
4.4   Removal of officeholders
   
4.5   Filing of recall petition
   
4.6   Recall election
   
4.7   Effect of recall election; removal of officeholder
   
4.8   Limitation on recall petitions
Article V.
Organization and Administration.
   
5.1   Council-Manager form of government
   
5.2   Town Manager
   
5.3   Town Attorney
   
5.4   Town Clerk and Deputy Town Clerk
   
5.5   Tax Collector
   
5.6   Finance Officer
   
5.7   Other officers and employees
   
Section 2.
   
Section 3.
   
Section 4.
   
Section 5.
   
Section 6.
   
Section 7.
   
Section 8.
   
Section 9.
SECTION 1.
The Charter of the Town of Troutman is hereby revised and consolidated to read
as follows: “THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF TROUTMAN.”
ARTICLE I.
Incorporation and Corporate Powers.
SEC. 1.1. INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS.
The Town of Troutman shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under
the name of the “Town of Troutman,” hereinafter referred to as the “Town.” The
Town shall continue to be vested with all property and rights which now belong
to the Town; shall have perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter
and renew the same at pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract, may acquire
and hold all such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed,
sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it,
and may from time to time hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; and
shall have and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal
powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature.
SEC. 1.2. POWERS.
The Town shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights,
privileges and immunities, which are now or hereafter may be conferred, either
expressly or by implication, upon the Town specifically by this Charter or upon
municipal corporations generally by the State Constitution, or by general or
special statute. The Town shall be authorized to participate in all federal
programs not contrary to the Constitution of the State of North Carolina and
not explicitly denied to municipalities by the North Carolina General Statutes.
ARTICLE II.
Corporate Boundaries.
SEC. 2.1. CORPORATE LIMITS.
The corporate limits of the Town shall be those existing at the time of
ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town and
as such limits may be altered from time to time in accordance with law. An
official map of the Town, showing the current municipal boundaries, shall be
maintained permanently in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be available
for public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate limits pursuant to law,
the appropriate changes to the official map shall be made, and copies shall be
filed in the office of the Secretary of State, the Iredell County Register of
Deeds, and the Iredell County Board of Elections.
ARTICLE III.
Mayor and Town Council.
SEC. 3.1. TOWN GOVERNING BODY.
The Town Council and the Mayor shall be the governing body of the Town.
SEC. 3.2. COMPOSITION OF TOWN COUNCIL.
The Town Council shall consist of five members to be elected by the qualified
voters of the Town voting at large in the manner provided in Article IV of this
Charter.
SEC. 3.3. MAYOR.
The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town voting at large
in the manner provided in Article IV of this Charter. The Mayor shall be the
official head of the Town government and shall preside at all meetings of the
Town Council. When there is an equal division on a question, the Mayor shall
resolve the deadlock by his or her vote, but shall vote in no other case.
SEC. 3.4. MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
At its first regular meeting following the certification of election results in
the municipal election by the Iredell County Board of Elections, the Town
Council shall choose one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tempore, and he or
she shall perform the duties of the Mayor in the Mayor’s absence or disability.
The Mayor Pro Tempore as such shall have no fixed term of office but shall
serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the remaining members of the Town
Council.
SEC. 3.5. TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCIES.
The Mayor shall serve a four-year term of office, and members of the Town
Council shall serve staggered four-year terms of office.
SEC. 3.6. ORGANIZATION OF TOWN COUNCIL.
The Town Council shall meet and organize for the transaction of business at the
first regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council following each municipal
election.
SEC. 3.7. MEETINGS OF TOWN COUNCIL.
The Town Council shall fix a suitable time and place for its regular meetings,
which shall be held at least once monthly. Special meetings may be held
according to the procedures and requirements designated by the general laws of
North Carolina pertaining to special meetings of city councils.
SEC. 3.8. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or proving of ordinances shall be in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of North Carolina
not inconsistent with this Charter. The ayes and noes shall be taken upon all
ordinances and resolutions and entered in the minutes of the Town Council. The
enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the Town Council
of the Town of Troutman.” All ordinances and resolutions shall take effect upon
adoption unless otherwise provided therein.
ARTICLE IV.
Elections.
CHAPTER 1. MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
SEC. 4.1. REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
Regular municipal elections in the Town shall be held in each odd-numbered year
in accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina.
Elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results shall be
determined using the nonpartisan plurality method as provided in G.S. 163-292.
SEC. 4.2. ELECTION OF MAYOR.
In the regular municipal election in 2023 and quadrennially thereafter, a Mayor
shall be elected to serve a four-year term.
SEC. 4.3. ELECTION OF TOWN COUNCIL.
In the regular municipal election in 2023, and quadrennially thereafter, two
Town Council members shall be elected to serve four-year terms in those
positions whose terms are then expiring. In the regular municipal election in
2025, and quadrennially thereafter, three Town Council members shall be elected
to serve four-year terms in those positions whose terms are then expiring.
CHAPTER 2. RECALL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
SEC. 4.4. REMOVAL OF OFFICEHOLDERS.
The Mayor and the Town Council members may be removed at any time by the
registered voters of the Town pursuant to this Chapter. The Mayor or a Town
Council member is removed upon the filing of a sufficient recall petition as
provided in this Chapter and the affirmative vote of a majority of those voting
on the question of removal at a recall election.
SEC. 4.5. FILING OF RECALL PETITION.
(a)   Any registered voter of the Town may file a sworn affidavit with the
Iredell County Board of Elections containing the name of the Mayor or Town
Council member whose removal is sought and a general statement of the grounds
alleged for removal. The Iredell County Board of Elections shall provide the
registered voter submitting the request with the official recall petition form
that demands the removal of the Mayor or Town Council member. The petition form
shall comply with all of the following:
   (1)   Be signed by the Iredell County Director of Elections.
   (2)   Contain the date of issuance.
   (3)   Be addressed to the Iredell County Board of Elections.
   (4)   Contain the name of the person to whom the form is issued.
   (5)   Contain the name or names of the Mayor or Town Council member whose
removal is sought.
   (6)   Provide a general statement of the grounds on which the removal is
sought, as alleged in the affidavit.
   (7)   Provide a place for signatures.
(b)   To be sufficient, a recall petition must be returned to the Iredell
County Board of Elections within 30 days after the issuance of the recall
petition form and must bear the signatures of at least twenty-five percent
(25%) of the registered voters of the Town as shown by the registration records
as of January 1 of the year immediately before the recall petition is being
filed. The signatures to the petition must be handwritten ink signatures. The
signatures need not all be appended to one paper. Each signer shall add his or
her printed name, signature, and the signer’s residential address.
(c)   Upon receipt of a filed recall petition, the Iredell County Board of
Elections shall conduct an investigation to verify the petition signatures by
confirming that the signatures and addresses listed belong to a registered
voter of the Town as shown by the registration records as of January 1 of the
year immediately before the recall petition is filed. The Iredell County Board
of Elections shall complete its investigation and issue its certification of
the results of the investigation within 30 days after the filing of any
petition. That period of 30 days shall be tolled for any period of time that is
also either two weeks before or one week after a primary or election being
conducted by the Iredell County Board of Elections. If, by the Iredell County
Board of Elections’ certification, the petition is shown to be insufficient, it
may be amended within 10 days from the date of the certification. The Iredell
County Board of Elections shall, within 10 days after any amendment, complete
an investigation to verify the petition signatures of the amended petition. If
the certification of the results of the investigation shows the amended
petition to be insufficient, a copy of the petition shall be returned to the
person filing the petition, who may then choose to file a new petition.
SEC. 4.6. RECALL ELECTION.
(a)   Upon a determination that a sufficient recall petition has been
submitted, the Iredell County Board of Elections shall notify the Mayor or Town
Council member whose removal is sought. The Iredell County Board of Elections
shall order and fix a date for holding a recall election. Subject to the
remaining provisions of this section, an election shall not be held less than
90 nor more than 120 days after the petition has been certified as sufficient.
(b)   The Iredell County Board of Elections shall provide legal notice of the
recall election by publication. The notice shall include the general statement
of the grounds on which the recall is sought as alleged in the petition. The
notice must also include arrangements for holding the recall election in
accordance with general law. The recall election shall be conducted, returned,
and the results declared as in other elections in Iredell County.
(c)   The question of recalling the Mayor or any number of the Town Council
members may be submitted at the same election, provided that a separate
petition is filed and there is an entirely separate question on the ballot for
each Town Council member and the Mayor.
(d)   The ballots used in a recall election shall submit the following
proposition:
“[] FOR [] AGAINST
The recall of [name and title of the Mayor or Town Council member].”
SEC. 4.7. EFFECT OF RECALL ELECTION; REMOVAL OF OFFICEHOLDER.
If less than a majority of the votes cast on the question of recalling the
Mayor or Town Council member are for recall, the Mayor or Town Council member
shall continue in office for the remainder of the unexpired term. If a majority
of votes are for the recall of the Mayor or Town Council member designated on
the ballot, the Mayor or Town Council member shall be deemed removed from
office and a vacancy shall be declared on the date the Iredell County Board of
Elections certifies the results of the recall election. The vacancy shall be
filled as provided in G.S. 160A-63. The Mayor or Town Council member removed
from office by the voters as a result of a recall election shall not be
appointed to fill the vacancy caused by the removal or resignation of that
Mayor or Town Council member.
SEC. 4.8. LIMITATION ON RECALL PETITIONS.
No recall petition shall be filed against a Mayor or Town Council member who
has been subjected to a recall election, but not removed, until at least 12
months after that recall election is certified. No recall petition shall be
filed against the Mayor or Town Council member during the first six months of
his or her respective term. No recall petition shall be filed against a Mayor
or Town Council member six months prior to the end of his or her respective
term.
ARTICLE V.
Organization and Administration.
SEC. 5.1. COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The Town shall operate under the council-manager form of government in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.
SEC. 5.2. TOWN MANAGER.
The Town Council shall appoint a Town Manager, who shall be the administrative
head of Town government and shall be responsible for the administration of all
departments of Town government. The Town Manager shall be appointed with regard
to his or her executive and administrative abilities and does not have to be a
resident of the Town when appointed but shall, during his or her tenure as Town
Manager, reside within the corporate limits of the Town. The Town Manager shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Town Council and shall receive the
compensation established by the Town Council from time to time. The Town
Manager shall have all the powers and duties conferred by general law and shall
have the additional powers and duties conferred by the Town Council as
authorized by general or local law.
SEC. 5.3. TOWN ATTORNEY.
The Town Council shall appoint a Town Attorney who shall be an attorney at law
licensed to engage in the practice of law in North Carolina and who need not be
a resident of the Town during his or her tenure. The Town Attorney shall serve
at the pleasure of the Town Council and shall receive compensation as
determined by the Town Council. The Town Attorney shall perform all duties
required by law or directed by the Town Council. The Town Council may also
employ other attorneys as it deems advisable in order to provide legal advice
and assistance to the Town.
SEC. 5.4. TOWN CLERK AND DEPUTY TOWN CLERK.
The Town Manager shall appoint a Town Clerk and may appoint a Deputy Town Clerk
to keep minutes of the proceedings of the Town Council, to maintain in a safe
place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the Town, and to
perform other duties as may be required by law or as the Town Council may
direct.
SEC. 5.5. TAX COLLECTOR.
The Town Manager shall appoint a Tax Collector and may appoint a Deputy Tax
Collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys due the Town,
subject to the provisions of State law and ordinances of the Town. The Tax
Collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all the general laws of
North Carolina relating to the collection of taxes by municipalities and shall
perform other duties as the Town Council may direct.
SEC. 5.6. FINANCE OFFICER.
The Town Manager shall appoint a Finance Officer and may appoint a Deputy
Finance Officer to perform the duties of the Finance Officer as required by the
Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, being G.S. §§ 159-1 et seq. and
to perform other duties as the Town Council may direct.
SEC. 5.7. OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
The Town Council may authorize other offices and positions to be filled by
appointment of the Town Manager and may organize the Town government and
combine offices as deemed appropriate, subject to the requirements of general
law.
SECTION 2.
The purpose of this section is to revise the Charter of the Town of Troutman
and to consolidate certain acts concerning the property, affairs, and
government of the Town. It is intended to continue without interruption those
provisions of prior acts that are expressly consolidated into this section, so
that all rights and liabilities which have accrued are preserved and may be
enforced.
SECTION 3.
This section does not repeal or affect any acts concerning the property,
affairs or government or public schools or any acts validating official
actions, proceedings, contracts, or obligations of any kind.
SECTION 4.
The following acts, having served the purposes for which they were enacted or
having been consolidated into this act, are expressly repealed:
Chapter 44 of the Private Laws of 1905;
Chapter 158 of the Session Laws of 1973;
Chapter 144 of the Session Laws of 1981;
Chapter 104 of the Session Laws of 1983;
Chapter 123 of the Session Laws of 1983;
Chapter 75 of the Session Laws of 1987.
SECTION 5.
The Mayor and members of the Town Council serving on the date of ratification
of this section shall serve until the expiration of their terms or until their
successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, those offices shall be filled
as provided in Articles III and IV of Section 1 of the Charter, as enacted by
this section.
SECTION 6.
This section does not affect any rights or interests that arose under any
provisions repealed by this section.
SECTION 7.
   Whenever a reference is made in this section to a particular provision of
the General Statutes and the provision is later amended, superseded, or
recodified, the reference shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
General Statute or to the General Statute that most clearly corresponds to the
statutory provision that is superseded or recodified.
SECTION 8.
If any provision of this section or application thereof is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this section
that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and, to
this end, the provisions of this section are declared to be severable.
SECTION 9.
This section is effective when it becomes law. No action or proceeding pending
on the effective date of this section by or against the Town of Troutman or any
of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by this
section.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Definitions; rules of construction
   
10.04   Official time
   
10.05   Reasonable time
   
10.06   References to offices
   
10.07   Errors and omissions
   
10.08   Supplementation of code
   
10.09   Altering code
   
10.10   Amendments to code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.11   Repeal, expiration, and revival of ordinances
   
10.12   Provisions reserved from repeal
   
10.13   Ordinances codified by official entries
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Application to future ordinances
   
10.16   Severability
   
10.17   Captions
   
10.18   Section histories
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE.
   The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and
be designated as the Code of Ordinances, Town of Troutman, North Carolina or
the Troutman Municipal Code and may be so cited.
(Prior Code, § 1-1)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 8-5, 160A-77, and 160A-79
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 DEFINITIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The chief administrative officer of the Town of Troutman,
whether designated “administrator,” “manager,” or some other title.
   BOND. Where a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.
   CODE. The code of ordinances of the Town of Troutman, North Carolina.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is
Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   COUNTY. The County of Iredell in the State of North Carolina.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision of this code requires or
authorizes an officer or employee of the municipality to do some act or perform
some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to
designate, delegate, and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty
unless the terms of the provision shall specifically designate or provide
otherwise.
   GENDER. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   HEALTH OFFICER OR DIRECTOR. The Health Officer or Health Director of Iredell
County, North Carolina.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons
shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them.
   MAY or SHALL. The term MAY is permissive; the term SHALL is mandatory.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   MUNICIPAL. Refers to the Town of Troutman.
   MUNICIPALITY. Refers to the Town of Troutman in the County of Iredell, North
Carolina.
   N.C. ADMIN. CODE, NCAC. Refers to the North Carolina Administrative Code.
   NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS. Terms and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   NUMBER. Terms used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
   OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED shall be equivalent to the words SWEAR and SWORN.
   OFFICIALS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND THE LIKE. Whenever reference is made to
officials, boards, commissions, committees, and the like by title only, they
shall be construed as if followed by the words “of the Town of Troutman, North
Carolina.”
   OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE. The same as public works.
   OR, AND. The term OR may be read as AND, and the term AND may be read as OR
if the sense requires it.
   OWNER. When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole
or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Includes an individual as well as a corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property except real property.
   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   PUBLIC WORKS. The same as operations and maintenance.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina.
   STATE LAW REFERENCE. Whenever reference is made, for example, to G.S. §
160A-200, it shall be construed to refer to the General Statutes of North
Carolina, § 160A-1, as amended, or to whatever section is cited.
   STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
alley, lane, path, viaduct, bridge, or other public place and the approaches
thereto within the town when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
and established for purposes of vehicular traffic.
   TENANT, OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, includes any person
who occupies the whole of or a part of such building or land whether alone or
with others.
   TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and the present.
   TOWN. The Town of Troutman, North Carolina.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the Town of Troutman unless, by virtue
of context, another board is that to which is being referred.
   TOWN LIMITS or CORPORATE LIMITS. The legal boundary of the town as set out
in the charter and as later amended.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, engraving, lithographing, and any
other mode of representing words and letters. In all cases where a written
signature is required by law, it shall be in a proper handwriting or in a
proper mark.
   YEAR. A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1-2) (Ord. 08-12, passed 4-12-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions G.S. §§ 1-593, 1A-1, 12-3, and 159-2
§ 10.04 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.05 REASONABLE TIME.
   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable
time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall
be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of that
act or the giving of that notice.
§ 10.06 REFERENCES TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.07 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention. The provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such an error.
§ 10.08 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this code shall
be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Town Council. A
supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general
parts of ordinances passed by the Town Council or adopted by initiative and
referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the code and shall also include all amendments to the charter during
the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared
that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date
of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and make changes
in such catchlines, headings, and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing sections or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to
“this chapter,” “this subchapter,” “this division,” and the like, as the case
may be, or to “sections__to__” (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code.
   (D)   In no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in
the code.
(Prior Code, § 1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 12-4
§ 10.09 ALTERING CODE.
   (A)   No person shall change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part
or portion of this code.
   (B)   No person shall insert or delete pages or any portions thereof or
alter or tamper with such code in any manner except pursuant to ordinance or
resolution or other official act of the Town Council which will cause the law
of the town to be misrepresented thereby.
(Prior Code, § 1-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.10 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal, or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein.
      (2)   In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any
part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded
from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the
time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-
adopted as a new code of ordinances.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: “That section____of the Code of Ordinances,
Town of Troutman, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows:....”
The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted.
   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to
be added, the following language may be used: “That the Code of Ordinances,
Town of Troutman, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered__________which section reads as follows:....” The new section shall
then be set out in full as enacted.
   (D)   In lieu of the provisions in division (C) above, when the governing
authority desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature
embracing a subject not previously existing in the code, but which the
governing authority desires to incorporate into the code, a provision in
substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: “It
is the intention of the council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions
of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, Town
of Troutman, North Carolina, and the sections of this ordinance may be
renumbered to accomplish that intention.”
   (E)   All sections, divisions, chapters, or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, or chapter number,
as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.11 REPEAL, EXPIRATION, AND REVIVAL OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance or its expiration, by virtue of any
provisions contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.
   (B)   When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the
previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect.
(Prior Code, § 1-7)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 12-2
§ 10.12 PROVISIONS RESERVED FROM REPEAL.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following
ordinances in effect at the time of adoption of this code:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving, and the like any street or public way in
the town;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
for such improvements;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or unified development ordinance;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
      (13)   Any ordinance relating to social security and retirement benefits
for town officers and employees;
      (14)   Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (15)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this code;
or
      (16)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
town.
   (B)   Nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed. All
such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to
the same extent as if set forth at length in this code and shall remain in
effect until later amended or repealed or until a franchise or moratorium
expires.
(Prior Code, § 1-10)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-77(a)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES CODIFIED BY OFFICIAL ENTRIES.
   (A)   The following ordinances are codified by appropriate entries on
official map books, as retained in the Clerk’s office or such other office
designated by the Council:
      (1)   Establishing or amending boundaries of zoning districts;
      (2)   Designating the location of traffic control devices;
      (3)   Designating areas or zones where regulations are applied to
parking, loading, bus stops, or taxicab stands;
      (4)   Establishing speed limits;
      (5)   Restricting or regulating traffic at certain times on certain
streets or to certain types, weights, or sizes of vehicles;
      (6)   Designating the location of through streets, stop intersections,
yield right-of-way intersections, waiting lanes, one-way streets, or truck
traffic routes; and
      (7)   Establishing regulations upon vehicle turns at designated
locations.
   (B)   Ordinances establishing utility rates, fees for public enterprise
services, and all other fees shall be codified by entry upon official lists or
schedules maintained by the town and retained in the office of the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 1-11)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-77(b) and (b)(1)
§ 10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of this Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.16 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this
code since the same would have been enacted by the Town Council without the
incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph, or section.
(Prior Code, § 1-4)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 12-3
§ 10.17 CAPTIONS.
   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of
the sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Prior Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, if any, are listed following the text of the
code section.
Example:
   (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
   (G.S. § 160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 139-1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the town any act is
prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, an offense, or a misdemeanor or
whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or other
ordinance shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment as allowed by the
state statutes.
   (B)   If any violation is designated as a nuisance, such nuisance may be
summarily abated by the town in addition to the imposition of a fine or
imprisonment.
   (C)   The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this code shall
not prevent the revocation of any permit, license, or franchise granted
pursuant to any town ordinance.
   (D)   Any violation of a town ordinance by any officer, agent, or other
person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association
or organization, while acting within the scope of his or her office or
employment, shall, in every case, also be deemed to be a violation by such
corporation, association, or organization.
   (E)   Any officer, agent, or other person acting for or employed by any
corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and
liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association
or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of a town ordinance
where such violation was the act or omission or the result of the act,
omission, or order of any such person.
   (F)   Each day that any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section
or this code shall relieve any offender of any fine, imprisonment, or penalty
for repeated violations on any one day.
   (G)   The provisions of this code or any other town ordinance may be
enforced by any remedy or a combination of the remedies authorized and
prescribed herein.
(Prior Code, § 1-9)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 14-4, 160A-174 et seq., and 160A-193
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   EMPLOYEES, OFFICERS, AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
31.   PUBLIC SAFETY
      
32.   TOWN POLICIES
      
33.   SCHEDULE OF FEES
CHAPTER 30: EMPLOYEES, OFFICERS, AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
30.01   Town Manager
   
30.02   Town Clerk; public records
§ 30.01 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   Office created. Pursuant to the authority of G.S. § 160A-147 and
Article 5, §
5.1, of the charter, the position of Town Manager is hereby adopted and shall
be appointed by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-40)
   (B)   Term of office; compensation. The Town Manager shall hold office at
the pleasure of the Town Council and shall receive such compensation as the
Council shall determine.
(Prior Code, § 2-41)
   (C)   Duties. The Town Manager shall have the powers and duties as outlined
in G.S. § 160A-148.
(Prior Code, § 2-42)
(Ord. 12-02, passed 10-10-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-147 and 160A-148
§ 30.02 TOWN CLERK; PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The Town Clerk is the designated official responsible for the receipt of
public records requests and the processing of those requests.
CHAPTER 31: PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Proclamation of state of emergency
Police Department
   
31.15   Created; composition
   
31.16   Chief of Police
   
31.17   Conditions of employment
   
31.18   Oath
   
31.19   Department operations
   
31.20   Revenue received
Police Reserves
   
31.35   Establishment; compensation; requirements
   
31.36   Training requirements
 
   
31.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 PROCLAMATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   States of emergency shall be governed by G.S. § 166A. The Mayor shall have
authority to declare an emergency without action by the Town Council.
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 166A-19.22
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.15 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created a Police Department for the town.
(Prior Code, § 14-18)
   (B)   Composition. The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police
and such other officers, patrol officers, and police officers as the Town
Council shall from time to time authorize.
(Prior Code, § 14-19)
(Ord. 10-77, passed 10-8-1977)
§ 31.16 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to screen all applicants
for positions with the Police Department and make recommendations with respect
thereto to the Town Council, which shall make such appointments. The Chief
shall formulate and communicate to other officers the general regulations of
the Department, especially with regard to code of conduct expected of officers
and grounds for dismissal from the Department.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of all members of the Police Department to
enforce all ordinances of the town and the laws of the state, within the
jurisdiction prescribed by statute; to secure proper warrants for the arrest of
those violating said ordinances and laws, including the issuance of citations
to such offenders when the nature of such offense indicates the same; and to
cooperate with the courts, as witnesses or otherwise, in the prosecution of
such violators. It shall also be the duty of the members of the Police
Department to protect life and property, keep the peace, and attempt to prevent
crime.
(Prior Code, § 14-20) (Ord. 10-77, passed 10-8-1977; Ord. passed 2-12-1985;
Ord. 03-22, passed 3-10-2022)
§ 31.17 CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.
   To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Town Police Department,
every applicant must:
   (A)   Be a citizen of the United States of America;
   (B)   Have obtained at least 21 years of age;
   (C)   Be of good moral character and must not have been convicted of a
felony or any offense involving moral turpitude;
   (D)   Have graduated from high school or its equivalent;
   (E)   Successfully pass a physical examination conducted by a duly licensed
physician;
   (F)   Be recommended by the Chief of Police and approved by the Town
Manager;
   (G)   Conform to and comply with the requirements of dress, personal
appearance, and other regulations as shall from time to time be formulated and
approved by the Town Manager; and
   (H)   Be certified by the Criminal Justice Training and Standards Commission
as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 14-21) (Ord. 10-77, passed 10-8-1977; Ord. passed 2-12-1985)
§ 31.18 OATH.
   Before exercising any duties, all police officers shall subscribe to the
oath of office which shall be administered by the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 14-22) (Ord. 10-77, passed 10-8-1977)
§ 31.19 DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be in charge of the operation of the
Department and shall be responsible for the discipline and demeanor of the
police force. The Chief shall see that all police officers carry out their
duties and responsibilities in a proper and efficient manner. The Chief shall
exercise all powers and duties granted to a department head by the personnel
rules and regulations for town employees, as same may be amended from time to
time. All personnel actions taken by the Chief shall be in accordance with
those rules and regulations, as may be supplemented by general regulations,
adopted exclusively for the Police Department.
   (B)   Any officer may appeal any action of the Chief not in keeping with the
town personnel policies or the other general rules and regulations of the
Police Department in accordance with the procedures outlined in the personnel
rules and regulations for town employees.
(Prior Code, § 14-23) (Ord. 10-77, passed 10-8-1977; Ord. passed 2-12-1985)
§ 31.20 REVENUE RECEIVED.
   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for seeing that proper records are
kept of all monies collected by the members of the Police Department and due to
the town, state, or otherwise and for accounting to the proper recipient at
reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 14-24) (Ord. 10-77, passed 10-8-1977)
POLICE RESERVES
§ 31.35 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPENSATION; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to and subject to the provisions of G.S. Chapter 160A,
Article 13, (G.S. §§ 160A-281 et seq.), the Chief of Police of the town is
authorized to establish and maintain a volunteer organization of reserve police
officers to be designated as the “Troutman Reserve Police,” whose members, when
called upon for active duty, shall be clothed with all the power and charged
with all the duties of regular members of the Police Department of the town.
   (B)   Reserve police officers shall give the same bond and be subject to the
orders, rules and regulations, and directions of their superior officers when
on active duty in the same manner as are the regular members of the Police
Department of the town. They shall take and subscribe to the oath required by
G.S. § 160A-284.
   (C)   Reserve police officers shall receive no compensation from the town
except that the town shall pay the premium upon any bond which may be required
of them.
   (D)   Reserve police officers shall be required to be examined and certified
under the provisions of G.S. Chapter 17C.
   (E)   Reserve police officers may be called to active duty at any time by
the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative to assist the
regular police officers of the town for an emergency or on special occasions
such as to provide security and police protection at athletic events, parades,
dances, public ceremonies, and other similar gatherings. Reserve police
officers shall also be subject to be called to duty for training activities.
   (F)   While undergoing official training and while performing duties on
behalf of the town, pursuant to orders or instructions of the Chief of Police
of the town, reserve police officers shall be entitled to all the powers,
privileges, and immunities afforded by law to regularly employed police
officers, including benefits under the State Workers’ Compensation Act, being
G.S. §§ 97-1 et seq.
   (G)   Members of the town reserve police organization shall subscribe and
adhere to all applicable sections of the Town Police Department Policy Manual
and to the personnel policy of the town with the exception that members of the
town reserve police will not be required to reside inside the town limits or
one mile from the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 14-52) (Ord. 4-84, passed 10-8-1984)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-281 et seq. and 160A-284 and Chapter
17A and 160A, Article 13
§ 31.36 TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.
   All reserve police officers of the Town Police Department shall complete,
within the required time interval, any in-service training or qualifications as
may be required. While undergoing official training and while performing
official duties on behalf of the town, pursuant to the orders or instructions
of the Chief of Police, reserve officers of the town shall be entitled to
benefits under the State Workers’ Compensation Act, being G.S. §§ 97-1 et seq.,
and to any fringe benefits for which reserve personnel qualify.
(Prior Code, § 14-53) (Ord. 07-04, passed 4-8-2004)
§ 31.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
31.01(F), any person violating any prohibition or restriction imposed by a
proclamation authorized by §
31.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction, by a fine
not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. §
14-4.
(Prior Code, § 14-1) (Ord. 13-02, passed 10-10-2002)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 32: TOWN POLICIES
Section
Smoking Policy
   
32.01   Definition
   
32.02   Smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles
Use of Public Property
   
32.15   Definitions
   
32.16   Use of public property within the town
 
   
32.99   Penalty
SMOKING POLICY
§ 32.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, SMOKING means the inhaling, exhaling,
burning, or carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or other combustible
tobacco and non-tobacco product.
(Prior Code, § 22-55) (Ord. 6-93, passed 9-2-1993)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 143-601
§ 32.02 SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
   (A)   Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful for
any person to smoke in any building or facility or portion of a building or
facility now or hereafter owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed, or
controlled by the town.
(Prior Code, § 22-90)
   (B)   Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to smoke in any vehicle now or hereafter owned or leased by the town.
(Prior Code, § 22-91)
(Ord. 6-93, passed 9-2-1993) Penalty, see §
32.99
USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 32.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FACILITY. Any building, structure, or improvement owned or leased by the
town or otherwise under its dominion or control.
   FACILITY MANAGER. The person designated by the Town Manager as the person in
charge of any facility or property of the town, which person shall have the
authority to grant permission for the use of said facility or property to
persons other than employees or officials of the town.
   PROPERTY. Any property owned or leased by the town or otherwise under its
dominion or control including, but not limited to, public sidewalks, streets,
and parking areas.
   TOWN MANAGER. The person appointed by the Town Council as manager (acting,
interim, or permanent) of the town. The Town Manager shall be in charge of all
property and facilities. The Town Manager may designate a person to be in
charge of each facility (the facility manager).
(Prior Code, § 22-90) (Ord. 03-07, passed 1-11-2007)
§ 32.16 USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY WITHIN THE TOWN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to leave any property or
facility after having been asked to leave by the Town Manager, facility
manager, or a designee thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rule or regulation
pertaining to any property or facility including, but not limited to, rules and
regulations pertaining to hours and places of parking vehicles, use of parking
lots or parking areas, use of buildings, and littering upon grounds or in
buildings.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any designated property or
facility for skateboarding, rollerblading, skating (in-line or otherwise),
congregating, playing music, biking (motorized or self-propelled), or staging,
playing, or participating in any game. The Town Manager shall have the full
authority to designate property and facilities where such use is prohibited.
The areas where such use is prohibited shall be marked by the town with
appropriate signage.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loaf, lounge, or loiter near,
on, or about the parking or sidewalk areas of any property or facility. Nothing
herein shall be construed, however, as prohibiting those with lawful business
at any property or facility from attending to such business, and this
subchapter shall not apply to persons with lawful business upon any property or
facility.
(Prior Code, § 22-91) (Ord. 03-07, passed 1-11-2007) Penalty, see §
32.99
§ 32.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §§
32.01 and
32.02 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with G.S. § 14-
4.
(Prior Code, § 22-58)
   (C)   Violation of any provision in §§
32.15 and
32.16 is a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 22-92)
(Ord. 03-07, passed 1-11-2007; Ord. 6-93, passed 9-2-1993)
Statutory reference,
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 33: SCHEDULE OF FEES
Section
   
33.01   Schedule of fees
§ 33.01 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   The following Schedule of Fees shall prevail:
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Fee Type Fee Amount
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Fee Type                                            Fee Amount
ADMINISTRATION
Copies (per page)                                   $0.25
Fax (per page)                                      $1
Finger printing                                     $10
Large map                                           $10
Police report                                       $3
Zoning map                                          $3
WATER METERS
3/4-inch                                            $425
3/4-inch (expedited)                                $605
1-inch                                              $800
2-inch                                              $1,500
Admin/technician fee (per hour)                     $50
Convenience fee                                     $3
Cross-connection inspection                         $75
Mobile food vendors                                 $100*
Peddler’s license                                 $25
Transient license                                   $50
Water non-payment fee                               $50
Water reconnection fee                              $50
* Free five-day initial visit; then 45 days for fee above with application.
WATER AND SEWER RATES
In Town
Sewer (per 1,000 gallons)                           $14.44
Water (per 1,000 gallons)                           $10.19
Out of Town
Sewer (per 1,000 gallons)                           $28.88  
Water (per 1,000 gallons)                           $20.38
Bulk Water Sales
Annual tank inspection                              $75
Per gallon ($20 minimum)                            $0.02
Per gallon for single-haul over 5,000 gallons       $0.01
*Water thief                                        $500
WATER AND SEWER DEPOSITS
Residential
Homeowners
Inside                                              $100
Outside                                             $200
Renters
Inside                                              $200
Outside                                             $300
Industrial/Commercial
Property owner                                      $300
Non-property owner                                  $300
NEW CONNECTIONS: WATER AND SEWER
Water Tap Fees
3/4-inch connection                                 $1,300
3/4-inch irrigation                                 $1,405
1-inch connection                                   $3,000
2-inch connection                                   $9,000
Developer-installed tap (meter only)                $425
Sewer Tap Fees
3/4-inch connection                                 $2,300
1-inch connection                                   $4,000
2-inch connection                                   $10,000
3-inch to 10-inch connections                       Based on contractor pricing
AVAILABILITY FEES
Water
3/4 inch                                            $5,555
3/4 inch irrigation if tap is installed             $5,555
1 inch                                              $9,260
2 inches                                            $29,625
3 inches                                            $64,810
4 inches                                               $116,655
6 inches                                               $240,725
8 inches                                               $518,485
10 inches                                              $777,725
Sewer (based on water service sizing)
3/4 inch                                            $6,140
1 inch                                              $10,230
2 inches                                            $32,745
3 inches                                            $71,630
4 inches                                            $128,935
6 inches                                            $266,055
8 inches                                            $573,040
10 inches                                           $859,560
Each additional inch of service                     +$1,500 per utility
Fire Service Availability
Commercial or industrial sprinkled space up to      $0.50/square foot
150,000 square feet ($75,000 max)
COMBINED WATER AND SEWER
Tap fee and availability fee (deposit not included)
3/4 inch                                            $15,720
1 inch                                              $27,290
2 inches                                            $82,870
3 inches (3 inches and up only reflect availability $136,440
fees due to contractor required)
4 inches                                            $245,590
6 inches                                            $506,780
8 inches                                            $1,091,525
10 inches                                           $1,637,285
REINSPECTION FEES
C.O. reinspection                                   $50
Meter install second request                        $50
   *These fees will be associated with all subsequent inspections until proper
compliance is achieved and passed
Hydrant test
GPM/PSI                                             $100
Meter test fee
Meter calibration test                              $75
   *Paid by the customer requesting a test if the meter is found to be within
spec.
ZONING
Annexation                                          $100
Board of Adjustment fee                             $300
Driveway permit                                     $25
Engineering review
   Fee if invoice is under $2,000                $140/hour + 10%
   Fee if invoice is over $2,000                 $140/hour + 5%
Subdivision exception plat                          $50
Major plat - final                                  $100
Major plat - preliminary $125 + $5/lot*             $350
Minor plat - preliminary                            $100
Nonresidential site plan                            $300+$10/acre
Re-zoning application (conditional)                 $750
Re-zoning application (conventional)                $500
Sign permit                                         $50
Special use permit                                  $300
Temporary use permit                                Private: $100
                                                    Non-profit: $50
Zoning permit                                       $50
Zoning verification letter                          $50
ZONING
UDO amendment                                       $500
Zoning permit                                       $45
Zoning verification letter                          $25
Nuisance Abatement Fee
First hour                                          $150
Each additional hour for mowing, refuse removal,    $75
and the like
Fee in Lieu of Sidewalk Construction
Applicable in limited circumstances and in conformance with the town’s Unified
Development Ordinance.
Payment shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost of construction of
the required sidewalk, which would include the cost of all materials, labor,
and engineering as determined by a quote approved by the Town Engineer.
RENTAL AND EVENT FEES
(Troutman ESC Park, Troutman Depot, and/or Council chambers)
Minimum of two hours. Cleaning deposit is refundable if site is cleaned. Rates
based on town residency of applicant.
Town Properties Cleaning Deposit
First 100 people                                    $100
Every additional 100 people                         $100
 
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Fee Type              Fee Amount
Rental Rates Per Hour In Town Non-Town Non-Profit
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Fee Type                                           Fee Amount
Rental Rates Per Hour                              In Town Non-Town Non-Profit
Council Chambers (minimum of a 2-hour rental; no   $50     $100
cleaning deposit required)
Event fee (town property)
   1-3 hours                                    $100    $100     $100
   4 or more hours                              $200    $200     $200
Park Pavilion (whole)                              $20     $30      $20
Soccer/baseball fields/volleyball courts           $15     $25      $15
Troutman Depot                                     $10     $20      $10
Troutman police off- duty minimum hourly rate (per $45     $45      $45
officer, 2 hour minimum)
Volleyball, basketball, pickleball courts          $15     $25      $15
No charge for town programs and organizations/agencies co-sponsored or
affiliated with the town.
 
(Prior Code, Appendix B) (Ord. 09-10, passed 3-11-2010; Ord. 11-10, passed 4-8-
2010; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-2010; Ord. passed 11-9-2023; Ord. passed 9-12-
2024; Ord. passed 10-10-2024; Ord. passed 2-13-2025; Ord. passed 4-10-2025;
Ord. passed 5-8-2025; Ord. passed 7-1-2025; Ord. passed 10-9-2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER AND SEWERS GENERALLY
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
CHAPTER 50: WATER AND SEWERS GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Scope
   
50.02   Definition
   
50.03   Maintenance responsibility
   
50.04   Town water system exclusive
   
50.05   Refusal of service
   
50.06   User liability
   
50.07   Water sale permitting
   
50.08   Water and sewer rates
   
50.09   Utility regulations
Connections and Meters
   
50.20   Connections required
   
50.21   Supervision
   
50.22   Laterals; extensions
   
50.23   Applications for connections
   
50.24   Ownership of connections, meters, and the like
   
50.25   Prerequisite for meter installation
   
50.26   Tampering prohibited
Deposits, Bills, and Fees Generally
   
50.40   Scope
   
50.41   Application for service
   
50.42   Utility service contract
   
50.43   Customer deposits
   
50.44   Credit history
   
50.45   Deposit and service disconnect
   
50.46   Reconnection fee
   
50.47   Availability fee
   
50.48   Deposits; payment of bills
Municipal Infrastructure Development Reimbursement Agreements
   
50.60   Authority
   
50.61   Approval of municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreements
   
50.62   Intersection and roadway improvement agreements
   
50.63   Reimbursement funding and impact fee credits
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 SCOPE.
   All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms
and conditions of any contract or agreement whereby the town furnishes any
utility services to any user or whereby the town makes any utility connections
or performs any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any
utility service.
(Prior Code, § 28-21) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. Chapter 62 and §§ 143-211 et seq., 143B-282 et
seq., 159-80 et seq., 160A-76, 160A-176, 160A-185, 160A-193, 160A-216 et seq.,
160A-286, 160A-296, 160A-311 et seq., 160A-319, and 160A-360
§ 50.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, LATERAL means a pipe connecting a sanitary
sewer or water main to the property line or metering point.
(Prior Code, § 28-22) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.03 MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair
of the water line from the point of metering to the structure served and shall
be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the sewer line, including all
lift stations and equipment, from the main sewer collection line to the
structure being served.
(Prior Code, § 28-29)
   (B)   The user shall be responsible for installing and maintaining service
lines and shall provide a suitable place for water meters when located on his
or her property.
(Prior Code, § 28-38)
(Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976; Ord. 12-76(B), passed 3-12-1985)
§ 50.04 TOWN WATER SYSTEM EXCLUSIVE.
   No part of the town’s water system shall be connected to any source of water
supply other than such sources as shall have been approved by the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-33) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.05 REFUSAL OF SERVICE.
   The town reserves the right to refuse service for water or sewer when the
capacity of the town system will not permit it.
(Prior Code, § 28-37) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.06 USER LIABILITY.
   When there is a change in occupancy, the user shall be responsible for
payment of water consumed up to the time of change, and notice by the user
shall be given the town at least 24 hours before the change is made.
(Prior Code, § 28-40) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.07 WATER SALE PERMITTING.
   (A)   Water sale permits shall be obtained from the Public Works Director or
his or her assigned designee. The Public Works Director or his or her designee
are the only town personnel authorized to issue the truck/tanker certification
card. The certification card and permit shall contain the truck or tanker
serial number and tag number.
   (B)   The Public Works Manager or his or her designee will designate
specific hydrants from which the customer will be authorized to take water.
   (C)   Upon being certified, the customer will be issued a tanker/water
permit by the Public Works Manager or his or her designee. This permit, along
with the truck/tanker certification card, will need to remain in the possession
of the truck/tanker operator at all times so that it will be available to the
town personnel for inspection when checking for authorized use of town
hydrants. The initial application fee is an amount in accordance with the Town
Fee Schedule, with the permit to expire one month from the date of issuance
unless determined otherwise by the Town Inspector.
   (D)   The customer will need to keep a record of the number of gallons used
during the month and present it for billing at a rate in accordance with the
Town Fee Schedule at or before the expiration of the initial permit. At that
time, if the customer will be drawing any additional water, he or she will need
to renew his or her tanker/water permit for a month at a time in an amount in
accordance with the Town Fee Schedule, continuing to keep monthly records of
usage to be submitted monthly at the time of permit renewal to the Public Works
Manager or his or her designee.
   (E)   If there is no activity for 12 months after the initial application is
issued, upon request for water purchase, it will be necessary to pay an initial
application fee in an amount in accordance with the Town Fee Schedule.
(Prior Code, § 28-436) (Ord. 04-03, passed 4-10-2003; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-
2010)
§ 50.08 WATER AND SEWER RATES.
   The town shall furnish water or sewer to consumers within or outside of the
limits of the town at such rates and charges as may be established and adopted
by the Town Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 28-35) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.09 UTILITY REGULATIONS.
   The town utility regulations and amendments thereto, if any, (a copy of
which shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk) are hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. Amendments to said
regulations may be made by the Town Council at any time by motion or
resolution.
(Prior Code, § 28-395) (Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
CONNECTIONS AND METERS
§ 50.20 CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All houses, buildings, or other structures requiring water and sewer
constructed within the town limits after the adoption of the ordinance from
which this section is derived and which abut or adjoin any street or alley
along which there is a public sewer and/or water main shall be connected to
such sewer and/or water main if the structure is within 200 feet of such sewer
or within 200 feet of such water main; provided, however, no user shall be
required to cross private property of any other owner to make such connection
nor shall a connection to the sewer system be required by the prospective user
unless the same can be accomplished by natural gravitation.
(Prior Code, § 28-25)
   (B)   Every house or building abutting any water or sewer main and requiring
a water or sewer connection shall be separately and independently connected.
(Prior Code, § 28-26)
(Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.21 SUPERVISION.
   The construction of laterals for the connection of sewer or water pipes on
any lot with sewer or water pipes in any street and the necessary excavation
therefor shall be done under the supervision of the town and inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 28-27) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.22 LATERALS; EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Water or sewer laterals laid as a part of any water or sewer main
improvement shall be laid only to the property line or metering point unless,
in the resolution ordering the improvement, the town specifically directs
otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 28-23)
   (B)   After laterals are paid from water or sewer mains to the property line
or metering point, no such lateral shall be put into service to the property
line until the owner or occupant of the property to be served thereby applies
therefor.
(Prior Code, § 28-24)
(Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.23 APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Required. No connection shall be made to any sewer or water main nor
to any sewer or water lateral except after the written application therefor has
been approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
   (B)   Form; filing.
      (1)   Every application for a sewer or water connection shall state:
         (a)   The name of the owner of the lot;
         (b)   The name of the street on which such lot is situated;
         (c)   The number of the house, if there is one on the lot, or, if not,
a description of the location of the lot;
         (d)   The number and kind of connections desired; and
         (e)   The character of the surface of the abutting street.
      (2)   Every such application shall be signed by the person making the
application and shall be filed with the Plumbing Inspector.
   (C)   Connections to be made at one time. Water and sewer connections to the
town’s water main and sewer lines, when both are desired or required, shall be
made at the same time, and an application to connect therewith shall be made at
the same time.
   (D)   Where made. Every sewer connection made directly to a main shall be
made at the wye provided for the lot to be served. If no such wye has been
provided for such lot, then such connection may be made directly to the main at
any convenient point.
   (E)   Duty of workers. After a street has been cut for the purpose of making
water and sewer connections, the plumbers shall be responsible for the
maintenance of such cut until such time as the same shall be accepted and
approved by the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-28) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.24 OWNERSHIP OF CONNECTIONS, METERS, AND THE LIKE.
   All meters, meter boxes, pipes, and other equipment furnished and used by
the town in installing any water or sewer connection shall be and remain the
property of the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-30) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.25 PREREQUISITE FOR METER INSTALLATION.
   No person may obtain a water meter installation from the Public Works
Department of the town without first naming and identifying the licensed
plumbing contractor who shall be responsible for the plumbing or building that
the meter will serve.
(Prior Code, § 28-31) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.26 TAMPERING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely damage any meter or meter
box or interfere with any meter or meter box belonging to the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-32) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
DEPOSITS, BILLS, AND FEES GENERALLY
§ 50.40 SCOPE.
   When there is a change in occupancy, the user shall be responsible for
payment of water consumed up to the time of change, and notice by the user
shall be given the town at least 24 hours before the change is made.
(Prior Code, § 28-392) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
§ 50.41 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Any person, association, partnership, firm, or corporation requesting
utility service shall make application therefor prior to using any town-
supplied utility service by executing an agreement for the purchase of utility
service on the form prescribed by the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-393) (Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 50.42 UTILITY SERVICE CONTRACT.
   (A)   Any person, association, partnership, firm, or corporation purchasing
or receiving utility service from the town, by accepting such service, agrees
to be bound by the application schedule of rates, all pertinent provisions of
this code, and the utility regulations adopted by the Town Council from time to
time.
   (B)   Any failure on the part of the customer to comply with the utility
regulations, as adopted and amended from time to time, shall subject the
customer to discontinuance of service and shall void the contract created by
division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 28-394) (Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 50.43 CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Residential customer deposits. All residential customers shall pay an
initial deposit at the time of application in accordance with the Town Fee
Schedule. Deposits so made shall be refunded only after disconnection of water/
sewer service and all water and sewer balances are paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 28-396)
   (B)   Commercial customer deposits.
      (1)   Commercial customers shall, at the time of application for initial
service, pay a deposit at the time of application for town services as follows.
         (a)   Commercial businesses under the same ownership as the property
upon which the business is located shall pay an amount in accordance with the
Town Fee Schedule.
         (b)   Commercial businesses not under the same ownership as the
property upon which the business is located shall pay an amount in accordance
with the Town Fee Schedule.
      (2)   After six billing periods following the initial deposit, the
customer’s usage and billing will be reviewed and one additional deposit may be
required. Deposits so made shall be refunded only after disconnection of water/
sewer service and all water and sewer balances are paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 28-397)
   (C)   Industrial customer deposit.
      (1)   Industrial customers, manufactures, or processors shall, at the
time of application for initial service, pay a deposit as specified for
commercial customers.
      (2)   Deposits so made shall be refunded only after disconnection of
water/sewer service and all water and sewer balances are paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 28-398)
(Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 50.44 CREDIT HISTORY.
   The town will maintain a confidential credit history on all customers based
upon payment of utility bills. A customer’s credit history will be classified
as “good” unless the customer has appeared twice during any preceding 12
months. If the customer has appeared twice on the cut-off list during any
preceding 12-month period, a credit history of “not good” shall be recorded.
The cut-off list will be prepared each month by the town for customers who fail
to pay utility accounts by the final payment date.
(Prior Code, § 28-399) (Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 50.45 DEPOSIT AND SERVICE DISCONNECT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the initial deposits specified in this subchapter, any
customer (whether residential, commercial, or industrial) whose payment history
becomes “not good” shall pay such deposit as specified by the town to protect
it from loss of revenue.
   (B)   Any customer who fails to make deposits so required or to provide
surety bonds when specified, within ten days of written notice, shall be
subject to the disconnection of service until such deposit has been made or
surety bond provided. Any customer whose service has been disconnected because
meter, wires, or other apparatus have been tampered with, in any manner, shall
pay such deposit, in addition to service and reconnection fees, as specified by
the town to protect it from loss of revenue.
(Prior Code, § 28-400) (Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 50.46 RECONNECTION FEE.
   If service is disconnected for nonpayment of utility charges, then a
reconnection fee, as reflected and provided in rate and charge schedules
established by the Town Council from time to time, shall be assessed by the
town. Such reconnection fee and all delinquent charges shall be paid by the
user in advance of any reconnection of utility services by the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-39) (Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976; Ord. 13-85, passed 9-10-
1985)
§ 50.47 AVAILABILITY FEE.
   Residential, commercial, and industrial customers shall, at the time of
original tap on to the town water and sewer system, pay an availability fee in
an amount in accordance with the Town Fee Schedule.
(Prior Code, § 28-401) (Ord. 5-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 50.48 DEPOSITS; PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   (A)   Deposits. A deposit may be required of any consumer of any town-
operated or town-furnished utility, as reflected and provided in the rate
schedules established and adopted by the Town Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 28-34)
   (B)   Payment of bills for utility services.
      (1)   All bills for water, sewer, and electric services furnished by the
town shall be due and payable prior to midnight of the tenth day of each month;
provided however, if the tenth day of such month shall fall on a Sunday or a
legal holiday observed by the town, then such bill shall be due and payable by
midnight of the next town workday of such month.
      (2)   If such bills are not paid within the period above set forth, a
penalty of 10% of the total due shall be added to the amount due for each
billing. The town further reserves the right to discontinue utility service to
the consumer and to hold any deposit which may have been made until such bill
and penalty have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 28-36)
   (C)   (1)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The town’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect that:
         (a)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
         (b)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
         (c)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by Counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the town official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge in the sum of $20.
(Ord. 12-76A, passed 12-11-1976)
MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 50.60 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter sets forth procedures and terms under which the town may
negotiate and approve reimbursement agreements and intersection and roadway
improvement agreements. Additional authority for such agreements may exist
elsewhere, and the provisions of this subchapter are intended to be
supplementary to such authority. This subchapter is authorized by G.S. Chapter
160A, §§ 320 and 499. Town approval authority for agreements under this
subchapter shall be governed by general town contracting authorizations and
delegations.
(Ord. 38-23, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 50.61 APPROVAL OF MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.
   The town may approve municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreements with
private developers and property owners for the design and construction of
municipal infrastructure that is included in the Town’s Capital Improvement
Plan and serves the developer or property owner. For the purpose of this
subchapter, MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE includes, without limitation, public
streets, bridges, traffic control devices, greenways, bikeways, water treatment
facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, on- and off-street surface and
underground stormwater drainage devices, lines, and culverts, public buildings,
water lines and related facilities, sanitary sewer lines, sanitary trunk lines,
and related facilities. The Town Manager, or his or her designee, may negotiate
municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreements with private developers and
property owners in accordance with this subchapter and applicable policies and
procedures. In negotiating such agreements, the town shall require the private
developer’s or property owner’s compliance with the requirements of G.S. §§
143-128.1 and 143-129 relating to the public advertising and bidding
requirements that would be applicable if the municipal infrastructure
construction contract had been awarded by the town.
(Ord. 38-23, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 50.62 INTERSECTION AND ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The town may approve intersection and roadway improvement agreements
with a developer or property owner, or with a private party who is under
contract with the developer or property owner, for public intersection or
roadway improvements that are adjacent or ancillary to a private land
development project. The Town Manager, or designee, may negotiate intersection
and roadway improvement agreements with a developer or property owner (or
private party under contract with the developer or property owner) in
accordance with this section and applicable policies and procedures. In
approving such agreements, the town shall first determine that:
      (1)   The public cost will not exceed the estimated cost of providing for
such improvements through either eligible force account qualified labor or
through a public contract let pursuant to G.S. Chapter 143, Article 8; and
      (2)   The coordination of separately constructed public intersection or
roadway improvements would be impracticable.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, such intersection and roadway
improvement agreements shall not be subject to the provisions of G.S. Chapter
143, Article 8, if the public cost will not exceed $250,000.
(Ord. 38-23, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 50.63 REIMBURSEMENT FUNDING AND IMPACT FEE CREDITS.
   Reimbursements under a municipal infrastructure reimbursement agreement or
intersection and roadway improvement agreement may be paid from any lawful
source. Without limiting the foregoing, the town may provide reimbursement by
fee credits against required fees when a developer or property owner installs
improvements of a type that generally would be paid for by the town out of a
capital reserve account funded by impact fees.
(Ord. 38-23, passed 11-9-2023)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
Emergency Water Conservation
   
51.01   Declaration
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Notice to general public
   
51.04   Compliance required
   
51.05   Restrictions
   
51.06   Industry compliance during Stage III and IV shortages
   
51.07   Discontinuation of service
Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention
   
51.20   Intent, purpose, and control
   
51.21   Definitions
   
51.22   Responsibility; enforcement
   
51.23   Regulations and standards
   
51.24   Industrial plants and facilities
   
51.25   Cross-connections with alternative sources
 
   
51.99   Penalty
EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION
§ 51.01 DECLARATION.
   (A)   Declaration. Whenever the water supply of the town’s public water
system is low and declining due to conditions which may adversely affect the
continued availability of water for human consumption, sanitation, health, and
fire protection, it may become necessary to declare a water shortage and
implement conservation requirements under the standards set forth in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-466)
   (B)   Water supply shortage. A water shortage shall be declared to exist
when the supply available to the town will have reached the point where the
citizens cannot be supplied with water to protect their health and safety
without substantially curtailing the water demand. A water shortage shall also
be declared to exist when production, transmission, and storage facilities are
incapable of meeting all daily water demands or when the projections of
available water show the supply will not meet daily demands.
(Prior Code, § 28-468)
(Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTOMER. A person in whose name a water connection is made and to whom a
bill is issued, whether such connection is inside or outside the corporate
limits of the town.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
limited liability company, professional association, or organization of any
kind. PERSON shall also include customers.
   TOWN. The Town of Troutman, North Carolina.
   WATER. Raw or treated water from the town’s public water supply system.
(Prior Code, § 28-467)
§ 51.03 NOTICE TO GENERAL PUBLIC.
   (A)   In the event of a water shortage in the town water supply of any of
the degrees of severity hereinafter set forth threatening the health and safety
of the citizens, as determined by the Public Works Director, the Town Manager
is authorized and empowered, after communication to the Mayor and Town Council,
to give notice to the general public of the existence of such state and the
severity thereof.
   (B)   (1)   In order to protect the health and safety of the people supplied
water by the town, the Town Manager may place in effect the restrictive
provisions hereinafter authorized. Notice shall be given by public press
announcement and by signing an executive order 24 hours following the press
announcement.
      (2)   However, in the event of a sudden severe water shortage by a
disrupted waterline or some other malfunction by the town’s water system, the
Public Works Director shall immediately advise the Town Manager, and the Town
Manager may immediately place into effect the appropriate restriction
provisions authorized herein.
   (C)   Once a stage of water restriction is declared, the Public Works
Director shall review the supply of water available to the town system at least
once per day. Following a periodic review, the Public Works Director shall
notify the Town Manager of available water supply and demand/require such
action. The Town Manager shall declare the appropriate stage to be in effect.
(Prior Code, § 28-469) (Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-
2010)
§ 51.04 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Compliance required in the event of a water shortage.
      (1)   In the event the Town Manager issues the notice described in §
51.03, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of water
from the system or from a water system served by the town for any of the
purposes hereinafter set forth until such time as this subchapter is amended or
repealed or until the Town Manager has declared such provisions are no longer
in effect.
      (2)   In exercising this authority, considerations shall be given to the
following criteria: capabilities of the water production and distribution
system, draw-down rates, outlook for precipitation, daily water-use patterns,
seasonal and long-term weather patterns, and availability of water from other
sources.
      (3)   Hospitals, nursing homes, and healthcare facilities shall comply
with all restrictions imposed on residential and nonresidential water
customers, as may be applicable to each individual institution, to the extent
compliance will not endanger the health of the patients or residents of the
institution.
      (3)   Each hospital, nursing home, or healthcare facility shall survey
its water usage patterns and requirements and implement such additional
conservation measures as may be possible without endangering the health of its
patients or residents to achieve a further reduction in the institution’s water
usage.
(Prior Code, § 28-470)
   (B)   Failure to comply unlawful.
      (1)   Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced
by personnel of the Public Works Department, the Police Department, and other
such personnel as designated by the Town Manager.
      (2)   Failure to comply with any of the regulations of this subchapter
shall be unlawful and a violation, and all remedies authorized by law for
noncompliance with this subchapter, including the issuance of a civil citation
or action for injunctive relief, may be exercised to enforce its provisions.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to fail to act in accordance therewith or to
use water in any manner or attempt to evade or avoid such water restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 28-473)
(Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 RESTRICTIONS.
   The severity of the water shortage shall be determined primarily in light of
the criteria set out in §
51.04(A). The restrictive measures in effect at each stage are as follows:
   (A)   Stage I, water conservation alert. In the event water levels of the
town’s water production system do not conform to seasonal expectations, as set
out in §
51.04(A), the Public Works Manager shall notify the Town Manager in writing.
Upon such notification, the Town Manager shall declare a Stage I, water
conservation alert. After complying with those notice provisions contained in §
51.03(A), the following voluntary water restrictions shall be requested.
Voluntary, commercial, manufacturing, institutional, and residential
conservation measures will be strongly encouraged and recommend including the
following.
      (1)   Inspect and repair all faulty and defective parts of faucets and
toilets.
      (2)   Use showers for bathing rather than the bathtub, and limit shower
use to no more than five minutes.
      (3)   Do not leave faucets running while shaving, rinsing dishes, or
brushing teeth.
      (4)   Limit use of clothes washers and dishwashers and, when used,
operate fully loaded.
      (5)   Limit lawn watering to that necessary for plant survival.
      (6)   Water shrubbery the minimum required, reusing household water when
possible.
      (7)   Limit vehicle washing.
      (8)   Do not wash down outside areas such as sidewalks, patios,
driveways, and the like.
      (9)   Install water-flow restrictions in shower heads and other water-
saving devices.
      (10)   Use disposable and biodegradable dishes where possible.
      (11)   Install water-saving devices in toilets such as early closing
flapper valves.
      (12)   Limit hours of water-cooled air conditioners.
      (13)   Do not fill swimming or wading pools.
      (14)   Water supply line pressure should be reduced where feasible to
reduce water consumption if it will not affect the operation of fixtures,
equipment, public safety, or health devices.
      (15)   Conservation in public buildings, institutions, dormitories, and
similar facilities is encouraged by reducing pressure at plumbing fixtures and
by installation of restricting devices.
      (16)   Water conservation should be followed during all phases of
construction-related activities. Where appropriate, water needed should be
obtained from supplemental sources.
   (B)   Stage II, water shortage warning.
      (1)   In the event the previous voluntary restrictions are not sufficient
to alleviate reductions in water supply reserves, the Town Manager shall
declare a Stage II, water shortage warning, to exist. After complying with
those notice provisions contained in §
51.03(A), the following mandatory water restrictions shall be imposed. It shall
be unlawful for those served by the town’s public water system:
         (a)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, ornamental plants,
flowers, and vegetable gardens except by handheld containers (such as a bucket,
jug, and the like). The use of water hoses to transfer water more than three
feet to the container is prohibited; provided, however, a person regularly
engaged in the sale of plants shall be permitted to use water by any method at
any time for irrigation of his or her commercial stock in trade;
         (b)   To seed lawns;
         (c)   To operate water-cooled air conditioners or other equipment that
does not recycle cooling water except when health and safety are adversely
affected;
         (d)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or any
other type of mobile equipment; except, parts of vehicles may be washed where
required by federal, state, or local laws or for safety reasons. Provided,
however, any commercial- or business-operated carwash facility shall be
permitted to use water for such purposes. Further, a person regularly engaged
in the sale and/or renting of vehicles shall be permitted to use water for the
cleaning of his or her commercial stock. However, the owner/operator shall
ensure that water wastage does not occur;
         (e)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways, service
station aprons, parking lots, office buildings, exteriors of existing or newly
constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks, or patios or to use water for
similar purposes; provided, however, hand-washing of exterior surfaces of a
building for the purpose of preparing them for painting shall be permitted.
Provided further, licensed commercial pressure washers shall be permitted to
operate. However, the facility owner/operator shall ensure that water wastage
does not occur;
         (f)   To operate or introduce water into any ornamental fountain,
pool, or pond or other structure making similar use of water;
         (g)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias, or other
food establishments except as requested;
         (h)   To use water from any public or private fire hydrants for any
purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency. Water use for
normal maintenance of water and/or sewer lines is permitted;
         (i)   To use water for dust control or compaction. Provided further,
licensed contractors engaged in construction activities shall be permitted to
operate normal dust-control and compaction activities. However, the facility
owner/operator shall ensure that water wastage does not occur;
         (j)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or intentionally waste
water. Commercial, industrial, and construction operations shall eliminate all
possible waste of water; and
         (k)   To fill newly constructed or drained pools.
      (2)   The owner or occupant of any land or building who receives water
from the town and/or uses water from a well or other supply shall post a sign
thereon, in a conspicuous place, furnished at no cost by the town giving notice
of the use of well or other sources of supply. The owner of such well may be
requested by town personnel to demonstrate the source of such well is not in
any way connected to or uses water originating from the town’s public water
system.
   (C)   Stage III, water shortage crisis.
      (1)   In the event the previous voluntary and mandatory restrictions are
not sufficient to eliminate reductions in water supply reserves, the Town
Manager shall declare a Stage III, water shortage crisis, to exist. After
complying with those notice provisions contained in §
51.03(A), the following mandatory water restrictions, in addition to those
imposed in Stage II, shall be imposed. It shall be unlawful for those served by
the town’s public water system:
         (a)   To seed lawns and/or plant new ornamental plants;
         (b)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or any
other type of mobile equipment; except, parts of vehicles may be washed where
required by federal, state, or local laws or for safety reasons. Provided,
however, any commercial- or business-operated carwash facility shall be
permitted to use water for such purposes. Further, a person regularly engaged
in the sale and/or renting of vehicles shall be permitted to use water for the
cleaning of his or her commercial stock. However, the owner/operator shall
ensure water wastage does not occur;
         (c)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways, service
station aprons, parking lots, office buildings, exteriors of existing or newly
constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks, or patios or to use water for
similar purposes; provided, however, hand-washing of exterior surfaces of a
building for the purpose of preparing them for painting shall be permitted.
Provided further, licensed commercial pressure washers shall be permitted to
operate. However, the facility owner/operator shall ensure that water wastage
does not occur;
         (d)   To operate or introduce water into any ornamental fountain,
pool, or pond or other structure making similar use of water;
         (e)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias, or other
food establishments except as requested;
         (f)   To use water from any public or private fire hydrants for any
purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency. Water use for
normal maintenance of water and/or sewer lines is permitted;
         (g)   To use water for dust control or compaction. Provided further,
licensed contractors engaged in construction activities shall be permitted to
operate normal dust-control and compaction activities. However, the facility
owner/operator shall ensure that water wastage does not occur;
         (h)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or intentionally waste
water. Commercial, industrial, and construction operations shall eliminate all
possible waste of water;
         (i)   To exceed the following water usage mandate: commercial,
industrial, and nonresidential water customers and construction activities
utilizing 5,000 or more gallons of water per day shall achieve mandatory
reductions in daily water usage of 25%, 50%, or 75% through whatever means is
available. The target reduction percentage shall be determined by the Public
Works Manager who will inform the Town Manager in writing and shall ensure that
such target reduction is announced publicly as part of the emergency
declaration. The percent reduction shall be based on average usage during the
corresponding billing period of the most recent 12-month period, ending June
30, in which no stage of this section was in effect. If no meter readings are
recorded or otherwise available for a customer’s billing period, the Finance/
Billing Department will establish an average of similar users for the customer.
            1.   It is the primary responsibility of each nonresidential
customer to meet its mandated water use reduction in whatever manner possible
including limitation of operating hours or days if necessary.
            2.   Each customer shall provide access to town personnel for the
purposes of meter reading and monitoring of compliance with this division (C)
(1)(l).
            3.   If the managed reduction in water usage cannot be obtained
without threatening health or safety or if there has been a significant change
in the customer’s circumstances, the customer may apply to the Town Manager or
his or her designee for a variance to the mandate. Any appeal of this
administrative decision shall be to the Town Council, as provided by law.
            4.   Any customer who exceeds the allotments established pursuant
to this rationing will be subject to the following excess-use water rates.
               a.   Excess-use water rates will be collected based on the
amount by which a customer’s use exceeds the water allotments established
pursuant to the local water-rationing declaration, computed on the basis that
all water used in excess of the allotment shall be at five times the normal
rate.
               b.   Any monies collected through excess-use water rates shall
be placed in a reserve account that is dedicated to addressing water shortage
problems and water conservation initiatives.
               c.   Failure of the customer to remit the periodic amount billed
within the allotted time may result in termination of water service to the
customer pursuant to the water and sewer regulations.
         (j)    To make any water service connections except as herein
provided. Connections to the town water system shall be allowed, but not
required, in the following cases if all other requirements of law pertaining to
such connections have been met:
            1.   Lots upon which construction has been authorized pursuant to a
valid building permit issued prior to the effective date of the Stage III,
water shortage crisis; provided, this exemption shall apply for only so long as
such building permit remains in effect; and
            2.   Public and other schools satisfying the compulsory education
requirements of the laws of the state; public facilities for the Sheriff,
police, jails, fire protection, hospitals, and emergency medical services; and
facilities of public service companies regulated as public utilities under the
laws of the state.
      (2)   The owner or occupant of any land or building who receives water
from the town and/or uses water from a well or other supply shall post a sign
thereon in a conspicuous place, furnished at no cost by the town, giving notice
of the use of well or other sources of supply. The owner of such well may be
requested by town personnel to demonstrate the source of such well is not in
any way connected to or uses water originating from the town’s public water
system.
   (D)   Stage IV, water shortage emergency. In the event previous voluntary
and mandatory restrictions are not sufficient to eliminate reductions in water
supply reserves, the Town Manager shall declare a Stage IV, water shortage
emergency, to exist. After complying with those notice provisions contained in
§
51.03(A), the following mandatory water restrictions shall be imposed.
      (1)   All use of water for purposes other than maintenance of public
health and safety is prohibited.
      (2)   Usage by individuals shall be limited to those amounts necessary to
sustain life through drinking, food preparation, and personal hygiene.
      (3)   Where the town system is not functional, National Guard and
emergency service vehicles shall be utilized to distribute water for household
use at prearranged locations within the affected area.
(Prior Code, § 28-471) (Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-
2010) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 INDUSTRY COMPLIANCE DURING STAGE III AND IV SHORTAGES.
   Commercial and industrial water customers utilizing 5,000 or more gallons
per day shall prepare plans detailing measure to be taken by them to achieve
25%, 50%, or 75% reduction in daily water usage during Stage III and IV water
crises. Such plans shall be submitted to the Town Manager within 90 days from
the adoption of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived. Plans
shall be updated at least every five years.
(Prior Code, § 28-472) (Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000)
§ 51.07 DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE.
   The town shall have the authority to discontinue or restrict water service
to a person or structure, in the event of a violation of the provisions of this
subchapter, during a Stage II, III, or IV water shortage period. All applicable
penalty fees may be applied in the event of service suspensions. The Town
Manager shall give at least two working days’ notice of intent to terminate or
restrict. Within the said two days, the person, upon petition to the Town
Manager or his or her designee, may be heard as to why such termination should
not be enforced. No notice shall be required to discontinue or turn off outside
water service which is provided solely for lawn and shrubbery sprinkler
systems, swimming pools, or other nonessential uses. When a water service has
been discontinued or turned off while any stage of the water shortage is in
effect, it shall be unlawful to reactivate such service without the permission
of the Town Manager or his or her designee. In the event of continued gross
noncompliance with this subchapter, removal of the meter and service will be
deemed proper and service will be discontinued. Tap fees and deposits will be
forfeited.
(Prior Code, § 28-475) (Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000)
CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 51.20 INTENT, PURPOSE, AND CONTROL.
   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter to recognize that there are
varying degrees of hazard to potable water within the water main and water
supply systems. It is also the intent to apply the principle that the degree of
protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   (B)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Protect the public potable water supply of the town against actual
or potential cross-connections, backflow, and backsiphonage by isolating within
the premises of private property contamination or pollution that has occurred
or may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on
the premises of private property;
      (2)   Eliminate cross-connections, backflow, and backsiphonage of any
other source of water or process water used for any purpose whatsoever which
may jeopardize the safety of the public potable water supply of the town; and
      (3)   Establish a cross-connection, backflow, and backsiphonage control
program.
   (C)   Cross-connection, backflow, and backsiphonage control requires
cooperation between the town and the consumer. The responsibilities and duties
of each shall be as set forth in this policy and other applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 28-504) (Ord. 05-03, passed 6-12-2003)
§ 51.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR-GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed, vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle. An approved AIR-GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the
vessel. In no case shall the gap be less than one inch.
   APPROVED. As used in reference to a water supply system or backflow
prevention device or method, one that has been approved by the State Division
of Health Services.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any effective device, method, or construction
used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of device used
shall be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential.
   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or
other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the
supply pressure.
   BACKSIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the
pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line
with the backflow source subject to an atmospheric pressure.
   CHECK VALVE. When approved, a check valve that is drip-tight in the normal
direction of flow when the inlet pressure is one psi and the outlet pressure is
zero. The CHECK VALVE shall permit no leakage in a direction reverse to the
normal flow. The closure element (such as a clapper) shall be internally
weighted or otherwise internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure.
   CONSUMER, COMMERCIAL. Any business or industry (public, private, nonprofit,
or otherwise) using or receiving water from the town water system.
   CONSUMER, RESIDENTIAL. Any person using or receiving water from the town
water system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage or
industrial fluids or waste to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease or pathogenic
organisms.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential connection or structural
arrangement between a public or a consumer’s potable water system and any other
source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the
potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than
the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
devices, and other temporary/permanent devices through which, or because of
which, backflow can or may occur are considered to be CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   CROSS-CONNECTION, POINT OF. The specific point of location in a public or a
consumer’s potable water system where a cross-connection exists.
   DETECTOR CHECK VALVE. A check valve having, as an integral part, a bypass
line and meter for the detection of flow.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, approved check valves including tight-closing shut-off
valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing
the water-tightness of each check valve.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. Derived from the evaluation of a health, system,
plumbing, or pollution hazard.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination or pollution
of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the
consumer’s potable water system to such a degree or intensity that there would
be a danger to health.
   HAZARD, PLUMBING. A plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable
water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap
separation, or other device.
   UNPROTECTED PLUMBING-TYPE CROSS-CONNECTIONS. Considered to be a health
hazard. The term includes, but is not limited to, cross-connections to toilets,
sinks, lavatories, wash trays, domestic washing machines, and lawn-sprinkling
systems. PLUMBING-TYPE CROSS-CONNECTIONS can be located in any types of
structures including homes, apartment houses, hotels, and commercial and
industrial establishments.
   HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL. An actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the
consumer’s potable water system but which would not constitute a health or
system hazard. The maximum degree or intensity of pollution to which the
potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a
nuisance, be objectionable, or could cause minor damage to the system or its
appurtenances.
   HAZARD, SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the
physical properties of the public or the consumer’s potable water in the system
or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, system, pollution, or plumbing hazard if
introduced into an approved water supply. The term may include, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated used waters;
      (2)   All types of process waters and used waters originating from the
public potable water system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality,
chemicals in fluid form, plating acids and alkalis, and circulated cooling
waters connected to an open cooling tower; and/or
      (3)   Cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or
stabilized with toxic substances, contaminated natural waters (such as from
wells, springs, streams, rivers, irrigation canals or systems, and the like),
oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquid
and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes or for firefighting
purposes.
   INDUSTRIAL PIPING SYSTEM, CONSUMERS. Any system used by the consumer for
transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid, or gaseous substance
other than an approved water supply. Such a system would include all pipes,
conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances used to
produce, convey, or store substances which are or may be polluted or
contaminated.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing
within its structure a minimum of two independently-acting, approved check
valves together with an automatically-operating pressure differential relief
valve located between the two check valves. The first check valve reduces the
supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less than
the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by discharging into the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The unit shall
include tight-closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and
each device shall be fitted with properly-located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system such as where the town loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s
water. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the
term SERVICE CONNECTION shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There
should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service lines ahead of any meter or
backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the consumer’s
water system.
   WATER, POTABLE. Water from any source which has been investigated by the
health agency having jurisdiction and which has been approved for human
consumption.
   WATER SUPPLY, AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the town’s approved public potable water supply. These AUXILIARY
WATERS may include water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply or
any natural source such as well, spring, river, stream, and the like or used
waters or industrial fluids. They may be polluted or contaminated or they may
be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the
town does not have sanitary control.
   WATER SYSTEM, CONSUMER. Includes any water system located on the consumer’s
premises whether supplied by a public potable water system or an auxiliary
water supply. The system may be either a potable water system or an industrial
piping system.
   WATER SYSTEM, CONSUMER’S POTABLE. The portion of the privately-owned potable
water system lying between the service connection and the point of use. This
system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures,
equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store, or use potable
water.
   WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC POTABLE. Any publicly- or privately-owned water system
operated as a public utility under a valid health permit to supply water for
domestic purposes. This system will include all sources, facilities, and
appurtenances between the source and the service connection such as valves,
pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and
appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat, or store a potable water supply
for public consumption or use.
   WATER, USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable
water system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the
service connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
(Prior Code, § 28-505) (Ord. 05-03, passed 6-12-2003)
§ 51.22 RESPONSIBILITY; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The town is primarily responsible for the prevention of
contamination and pollution of the public water system. Such responsibility
begins at the point of origin of the public water distributing system and ends
at the service connection to the consumer’s water system. In addition, the town
shall exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that the consumer has taken the
proper steps to protect the public potable water system.
      (2)   When it is determined that a backflow prevention device is required
for the protection of the public system of the town, the town shall install an
approved backflow prevention device at each service connection for residential
users. The residential owner shall pay the cost of the device and installing
the device and for the yearly testing and inspection.
   (B)   The commercial consumer has the prime responsibility of preventing
contaminants and pollutants from entering its potable water system or the
public water system at its service connection. The town will require the
commercial/industrial consumers to install, operate, and maintain an approved
backflow prevention device at the service connection, as directed by the town.
Tests, maintenance, and repairs of backflow prevention devices shall be made by
the town at the consumer’s expense. A certification of testing and/or
maintenance shall be submitted annually to the town.
   (C)   Enforcement of this section shall be administered by the Public Works
Manager utilizing the staff of the Water/Sewer Maintenance and Inspections
Division.
(Prior Code, § 28-506) (Ord. 05-03, passed 6-12-2003; Ord. 17-10, passed 6-8-
2010)
§ 51.23 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained unless the potable water and water supply are protected against
actual or potential contamination or pollution in the manner required.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a potable water system,
the consumer shall notify immediately the town in order that appropriate
measures may be taken to overcome the contamination or pollution.
   (C)   The Public Works Manager or his or her authorized representative shall
have the right to enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any
duty imposed upon him or her by this section where cross-connection, backflow,
and backsiphonage is deemed possible.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall relieve the consumer of the responsibility for
conducting or causing to be conducted periodic surveys of water use practices
on his or her premises to determine whether there are actual or potential
cross-connections in the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could flow back into the public water system.
   (E)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the town any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on such property where cross-
connection, backflow, and backsiphonage is deemed possible.
   (F)   Existing situations requiring the installation of backflow prevention
devices shall be considered on a case-by-case basis, but in no case shall the
completion date for compliance with the provisions exceed two years from the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
   (G)   Water service may be discontinued after reasonable notice to the
consumer if a violation of this section exists on the premises, and such other
precautionary measures may be taken as are deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger to the potable water system. Water service shall not be restored until
the danger has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this
section.
   (H)   Installation of all cross-connections and backflow and backsiphonage
control devices will be by the Public Works Department or by a mechanical
contractor or utility contractor approved by the town.
   (I)   All cross-connection, backflow, and backsiphonage control equipment
shall meet the testing requirements of the Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research; the American Waterworks Association; the State
Building Code;” and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The
following are town-approved back control devices: Hersey, Febco, Mc Donald, and
Neptune-Wilkins.
   (J)   All cross-connection, backflow, and backsiphonage control devices,
both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe
condition and in good working order. The commercial consumer shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all backflow prevention devices. All
backflow prevention devices shall be tested at least once a year or more often
in those instances where inspections indicate a need by the consumer. All
rubber goods shall be replaced at least every five years or more often if
needed. All maintenance and repairs shall be made at the expense of the
commercial consumer.
   (K)   All backflow prevention devices located at the service connection
shall be tested at least once a year or more often in those instances where
inspections indicate a need by the Public Works Department.
   (L)   All rubber goods shall be replaced every five years or more often if
needed. All maintenance and repairs shall be at the expense of the commercial
consumer.
(Prior Code, § 28-507) (Ord. 05-03, passed 6-12-2003; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-
2010)
§ 51.24 INDUSTRIAL PLANTS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The following abbreviations have been adopted describing devices and
methods used to control cross-connections at the service connection:
 
Air gap                              AG
Double check valve assembly          DCA
Double detector check valve assembly DDCA
Reduced pressure backflow device     RPD
 
   (B)   The following sets out the usual requirements and methods of
correction for backflow protection at the service connection:
      (1)   Auxiliary water systems:
         (a)   Potentially contaminate source: AG or RPD;
         (b)   Potable but not acceptable as supplemental source for the public
water system: DCA; and
         (c)   Approved source supplemental to the public potable water system:
none.
      (2)   Beverage-bottling plants:
         (a)   Subject to back pressure: AG or RPD; and
         (b)   Not subject to back pressure: DCA.
      (3)   Breweries: AG or RPD;
      (4)   Buildings (such as hotels, apartment houses, public and private
buildings, or other structures):
         (a)   Major health hazard exists: AG or RPD; and
         (b)   Minor health hazard exists: DCA.
      (5)   Canneries, packing houses, and reduction plants: AG or RPD;
      (6)   Chemical plants (manufacturing, processing, compounding, or
treatment): AG or RPD;
      (7)   Chemically-contaminated water systems: AG or RPD;
      (8)   Civil works:
         (a)   Health hazard exists: AG or RPD; and
         (b)   No health hazard: DCA.
      (9)   Dairies and cold storage plants:
         (a)   Health hazard exists: AG or RPD; and
         (b)   No health hazard: DCA.
      (10)   Film laboratory: AG or RPD;
      (11)   Fire systems:
         (a)   Health hazard exists: AG or RPD; and
         (b)   No health hazard: DDCA.
      (12)   Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries,
autopsy facilities: AG or RPD; nursing and convalescent homes and clinics
(single story): DCA;
      (13)   Irrigation systems and premises having irrigation systems separate
from their domestic systems (such as: parks, playgrounds, cemeteries, golf
courses, schools, estates, ranches, and the like): AG or RPD;
      (14)   Laundries and dye-works: AG or RPD;
      (15)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabricating plants:
         (a)   Health hazard exists: AG or RPD; and
         (b)   No health hazard: DCA.
      (16)   Paper and paper product plants: AG or RPD;
      (17)   Plating plants: AG or RPD;
      (18)   Power plants: AG or RPD;
      (19)   Radioactive materials or substances (plants or facilities
handling): AG or RPD;
      (20)   Restricted, classified, or other closed facilities: AG or RPD;
      (21)   Sand and gravel plants: AG or RPD;
      (22)   Schools and colleges: AG or RPD; and
      (23)   Sewage and storm drain facilities: AG or RPD.
(Prior Code, § 28-508) (Ord. 05-03, passed 6-12-2003)
§ 51.25 CROSS-CONNECTIONS WITH ALTERNATIVE SOURCES.
   (A)   Where a residential connection to a town water line is made and the
property owner continues to have a well or other source of water, it shall be
unlawful for the plumbing serving any building upon such property to be so
connected that any building may be served with water from any other source
other than the town connection. It shall also be unlawful to have plumbing
cross-connected or so installed that water from the town water system or the
private water system may, in any way, become intermingled. Such cross-
connections may result in removal of the meter supplying such connections as
well as other penalties, civil or criminal, provided by law.
   (B)   Upon discovery of a cross-connection upon any property being furnished
water through the town water system, the owner of this property shall be
notified that the cross-connections must be discontinued with 30 days; if the
correction is not made within the 30-day period, the meter shall be removed and
shall not be reinstalled without payment of a charge in an amount in accordance
with the Town Fee Schedule.
(Prior Code, § 28-509) (Ord. 05-03, passed 6-12-2003) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Residential users. Any residential user who shall violate any
provision of §§
51.01 through
51.07 shall be subject to civil penalties. Civil penalties for a violation of a
Stage II, III, or IV mandatory restriction shall be as follows:$100 for each
violation. Each occurrence of a violation for these stages shall be considered
a separate violation.
      (2)   Nonresidential customers. Any nonresidential customer who violates
any provision of §§
51.01 through
51.07 shall be subject to a civil penalty except as provided in division (B)(4)
below. Civil penalties for a violation of any mandatory restrictions of any
stage of these provisions shall be as follows:
         (a)   A civil penalty of $200 for the first violation;
         (b)   A civil penalty of $500 for the second violation; and
         (c)   A civil penalty of $1,000 for the third and successive offenses.
      (3)   Cumulation of violations. Violations shall be accumulated by all
customers so long as §§
51.01 through
51.07, in any of its stages, is continuously in effect and until no stage of §§
51.01 through
51.07 has been in effect for a period of one calendar year. Violations of any
of the mandatory restrictions of any stage shall accumulate with violation of
other stages. Should a customer move or cease and renew service during the
period described herein, the customer’s violation shall continue to accumulate
as if such move or cessation had not occurred.
      (4)   Civil penalties for excessive water use. Excessive water-use rates
imposed upon users by Stage III and IV shall constitute the sole monetary
penalty for such excessive use. Other violation by such users shall be subject
to the civil penalties set out herein. Other enforcement procedures shall apply
to such users for excessive use and other violations.
(Prior Code, § 28-474) (Ord. 9-00, passed 7-6-2000)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose and policy
   
52.002   Definitions and abbreviations
   
52.003   Special agreements
   
52.004   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.005   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.006   State requirements
   
52.007   Local limits
   
52.008   Dilution
   
52.009   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
52.010   Slug control for accidental discharge
   
52.011   Hauled wastewater
   
52.012   Control of prohibited wastes
Backwater Valves
   
52.025   Incorporation in contracts and agreements
   
52.026   Applicability
   
52.027   Where required
   
52.028   Valve standards
   
52.029   Installation
   
52.030   Enforcement and inspections
Wastewater Disposal System Fees
   
52.045   Purpose
   
52.046   User charges
   
52.047   Surcharges
   
52.048   Pretreatment program administration charges
Wastewater Discharge Permits and Sampling
   
52.060   Permission to connect or discharge required
   
52.061   Wastewater permits; application; issuance
   
52.062   Sample collection and analytical requirements
Reporting Requirements
   
52.075   Baseline monitoring reports
   
52.076   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
52.077   Reports on compliance
   
52.078   Periodic compliance reports
   
52.079   Reports of changed conditions
   
52.080   Reports of potential problems
   
52.081   Reports of unpermitted users
   
52.082   Notice of violations
   
52.083   Timing
   
52.084   Recordkeeping
Monitoring and Enforcement
   
52.095   Monitoring facilities
   
52.096   Inspection and sampling
   
52.097   Search warrants
   
52.098   Confidential information
   
52.099   Administrative remedies
   
52.100   Alternative remedies
   
52.101   Remedies nonexclusive
   
52.102   Annual publication of noncompliance
   
52.103   Defenses to violations
   
52.104   Bypass
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the town,
hereafter referred to as the “town,” and enables the town to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403).
The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge; (See 15A NCAC 2H.0900 et seq.)
      (2)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the municipal system;
      (4)   Protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage,
sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as to protect
the general public;
      (5)   Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and
      (6)   Ensure that the town complies with its NPDES or non-discharge
permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal
or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.
   (B)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the town wastewater system through the issuance of permits to
certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for
the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (C)   (1)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the town’s wastewater
system, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-312 and/or G.S. § 153A-275. The Mayor or
Town Manager shall designate an administrator of the POTW and pretreatment
program, hereafter referred to as the POTW Director. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be
delegated by the POTW Director to other town personnel. By discharging
wastewater into the town wastewater system, industrial users located outside
the town limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in
this chapter as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 28-134) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 153A-275 and 160A-312
§ 52.002 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Environmental
Management of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources or his or her designee.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. The individuals described in divisions (a)
through (c) below may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the town.
         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation, the term AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE means:
            1.   The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship,
the term AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE means a general partner or the proprietor,
respectively.
         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state, or local government
facility, the term AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE means a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility or his or her designee.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20° Celsius.
      BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the POTW.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
being 40 C.F.R. pt. 403, or pretreatment standard.
      CELSIUS. Usually expressed as a concentration (such as mg/l).
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of equivalent oxygen utilized
in the chemical oxidation of organic matter as measured by standard laboratory
methods, as set out herein, expressed in milligrams per liter.
      COLOR. The true color due to substances in solution which cause any
variation in hue of the receiving stream.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. BOD, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform
bacteria and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future
specified and controlled in the town’s NPDES permit for its wastewater
treatment works where said works have been designed and used to reduce or
remove such pollutants.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant added
to the water is heat.
      DOMESTIC WASTE. Liquid waste:
         (a)   From the noncommercial preparation, cooking, and handling of
food; and/or
         (b)   Containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of
food.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not to exceed 15 minutes.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks including, but not
limited to, such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction from
any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c), or (d)) into the POTW (including holding tank waste
discharged into the system).
      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.
      INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service
connections, from the ground through such means as, but not limited to:
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls. INFILTRATION does
not include and is distinguished from INFLOW.
      INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system including service
connections from such sources as, but not limited to: roof leaders, cellars,
yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers
and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, and street wash
waters or drainage. INFLOW does not include and is distinguished from
INFILTRATION.
      INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMITS. The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal which causes or
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES or non-
discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The
term INTERFERENCE includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the
POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401
et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., the
Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA, being 16 U.S.C. §§
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c)) which
applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appears in 40
C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT. Permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342) or pursuant to G.S. §
143-215.1 by the state under delegation from the EPA.
      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in §
52.004 and are developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act (being 33
U.S.C. § 1317(b)) and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   The term NEW SOURCE means any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the Act (being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a))
which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with § 307(c), provided:
            1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; and
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of division (a)2. or (a)3. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a NEW SOURCE
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; and/or
               b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment.
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this definition.
      NITROGEN, AS AMMONIA, (NH3). The initial product in the decomposition of
nitrogenous organic matter as measured by using standard laboratory methods, as
set out herein, expressed in milligrams per liter.
      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A disposal system permit issued by the state
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1.
      PASS-THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other
sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation, of the POTW’s NPDES or non-discharge permit or a downstream
water quality standard.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents, or
assignees. The term PERSON includes all federal, state, and local government
entities.
      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of
the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in gram-moles per liter of
solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any waste, as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18), and dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of
wastewater (such as pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity,
or odor).
      POTW DIRECTOR. The administrator designated by the town with the
responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this chapter.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes or process changes or
other means except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
town in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval
authority, as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.11.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards, and local limits.
      PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM.
      (1)   A treatment works, as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1292), which is owned, in this instance, by the town. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
      (2)   The term POTW or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM includes sewers,
pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter, the term POTW shall also
include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the
town who are, by contract or agreement with the town or in any other way, users
of the POTW of the town.
      RECEIVING STREAM. A body of water, stream, or watercourse receiving or
formed by the discharge of waters from the waste treatment plant.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and
industrial waste except that of the type expressly prohibited by this chapter
without the admixture of surface water and stormwater.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. The term SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE
does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater
disposal system who:
         (a)   Has an average daily process wastewater flow of 25,000 gallons
or more;
         (b)   Contributes more than 5% of any design or treatment capacity
(such as allowable pollutant load) of the wastewater treatment plant receiving
the indirect discharge;
         (c)   Is required to meet a national categorical pretreatment
standard; or
         (d)   Is found by the town, the Division of Environmental Management,
or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for
impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial
users, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system’s
effluent quality, or compliance with any pretreatment standards or
requirements.
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or REPORTABLE NONCOMPLIANCE. A status of
noncompliance defined as follows:
         (a)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits:
            1.   Chronic violations: 65% or more of the measurements exceed (by
any magnitude) the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a six-
month period;
            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations: 33% or more of the
measurements equal or exceed the TRC times the limit (maximum or average) in a
six-month period. There are two groups of TRCs:
               a.   For the conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and
grease), the TRC equals 1.4; and
               b.   For all other pollutants, the TRC equals 1.2.
            3.   Any other violation of an effluent limit (average or daily
maximum) that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through or endangered
the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the public; and
            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
         (b)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date;
         (c)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-
monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and
periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the due date;
         (d)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and
         (e)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority considers to be significant.
      SLUG LOAD. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
52.004.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the executive office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
      STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquids and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      UTILITIES DIRECTOR. The person designated by the town to supervise the
operation of the publicly-owned treatment works and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this chapter or his or her duly authorized
representative.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities, and institutions together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
      WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in §
52.061.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water (surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private) which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   (B)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter,
shall have the designated meanings:
Biochemical oxygen demand                       BOD
Code of Federal Regulations                     C.F.R.
Chemical oxygen demand                          COD
Environmental Protection Agency                 EPA
Gallons per day                                 gpd
North Carolina General Statutes                 G.S.
Liter                                           l
Milligrams                                      mg
Milligrams per liter                            mg/l
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System NPDES
Operation and maintenance                       O&M
Publicly-owned treatment works                  POTW
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act          RCRA
Standard Industrial Classification              SIC
Solid Waste Disposal Act                        SWDA
Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen                         TKN
Total suspended solids                          TSS
United States Code                              U.S.C.
 
(Prior Code, § 28-135) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 143-213(18), 143-215.1, and 143-215.3(a)(14)
§ 52.003 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the town and any user of the wastewater
treatment plant pursuant to which wastewater of unusual strength or character
is accepted into the system and specially treated, subject to any payments or
user charges as may be applicable. Any such agreement or arrangement shall not
be less stringent than any applicable federal pretreatment standard, state
requirements and regulations, or categorical regulation pursuant to § 307 of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317.
(Prior Code, § 28-173) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.004 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which causes interference or pass-through. These general prohibitions apply to
all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which, by their nature of quantity, are or may be
sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, able to
create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the
test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, zylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch in any dimension. Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to: grease, uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic,
tar, asphalt residues, residues from the refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, and similar substances;
      (3)   Total fat, fats, oils, wax, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32°F and 150°F (0°C and 65°C) at the point of discharge into the
system. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
      (4)   Any wastewater which will cause deterioration or corrosion of the
wastewater treatment system. All wastewater discharged to the wastewater
treatment system must have a pH between 6.0 and 9.0. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and
fluoride compounds, and substances which will react with water to form acidic
products;
      (5)   Any wastewater-containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants (such as BOD), in sufficient quantity, flow, or concentration
(either singly or by interaction with other pollutants) to cause interference
with the POTW;
      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (66°C) or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with §
52.011;
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;
      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW (such as residues, sludge, or scums) to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under § 405 of the
Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1345, the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances
Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or state criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used;
      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process (including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions) which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment
plant’s effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary
recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the
palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for
any designated uses;
      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (13)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, de-ionized
water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director;
      (14)   Any wastewater that constitutes a slug load;
      (15)   Any sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (16)   Any medical wastes except as specifically authorized by the POTW
Director in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating
agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal
wastewater system;
      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according
to 40 C.F.R. part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be
specifically authorized by the POTW Director;
      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate
state water quality standards for toxic substances, as described in 15A NCAC
2B.0200;
      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy;
      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater
system;
      (23)   Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by
the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant
to § 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Pub.
Law No. 92-500, and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other taste or
producing substances, or any other substances which are not susceptible to
treatment which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of
the wastewater treatment system or that will pass through the system.
      (24)   Any clothing, rags, textile remnants or waste, or cloth scraps
except fibers of scrap that will pass through a one-fourth-inch mesh screen or
its equivalent in screening ability;
      (25)   Any waters or wastes in which the total fixed solids exceed 1,500
ppm by weight; and
      (26)   At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system,
be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter.
   (C)   Manner of storage or discharge. Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or
other wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system.
All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge
to the industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the
system.
   (D)   POTW contribution or interference; determination. When the POTW
Director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any of the
substances enumerated in division (B) above in such amounts which may cause or
contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass-through, the POTW Director
shall:
      (1)   Advise the user of the potential impact of the contribution on the
POTW in accordance with §
52.045; and
      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§
52.060 and
52.061 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass-through.
(Prior Code, § 28-164) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.005 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. parts 405 through 471
and incorporated herein.
   (B)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW
Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e).
   (D)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
   (E)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(Prior Code, § 28-165) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.006 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-167) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.007 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   Local limits.
      (1)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user discharging
wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits:
Type of Waste mg/l
Type of Waste mg/l
Arsenic       0.003
BOD           300
Cadmium       0.003
Chromium      0.05 (total chromium)
COD           700
Copper        0.061
Cyanide       0.01
Lead          0.049
Mercury       0.00003
NH3           15
Nickel        0.03
Silver        0.005
TKN           40
TSS           300
Zinc          0.175
 
      (2)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop user-
specific local limits, when necessary, to ensure that the POTW’s maximum
allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall
be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass-based
limits in addition to or in place of concentration-based limits.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes discharged by any user which are in excess of
the limits set forth in this division (A) may be admitted into the sanitary
sewers after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived
when such discharge is approved in writing by the POTW Director.
(Prior Code, § 28-166)
   (B)   Right of revision. The town reserves the right to establish
limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by
either state or federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in §
52.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in §
52.004, as is allowed by 40 C.F.R. § 403.4.
(Prior Code, § 28-168)
(Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.008 DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national
categorical pretreatment standards unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed
by the town or state.
(Prior Code, § 28-169) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.009 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits issued under §
52.061 and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
52.004 within the time limitations as specified by the EPA, the state, or the
POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained continuously and
efficiently at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review
and shall be approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility.
The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the
user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce
an effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions herein. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported
to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the user’s initiation of the
changes.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of chapter.
      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. In order to
promote equalization of flows over a 24-hour period, each person discharging a
waste into the town’s sanitary sewers having the following average daily
volumes over a period of his or her normal processing period in any one week
shall construct and maintain, at his or her own expense, a suitable storage
facility of the corresponding minimum volumes:
Volume of Waste Discharged (average gallons Minimum Volume of Storage Tank (in
per day)                                    percentage of daily volume of waste
                                            discharged)
Volume of Waste Discharged (average gallons Minimum Volume of Storage Tank (in
per day)                                    percentage of daily volume of waste
                                            discharged)
0 to 20,000                                 0
20,001 to 30,000                            50
30,001 to 40,000                            60
40,001 to 50,000                            70
50,001 to 60,000                            80
60,001 to 70,000                            90
70,001 and above                            100
 
      (3)   The storage facility shall have its outlet to the sewer controlled
by an approved device, the setting of flow rates being as directed by the POTW
Director. When the processing period is less than seven days in any week, the
person discharging the waste shall arrange the discharge rate so that his or
her storage facility shall be substantially full at the end of his or her
processing period. The storage facility shall be discharged during the period
of shutdown unless otherwise directed by the POTW Director. Storage facility
requirements may be waived by the POTW Director in cases where a constant rate
of flow is discharged provided:
         (a)   The normal operating day extends over a 24-hour period, and the
rate of waste flow and load discharged is such that, in the opinion of the
approving authority, the installation of a storage tank would not improve sewer
and treatment plant loading conditions; and
         (b)   All other requirements of this chapter are fulfilled.
      (4)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, sand, or flammable
wastes; except, such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW
Director and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed or deemed necessary by the POTW Director, by the user at
his or her expense.
      (5)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas-detection meter.
(Prior Code, § 28-170) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.010 SLUG CONTROL FOR ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.
   (A)   At least once every two years, the POTW Director shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the POTW Director may
develop such a plan for any user.
   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
52.080; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to: inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Prior Code, § 28-171) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.011 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are established by the
POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate §§
52.004 through
52.012 or any other requirements established by the town. The POTW Director may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements
herein.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
   (D)   (1)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
      (2)   The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Prior Code, § 28-172) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.012 CONTROL OF PROHIBITED WASTES.
   (A)   Regulatory actions. If wastewaters containing any substance described
herein are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the wastewater
treatment system of the town or to any sewer system tributary thereto, the
Director may take any action necessary to:
      (1)   Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater;
      (2)   Require a user to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will
reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this
chapter;
      (3)   Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow
equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics
or substances so the discharge will not violate this chapter;
      (4)   Require the person making, causing, or allowing the discharge to
pay any additional cost or expense incurred for handling and treating excess
loads imposed on the wastewater treatment system; and
      (5)   Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or
necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   Submission of plans. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater
treatment system is required, plans, specifications, and other pertinent data
or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall
first be submitted to the Director for review and approval. Such approval shall
not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with any applicable
code, ordinance, rule, regulation, or order of any governmental authority. Any
subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment of flow-control
facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the
POTW Director.
   (C)   Pretreatment facilities operations. If pretreatment or control of
waste flows is required, such facilities shall be maintained in good working
order and operated as efficiently as possible by the user at his or her own
cost and expense, subject to the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   (D)   Admission to property.
      (1)   Whenever it shall be necessary, for the purposes of these rules and
regulations, the Director or designated representative, upon the presentation
of credentials, may enter upon any property or premises at reasonable times for
the purpose of:
         (a)   Copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of
this chapter;
         (b)   Inspecting any monitoring equipment or method; and/or
         (c)   Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the treatment works.
      (2)   The Director or designated representative may enter upon the
property at any hour under emergency circumstances.
   (E)   Protection from accidental discharge. Each industrial user shall
provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW Director for review and
shall be approved by him or her before construction of the facility. Review and
approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify his or her facility as
necessary to meet the requirements herein.
   (F)   Reports of accidental discharge. If, for any reason, a user does not
comply with or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation
herein, the user responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the
Director so the corrective action may be taken to protect the wastewater
treatment system. In addition, a written report addressed to the Director
detailing the date, time, and cause of the discharge and corrective action
taken to prevent future discharges shall be filed by the responsible user
within five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge. Such
limitations include:
      (1)   A BOD greater than 300 mg/l;
      (2)   Containing COD of more than 600 mg/l;
      (3)   Containing suspended solids of more than 300 mg/l;
      (4)   Containing ammonia of more than 15 mg/l; or
      (5)   Having other characteristics prohibited in §§
52.045 through
52.048.
   (G)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients;
except, such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his or her
expense in continuously efficient operation at all times.
   (H)   Notices. Notice shall be given the approving authority when normal
industry operations will be interrupted for 72 hours or longer and wastes will
not be available for discharge or when a change of process is contemplated or
malfunction of the treatment facility occurs or is anticipated which will alter
demands on the municipal treatment facilities. Normal operations shall include
allowance for legal holidays and other announced plan shutdowns.
   (I)   Preliminary treatment or holding facilities.
      (1)   Where preliminary treatment or holding facilities are provided for
any purpose, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
      (2)   There shall be no discharge of wastes requiring pretreatment either
directly or indirectly to the town’s sewer system without first notifying and
obtaining approval from the approving authority.
(Prior Code, § 28-174) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
BACKWATER VALVES
§ 52.025 INCORPORATION IN CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS.
   All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms
and conditions of any contract or agreement whereby the town furnishes any
utility services to any user or whereby the town makes any utility connections
or performs any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any
utilities service.
(Prior Code, § 28-95) (Ord. 2-89, passed 3-2-1989)
§ 52.026 APPLICABILITY.
   All property owners whose property is served by sanitary sewer service,
which fixtures are located below the level of the top of the first upstream
manhole, shall install a backwater valve for the purposes of protecting said
fixtures.
(Prior Code, § 28-97) (Ord. 2-89, passed 3-2-1989)
§ 52.027 WHERE REQUIRED.
   Any property owner or others desiring sanitary sewer service under
conditions and circumstances where fixtures are located below the level of the
top of the first upstream manhole shall install a backwater valve for the
purpose of protecting said fixtures.
(Prior Code, § 28-96) (Ord. 2-89, passed 3-2-1989)
§ 52.028 VALVE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Composition of valves. Backwater valves shall have all bearing parts
of bronze or other corrosion-resistant materials.
(Prior Code, § 28-99)
   (B)   Sealing ability required. Backwater valves shall be so constructed as
to ensure a mechanical seal against backflow.
(Prior Code, § 28-100)
   (C)   Valve capacity. Backwater valves, when fully opened, shall have a
capacity not less than that of the pipes in which they are installed.
(Prior Code, § 28-101)
   (D)   Valve accessibility required. Backwater valves shall be so installed
as to provide ready accessibility to their working parts.
(Prior Code, § 28-102)
(Ord. 2-89, passed 3-2-1989)
§ 52.029 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Installation location. Backwater valves shall be installed in the
branch of the building drain which receives only the discharge from fixtures
located within such branch and below grade.
(Prior Code, § 28-98)
   (B)   Installation according to State Code. All backwater valves shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code, as
said code shall be amended from time to time, to the extent that, if the code
conflicts with the provisions of this subchapter, the terms and provisions of
the code shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 28-103)
(Ord. 2-89, passed 3-2-1989)
§ 52.030 ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Enforcement responsibility. For the purpose of making inspections
concerning the installation of the backwater valve and other water and sewer
connections, as may be made within the town, which are not the responsibility
of the County Building Inspection Department, the Zoning Enforcement Officer of
the town is designated as the plumbing official having jurisdiction over the
public sewer system and water systems of the town.
(Prior Code, § 28-104)
   (B)   Inspection of valves.
      (1)   All backwater valves shall be inspected and approved by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer prior to the time sanitary service is provided to the
location having such valve. Likewise, all such valves which have been or are to
be installed at properties currently serviced by sanitary sewer shall be
inspected and approved prior to and as a condition of continued service.
      (2)   All owners who are to install or who have installed such a valve
shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer of its location and existence. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect at least one time in each calendar
year all such valves that have been installed to determine that they are in
working order and shall require such repairs as said inspection may show to be
necessary as a condition of continued sewer service.
(Prior Code, § 28-105)
(Ord. 2-89, passed 3-2-1989)
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM FEES
§ 52.045 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the wastewater disposal system of the town for the implementation
of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the POTW Director and
approved by the Town Council. A copy of these charges and fees will be made
available from the POTW Director.
(Prior Code, § 28-197) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.046 USER CHARGES.
   (A)   A user charge shall be levied on all users that discharge, cause, or
permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW including, but not limited to,
persons, firms, significant industrial users, corporations, or governmental
entities.
   (B)   The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or
conditions of agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the
requirements of § 204(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284
(b)(1).
      (1)   The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of debt service,
operation, and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.
      (2)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow,
concentration of wastewater, and percentage of maximum allowable headworks
loading.
      (3)   The Town Manager shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation, and maintenance of the POTW
and will make recommendations to the Town Council for adjustments in the
schedule of charges and fees as necessary.
      (4)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the
users, including all extraneous flows (infiltration, inflow, and the like),
shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow
of the users.
(Prior Code, § 28-198) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.047 SURCHARGES.
   The amount of the surcharges will be based upon the following.
   (A)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:
      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the town;
      (2)   If required by the town or at the individual discharger’s option,
other flow-monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater
discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located,
and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved
by the town. The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the
user’s expense according to arrangements that may be made with the town;
      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water supply from
sources other than the town, the user shall install and maintain, at his or her
own expense, a flow-measuring device of a type approved by the town; and
      (4)   If a person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system
produces evidence to the Director that more than 10% of the total annual volume
of water used for all purposes does not reach the town sanitary sewer, an
estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing charges
may be agreed upon between the Director and the person discharging industrial
wastes into the sewer.
   (B)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be
collected in such a manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and
shall be analyzed using procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or her
duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.
   (D)   Users discharging industrial wastewater into the sanitary sewer shall
pay a surcharge amounting to the costs enumerated in division (E) below for
treating all wastewater having a COD in excess of 700 ppm, a suspended solids
concentration in excess of 300 ppm, or an NH3 in excess of 15 ppm by weight.
This surcharge shall be in addition to any existing sewer service charge and is
based on the quarterly monitoring sample.
   (E)   The surcharge shall be computed as follows: When the concentration of
COD, suspended solids, or NH3 in the industrial waste discharged to the town’s
sanitary sewers exceeds the prescribed limits, a monthly surcharge shall be
imposed upon the offending industrial user’s sewage flow when the excess is
calculated using the industrial plant water flow and the difference between the
actual COD, suspended solids, or NH3 concentration and the permissible limits
of 700 mg/l, 300 mg/l, and 15 mg/l respectively.
      (1)   (a)   The sewer surcharge shall be established by the town at a
regular Council meeting in November for the following calendar year. This
surcharge shall be invoked, as herein provided, in addition to the existing
regular sewer service charge. The sewer surcharge shall be applied beginning
with the December utility billing and during subsequent months during the
calendar year. The surcharge shall reflect the total cost of treating the
excess pounds of industrial waste including necessary cost of administration of
the sewage plant and this chapter.
         (b)   In addition, each industrial user affected by the surcharge
shall submit to the POTW Director a current list of raw chemicals and other
materials used in their manufacturing process. The method used to determine the
surcharge amount shall consist of dividing the total treatment plant, which is
affected by COD, SS, or NH3 (including the applicable administrative and plant
debt service), for the preceding fiscal year by the total treatment plant
design poundage of COD, suspended solids, or ammonia. The POTW Director shall
make a report to the Council each quarter of all activities conducted
hereunder.
      (2)   (a)   The surcharge shall be billed and payable monthly on a
separate bill rendered to the proper users by the Town Water Department. Said
bills will be sent through the United States mail notifying all users of the
amount and date due. Failure to receive notice is not an excuse for nonpayment
of bills. Users not having paid their bills within 15 days of date of billing
will be delinquent. Notice shall be sent to them through the United States
mails.
         (b)   If after ten days’ notice, given as above, a bill remains
unpaid, the water connection serving the premises will be severed and will not
be turned on again until said bill is paid. In case a user discharging wastes
into the town sanitary sewer system does not procure his or her water supply
from the town and becomes delinquent in his or her payment of the aforesaid
surcharge, his or her connection with the town sewer system will be severed and
will only be reconnected at his or her expense.
      (3)   (a)   Surcharge bills for a user having a private water supply
remaining unpaid within 30 days of the date of billing shall be delinquent.
         (b)   A notice shall be mailed to the user informing him or her of the
delinquent status of his or her account, and if, after five days from the date
of mailing, the notice of the bill remains unpaid, the user’s connection with
the wastewater treatment system will be severed and will only be reconnected at
the user’s expense and upon payment of all charges due.
         (c)   Upon the severing of the connection with the sanitary sewer, the
Director shall notify the State Division of Water Quality of his or her action
and the resulting possibility of a discharge to the surface waters of the
state.
      (4)   All applications for the discharge of industrial wastes into the
public sewers shall be made to the POTW Director. Approval will be granted to
such applications when evidence is submitted by the applicant that the
discharge of wastes into the public sewer will comply with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 28-199) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.048 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   Total costs incident to the supervision, inspection, and
sampling of wastes shall be included in the charge made to industries or
businesses discharging wastes into the town’s sanitary sewers.
      (2)   Industries subject to the pretreatment program shall pay applicable
permit application fees and annual permit fees, as approved by the Town
Council. Industries subject to the pretreatment program shall pay for any
analyses which are performed by private laboratories.
   (B)   The schedule of charges and fees may include charges and fees for:
      (1)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program;
      (2)   Monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures;
      (3)   Reviewing slug control plans including accidental and/or slug load
discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;
      (4)   Permitting; and
      (5)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.
(Prior Code, § 28-200) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS AND SAMPLING
§ 52.060 PERMISSION TO CONNECT OR DISCHARGE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the town. When requested by the POTW
Director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of
its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW Director is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.
(Prior Code, § 28-229) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.061 WASTEWATER PERMITS; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing
industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant
industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180
days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s determination. Industrial
users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may, at the
discretion of the POTW Director, be required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit for non-significant industrial users.
   (B)   The process for such permit shall go as follows.
      (1)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons proposing to
discharge non-domestic wastewater or proposing to change the volume or
characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall
request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user determination. If
the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the
significant industrial user criteria, he or she will require that a significant
industrial user permit application be filed.
      (2)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to
obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the
town an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director and accompanied
by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and
fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant industrial
user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW Director’s
determination in division (A) above. In support of the application, the user
shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
         (a)   Name, address, and location if different from the address;
         (b)   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes for pretreatment,
the industry as a whole, and any processes for which categorical pretreatment
standards have been promulgated;
         (c)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and characteristics
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in §§
52.004 through
52.012, any of the priority pollutants (§ 307(a) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1317(a)) which the applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, and any other pollutant of
concern to the POTW; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act, being
33 U.S.C. § 1314(h), and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;
         (d)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;
         (e)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates including
daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of flow,
and appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation;
         (g)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on
the premises including all materials which are or could be accidentally or
intentionally discharged;
         (h)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any town, state, or federal pretreatment
standards and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
         (i)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet
the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule.
            1.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the schedule shall
exceed nine months.
            2.   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event
shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW
Director.
         (j)   Each product produced by type, amount, process, and rate of
production;
         (k)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
         (l)   Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
         (m)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline monitoring
report in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H.0908(a), as
outlined in §
52.075; and
         (n)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director to
be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
      (3)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
      (4)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director will evaluate
the data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
         (a)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the
town and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and
evaluation.
         (b)   Within 30 days of receipt, the POTW Director shall acknowledge
and accept the complete application or, if not complete, shall return the
application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is
required.
      (5)   Tentative determination and draft permit.
         (a)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an
on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.
         (b)   If the staff’s tentative determination in division (B)(5)(a)
above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be
made in writing:
            1.   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed
to be limited;
            2.   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and
            3.   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions
which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the
application.
         (c)   The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to
divisions (B)(5)(a) and (B)(5)(b) above and the general permit conditions of
the town into a significant industrial user permit.
      (6)   Permit synopsis. A fact sheet providing a brief synopsis of the
application shall be prepared by the POTW staff for submission to the applicant
and the approval authority and shall be made available to the public upon
request. The contents of such fact sheets shall include at least the following
information:
         (a)   A sketch and detailed description of the industrial facilities
and pretreatment facilities including the location of all points of discharge
to the POTW and all established compliance monitoring points; and
         (b)   A quantitative description of the discharge described in the
application which includes at least the following:
            1.   The rate or frequency of the proposed discharge; if the
discharge is continuous, the average daily flow;
            2.   The actual average daily discharge in pounds per day of any
limited pollutant and any pollutant identified in the application as known or
suspected present; and
            3. The basis for the pretreatment limitations including the
documentation of any calculations in applying categorical pretreatment
standards.
      (7)   Final action on significant industrial user permit applications.
         (a)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications
not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application.
         (b)   The POTW Director is authorized to:
            1.   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such
conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this division and
G.S. § 143-215.1;
            2.   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time
schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
            3.   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days’ notice and
pursuant to division (B)(9) below;
            4.   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 52.089;
            5.   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 52.089; and
            6.   Deny a permit application when, in the opinion of the POTW
Director, such discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate
the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.
      (8)   Hearings. The local government may conduct hearings in accordance
with its regular hearing procedure.
         (a)   Initial adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose permit is
denied (or is granted, subject to conditions he or she deems unacceptable) or a
permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under §
52.999 or one issued an administrative order under § 52.089 shall have the
right to an adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer designated by the
POTW Director, upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to
be contested to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the
significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative
order. Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer shall make a final
decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the
receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit a
copy of the hearing officer’s decision by registered or certified mail.
            1.   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit,
the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed, and the permit is not
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.
            2.   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms of conditions of a renewed permit, the
terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the
conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
         (b)   Final appeal hearing. Any decision of a hearing officer made as
a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division (B)(8)(a) above may be
appealed to the Council or board serving the town upon filing a written demand
within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under this
division (B)(8) shall be conducted in accordance with local hearing procedures.
Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein shall bar
further appeal. The Town Council shall make a final decision on the appeal
within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a written
copy of its decision by registered or certified mail.
         (c)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under division
(B)(8)(b) above, the Town Council shall prepare an official record of the case
that includes:
            1.   All notices, motions, and other similar pleadings;
            2.   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
            3.   A certified transcript of all testimony taken if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken; and
            4.   A copy of the final decision of the Town Council.
         (d)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or
decision of the Town Council is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted
under division (B)(8)(b) above, may seek judicial review of the order or
decision by filing a written petition within 30 days after receipt of notice by
registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, with
the County Superior Court along with a copy to the town. Within 30 days after
receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review, the Town Council shall
transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the
official record.
      (9)   Permit modification.
         (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural
requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows:
            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change
in the permit is indicated;
            2.   A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess
of four months; and
            3.   Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules)
in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge
until control facilities are operational. Any changes or new conditions in the
permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
         (b)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such
standard shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the
time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit, as required by division (B)(2) above, the
user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.
         (c)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a
waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(b) for modifications.
      (10)   Permit conditions.
         (a)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit
with such conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to achieve the
purpose of this subchapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall
contain, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   A statement of duration, in no case more than five years;
            2.   A statement of non-transferability;
            3.   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or
local limits or both;
            4.   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
            5.   Notification requirements for slug loads; and
            6.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.
         (b)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the
following:
            1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
            2.   Limits on the instantaneous, daily, and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
            3.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology
or construction of appropriate containment devices and the like designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works;
            4.   Development and implementation of spill-control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
            5.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system;
            6.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system;
            7.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment;
            8.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests and reporting schedules;
            9.   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of
noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days where
self-monitoring indicates a violation;
            10.   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements;
            11.   Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or
special notification reports;
            12.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records
relating to wastewater discharges as specified in §
52.084 and affording the POTW Director or his or her representatives access
thereto;
            13.   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant
change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in
the system;
            14.   Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the
POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process
used by the permittee;
            15.   Requirements for immediate notification of excessive,
accidental, or slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause any problems
to the system;
            16.   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards including those which become effective during the
terms of the permit; and
            17.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director
to ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
      (11)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than
a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
      (12)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user
for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned
or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new
or changed operation.
      (13)   Permit re-issuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for
permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance
with this section, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the
existing permit.
      (14)   Industrial waste permits outside the town limits. Any person
owning or controlling premises outside the town limits and desiring to install
a plumbing system for the purpose of discharging domestic sewage and industrial
waste into the sanitary sewer of the town may do so by complying with the
requirements herein and by paying an additional fee and sewer rental charge to
be fixed by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 28-230) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 143-215.1 and 143-215.1(b)
§ 52.062 SAMPLE COLLECTION AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136 unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
(Prior Code, § 28-263)
   (B)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in division (B)(2) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In
the event flow-proportional sampling is infeasible, the POTW Director may
authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab
samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative
sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
(Prior Code, § 28-264)
(Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.075 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Submission to POTW Director. Within either 180 days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)
(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report
containing the information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall report the method
of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A
new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Required information. Users described in division (A) above shall
submit the information set forth below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Operations, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications. This description should include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants. Measurement of pollutants shall include
the following provisions:
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
52.062(A); and
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in § 52.064(B).
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
52.076; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.061(B)(3).
(Prior Code, § 28-254) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.076 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
52.075(B)(7).
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards; such events include, but are not limited to:
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation.
   (B)   No increment referred to in division (A) above shall exceed nine
months.
   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule along with the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the POTW Director.
(Prior Code, § 28-255) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.077 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
Director a report containing the information described in §
52.075(B)(4) through (B)(6).
   (B)   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production
rate.
   (C)   For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
52.061(B)(3).
(Prior Code, § 28-256) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.078 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the POTW Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§
52.061(B)(3).
   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §
52.062(A), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Prior Code, § 28-257) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.079 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
   (B)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
52.061.
   (C)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
52.061 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
52.061 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   (D)   For purposes of this requirement, SIGNIFICANT CHANGES include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants. EPA regulations do not define the term
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE. However, it is recommended that changes of 20% or greater
be considered SIGNIFICANT CHANGES.
(Prior Code, § 28-258) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.080 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge (including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges; discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature; a non-
customary batch discharge; or a slug load) that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director
of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(Prior Code, § 28-259) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.081 REPORTS OF UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the POTW Director, as the POTW Director may require.
(Prior Code, § 28-260) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.082 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW Director monitors
at the user’s facility at least once a month or if the POTW Director samples
between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results of
this sampling.
(Prior Code, § 28-261) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.083 TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 28-265) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.084 RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this subchapter shall
retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
   (B)   Records shall include:
      (1)   The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of
the person taking the samples;
      (2)   The dates analyses were performed;
      (3)   Who performed the analyses;
      (4)   The analytical techniques or methods used; and
      (5)   The results of such analyses.
   (C)   In addition, users shall maintain records of production and related
factors as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with this chapter. These
records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This
period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning the user or the town or where the user has been specifically
notified of a longer retention period by the POTW Director.
(Prior Code, § 28-266) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.095 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The town requires the user to provide and operate, at the user’s own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the
town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The control
manhole shall be equipped with a permanent-type volume-measuring device such as
a nozzle or other device approved by the POTW Director. The facility, sampling,
and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe, accessible,
and proper operating condition at all times at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and
approval of the town and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the town.
   (D)   When more than one user discharges into a common sanitary sewer, the
Director may require installation of separate monitoring equipment for each
user. When there is a significant difference in constituents and
characteristics produced by different operations of a single user, the Director
may require that separate monitoring facilities be installed for each separate
discharge.
(Prior Code, § 28-296) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.096 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   (1)   The town will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the town, approval authority, and EPA or its
representative ready access, at all reasonable times, to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, and
copying or in the performance of any of their duties.
      (2)   The town approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up
on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or metering operations.
      (3)   Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the town, approval
authority, and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the POTW Director/
Superintendent’s, approval authority’s, or EPA’s access to the user’s premises
shall be a violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial
of access.
   (B)   Compliance determinations may be made on the basis of either
instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater. Composite
samples may be taken over a 24-hour period or over a longer or shorter time
span, as determined necessary by the Director, to meet the needs of specific
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 28-297) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.097 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   The POTW Director, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the Twenty-Second District Judicial Court if the POTW Director,
approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property or any part thereof and:
   (A)   Is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter;
   (B)   There is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the town designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder; or
   (C)   To protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the
community.
(Prior Code, § 28-298) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.098 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the POTW Director/Superintendent, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available, upon
written request, to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, non-discharge
permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, such portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall
be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request.
(Prior Code, § 28-299) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.099 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director finds that any
industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, wastewater permit,
or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained therein or any other
pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 15 days from the
date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the town by the user.
Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to
correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order.
Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order
issued pursuant to division (D) below.
   (C)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is
responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this chapter, or is in
noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director
determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the
hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
      (3)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to
the assessment of a civil penalty under §
52.999 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director/Superintendent
under this section subject to an administrative appeal under §
52.061(B)(8).
   (D)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders
issued herein, or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons
in noncompliance to do any of the following:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in
the order;
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
continuing or threatened violation; and/or
      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified
time period.
   (E)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/
or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, interferes with the POTW, or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension
to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user’s waste discharge
permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the POTW Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary
(including immediate severance of the sewer connection) to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director
shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon
proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user
shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the
POTW Director prior to the date of the above-described hearing.
   (F)   Termination of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions
of this chapter or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to
having its permit terminated:
      (1)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his or her discharge;
      (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring; or
      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.
   (G)   Noncompliance. Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause, under § 52.093(A), why the proposed action should
not be taken.
(Prior Code, § 28-327) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.100 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned herein, are
available to the POTW Director who may use any single one or combination
against a noncompliant user.
   (B)   Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for Judicial District 22
may, at the request of the town, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the
provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B. Under state law, it is a crime to negligently
violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit or
negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit issued by local governments
(G.S. § 143-215.6B(f)); to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition,
or requirement of a pretreatment permit or knowingly and willfully fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B
(g)); to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit issued by local governments or knowingly fail to apply for
a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent
danger of death or serious bodily injury (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)); and to falsify
information required under G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21 (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)).
      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW
Director, through the Town Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Justice
for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent
injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.
      (3)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation
of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water
service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence,
at the user’s expense, after he or she has satisfactorily demonstrated ability
to comply.
      (4)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
POTW Director. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the appropriate ordinances of the town governing such nuisances
including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or
remedying said nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 28-329) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 143-215.6B and 143-215.6B(f) through 143-
215.6B(i) and Chapter 143, Article 21
§ 52.101 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this subchapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the enforcement response plan of the town. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
(Prior Code, § 28-330) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.102 ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in the largest daily
newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users
which were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as
reportable noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(31), with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements during the previous 12 months.
(Prior Code, § 28-331) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.103 DEFENSES TO VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset.
      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (A)(2) below are met.
      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence, that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the
upset;
         (b)   The facility was, at the time, being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW
Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset; if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Prior Code, § 28-356)
   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards defense.
      (1)   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
52.004(A) or the specific prohibitions in §
52.004(B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(5) through (B)(7), and (B)(9) through (B)(23) if it
can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone
or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through
or interference and that either:
         (a)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user
was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass-through
or interference; or
         (b)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when
the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit and, in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
      (2)   Pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a)(2), the affirmative defense
outlined in this section cannot apply to the specific prohibitions in §
52.004(B)(1), (B)(4), and (B)(8).
(Prior Code, § 28-357)
(Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.104 BYPASS.
   (A)   Allowable bypass conditions. A user may allow any bypass to occur
which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provision of divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   User requests for bypass submission.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall
submit prior notice to the POTW Director/Superintendent at least ten days
before the date of the bypass if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time he, she, or it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of this time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the bypass and its cause;
         (b)   The duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and
         (c)   Steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (3)   The POTW Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case
basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (C)   Bypass prohibition; exceptions.
      (1)   A bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director/Superintendent may
take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed, in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment, to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices, as required under division (B)
above.
      (2)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 28-358) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder,
may be fined up to $25,000 per day per violation.
   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director
shall consider the following:
      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the
public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation;
      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
      (3)   The effect on groundwater or surface water quantity or quality or
on air quality;
      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply
with the pretreatment program; and
      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the town.
   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in §
52.061(B)(8).
(Prior Code, § 28-328) (Ord. 11-00, passed 9-7-2000)
CHAPTER 53: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Administration
   
53.03   Prohibited disposal
   
53.04   Pre-collection practices
   
53.05   Collection practices
   
53.06   Participation in collection of solid waste services
Landfills
   
53.20   Purpose and intent
   
53.21   Definitions
   
53.22   Regulations
 
   
53.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING OR STRUCTURAL MATERIAL. Materials such as lumber, bricks, plaster,
roofing, loam, and other substances accumulated as a result of repairs to or
construction of buildings or structures.
   BULK CONTAINER. A metal container of not less than six cubic yards nor more
than eight cubic yards of storage capacity.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any office in or from which is conducted a
service, retail, or wholesale store; bottling plants; printing establishments;
religious, charitable, or governmental offices; private clubs; hospitals; or
restaurants.
   CURBSIDE. The space in front of the property in the grass strip between the
street and the sidewalk, where said strips exist, or that space immediately
adjacent to that portion of the street right-of-way normally used by vehicles,
whichever is applicable.
   GARBAGE. Waste food, tin cans, paper, small paper boxes, glass, plastic, and
similar non-bulky items commonly generated as waste through normal household
activities. The term GARBAGE does not include liquid that may be drained into
the sewer, large quantities of newspaper, building materials, lawn and garden
waste (not resulting from food preparation), medium and large paper boxes, dead
animals, non-acceptable refuse, and bulky items.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. All waste generated from manufacturing operations or
industrial processing.
   NON-ACCEPTABLE REFUSE. Poisons, acids, caustics, infectious materials,
explosives, chemical liquids, whole trees, large tree limbs, and tree stumps.
   PERSON. A person, partnership, firm, company, corporation, or association or
the plural thereof.
   SMALL DEAD ANIMALS. Cats, dogs, and other animals of similar size.
   TRASH. All waste other than garbage, industrial waste, and non-acceptable
refuse.
(Prior Code, § 20-19) (Ord. 9-85, passed 5-21-1985)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 130A-290 et seq., 136-18.3, 160A-303.1,
160A-311 et seq., and 160A-317(b)
§ 53.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The administration of the provisions of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Public Works Department. It shall be the duty of the
Police Department to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter and to make
any and all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of
this chapter are being met.
(Prior Code, § 20-20) (Ord. 9-85, passed 5-21-1985; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-
2010)
§ 53.03 PROHIBITED DISPOSAL.
   (A)   No person shall throw, dispose of, or sweep any garbage, trash,
industrial waste, dead animals, or non-acceptable refuse into any street, storm
drain, manhole, or median strip.
   (B)   No garbage, trash, industrial waste, non-acceptable refuse, dead
animals, or disease-producing materials shall be dumped for any purpose in or
allowed to accumulate on any lot or space within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 20-23) (Ord. 9-85, passed 5-21-1985) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04 PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Receptacles for garbage and trash shall be of metal or plastic, of
substantial construction, watertight with tightfitting lids, and shall be kept
in a serviceable condition with the lid in place. Such receptacles shall have a
total capacity of not more than 96 gallons.
   (B)   Leaves shall not be picked up by the town.
   (C)   Receptacles for garbage and trash may be placed at the curb on the
night before the scheduled pickup.
   (D)   Rollout containers and other receptacles must be removed from the curb
by 8:00 a.m. on the day after they are collected. It is the responsibility of
the householder to pick up loose debris around the collection area.
(Prior Code, § 20-21) (Ord. 9-85, passed 5-21-1985; Ord. 4-96, passed 10-3-
1996; Ord. 01-03, passed 1-9-2003)
§ 53.05 COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Residential service. Collection shall be once each week, as scheduled
by the franchisee, except for disruptions caused by inclement weather, legal
holidays, or unavoidable circumstances. All receptacles containing garbage or
trash which are to be picked up shall be placed at curbside prior to 12:30 a.m.
on the date collection is to be made.
   (B)   Commercial establishment service. Collection shall be made on a
regular schedule for residential collection in the area where the establishment
is located. Collection shall be limited to one 95-gallon trash container.
   (C)   Bulk containers. Service shall not be provided by the town for bulk
containers.
   (D)   Industrial waste. Industrial waste shall be collected, removed, and
disposed of by the operator of the factory, plant, or enterprise creating or
causing the same.
   (E)   Non-acceptable refuse. Non-acceptable refuse shall not be collected by
town forces.
   (F)   Dead animals. Neither large nor small dead animals shall be picked up
or collected by town forces.
   (G)   Building materials; lot clearing; landscaping. Building materials and
wastes from lot clearing, landscaping, and building shall be collected,
removed, and disposed of by the contractor or builder or, in the event of his
or her failure, by the owner of the within premises.
   (H)   Responsibility of owner. In all instances where a service shall not be
provided by the town, the material (whether it is building or structural
materials, garbage, industrial waste, trash, non-acceptable refuse, or dead
animals) shall be collected, removed, and disposed of by the party creating or
owning such matter and, upon his or her failure to do so, by the owner of the
property upon which such matter is located. In the event that both the party
creating or owning such matter or the owner of the property upon which such
matter is located does not collect, remove, and dispose of said matter, after
having been given one week’s written notice by the Public Works Department, the
town shall have an independent contractor remove the same and dispose of it at
the property owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 20-22) (Ord. 9-85, passed 5-21-1985; Ord. 4-96, passed 10-3-
1996; Ord. 19-10, passed 7-8-2010)
§ 53.06 PARTICIPATION IN COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE SERVICES.
   G.S. Chapter 160A, § 317 permits the town to adopt an ordinance mandating
all properties participating in the collection of town solid waste services
remain customers. A property may only opt out of participation in services by
approval from the Town Manager, or designee for the follow reason: a small
subdivision with one collection area for all residents.
(Ord. 24-24, passed 8-8-2024)
LANDFILLS
§ 53.20 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To promote the safety, health, and welfare of the public in the use of
landfills within the town;
   (B)   To keep the town attractive and promote the prosperity and economic
well-being and general welfare of the town;
   (C)   To preserve and enhance the beauty of the roadsides and neighborhoods
of the town and to improve aesthetics of the town;
   (D)   To protect the public from health nuisances and safety hazards; and
   (E)   To exercise the general police powers of the town to abate nuisances.
(Prior Code, § 20-56) (Ord. 02-11, passed 1-13-2011; Ord. 07-12, passed 3-9-
2012)
§ 53.21 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   LANDFILL means a facility or use of land for the fill and/or disposal
of construction and demolition debris, land clearing debris, inert debris (such
as, but not limited to, concrete, brick, concrete block, rock, and gravel), and
any solid waste debris.
   (B)   All definitions contained in the town’s Uniform Development Ordinance
are also incorporated herein.
(Prior Code, § 20-57) (Ord. 02-11, passed 1-13-2011; Ord. 07-12, passed 3-9-
2012)
§ 53.22 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All landfills shall comply with all laws and regulations and
ordinances of the state and the town.
   (B)   Any landfill within the town shall be contained within an area that
shall be surrounded by an opaque fence that shall be at least six feet in
height by either woven or welded wire (14 gauge).
   (C)   Any landfill shall be substantially covered with clean field dirt
every 60 days.
   (D)   Any landfill shall be operated only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on
Saturday. Any such landfill shall not be operated on any other day or at any
other time. Operation of any landfill shall be subject to the Unified
Development Ordinance of the town and any issuance of special use permits.
(Prior Code, § 20-58) (Ord. 02-11, passed 1-13-2011; Ord. 07-12, passed 3-9-
2012)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The violation of any provisions of §§
53.01 through
53.05 shall be unlawful and shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punishable in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 20-24)
   (C)   Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of §§
53.20 through
53.22 or a failure to comply with any of its requirements shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $250 per violation. If the offender fails to pay
this penalty within ten days after being cited for a violation, the penalty may
be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt.
      (1)   These provisions may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable
action. Such remedy may include a court order of abatement as part of the
judgment in the case. The abatement order may include removal of debris from
illegal landfills, covering of debris with clean dirt, and other actions
required to make the property and property owner to comply with the provisions
herein at the owner’s expense.
      (2)   Each day that any violation continues after initial notification
that such violation exists may be considered a separate offense for purposes of
the penalties and remedies specified by §§
53.20 through
53.22.
      (3)   Any one, all, or combination of the penalties and remedies
described herein may be used to enforce §§
53.20 through
53.22. In addition to such enforcement provisions, these provisions may be
enforced by any remedy of injunction.
(Prior Code, § 20-59) (Ord. 9-85, passed 5-21-1985; Ord. 02-11, passed 1-13-
2011; Ord. 07-12, passed 3-9-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING RULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Avoiding traffic signal or sign
   
70.02   Intersection designation
   
70.03   Minors and regulated use of motor vehicles
   
70.04   Visibility obstructions
Truck Routes
   
70.15   Definitions
   
70.16   Declaration of truck routes
   
70.17   Unlawful operation
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 AVOIDING TRAFFIC SIGNAL OR SIGN.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to avoid traffic
control lights or signs installed or erected by any proper governing authority
within the town by cutting across any sidewalk, driveway of any gasoline
service station, or other property to avoid the affect of traffic controls on
the operation of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 26-1) (Ord. 8-81, passed 5-11-1981) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 INTERSECTION DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Certain intersections within the town are hereby designated as yield
intersections in the manner and to the extent set out as shown in ordinances
and exhibits thereto which are incorporated fully in this division (A) by
reference.
   (B)   Certain intersections within the town are hereby designated as stop
intersections, as shown in ordinances and exhibits thereto which are fully
incorporated in this division (B) by reference.
   (C)   The Town Council shall cause appropriate signs to be posted adjacent
to those streets designated in this section as yield or stop streets in such
manner as to be plainly visible to traffic on such streets affected hereby and
in the manner provided by state statutes. Failure to yield or stop according to
posted signs shall be unlawful.
   (D)   No citation for violation of this section shall be issued to any
motorist unless and until appropriate signs have been posted, as provided in
this section.
(Prior Code, § 26-4) (Ord. 8-85, passed 5-14-1985; Ord. 12-85, passed 7-9-1985;
Ord. 18-07, passed 6-14-2007; Ord. 28-07, passed 7-13-2007; Ord. 23-09, passed
8-13-2009; Ord. 3-15, passed 3-12-2015) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 MINORS AND REGULATED USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between property or right-of-way
lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular
traffic. The term HIGHWAY or STREET or a combination of the two shall be used
simultaneously.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle. Excepted from the term MOTOR VEHICLE will be lawn mowers and farm
tractors when being driven to and from a work site.
      PUBLIC VEHICULAR AREA. 
         (a)   Any area within the town that is generally open to and used by
the public including, by way of illustration and not limitation, any drive,
driveway, road, roadway, street, alley, or parking lot upon the grounds or
premises of:
            1.   Any school, orphanage, church, or any of the institutions,
parks, or other facilities maintained and supported by the town, county, or
state or any of its subdivisions;
            2.   Any service station, drive-in theater, supermarket, store,
restaurant, or office building or any other business, residential, or municipal
establishment providing parking space for customers, patrons, or the public; or
            3.   Any property leased by the town or of which the town is in
lawful possession thereof.
         (b)   The term PUBLIC VEHICULAR AREA includes any road open to
vehicular traffic within or leading to a subdivision for use by subdivision
residents, their guests, and members of the public, whether or not the
subdivision roads have been offered for dedication to the public.
   (B)   Unlawful permission by guardian. It shall be unlawful for any parent,
guardian, or person standing in loco parentis to knowingly permit his or her
child under the age of 16 years to have the possession, custody, or use in any
manner whatsoever of any motor vehicle within the town limits except when such
child is under the supervision of the parent, guardian, or person standing in
loco parentis; it shall be unlawful for any other person to knowingly furnish
such child a motor vehicle for use when such child is not under the supervision
of his or her parent, guardian, or person standing in loco parentis. This
section shall not apply when said child is in possession of an operator’s
permit or license recognized as valid by the laws of the state.
   (C)   Unlawful possession or use. It shall be unlawful for any person who is
under the age of 16 years to have the possession, custody, or use, in any
manner whatsoever, of any motor vehicle within the town limits except when such
person is under the supervision of his or her parent, guardian, or person
standing in loco parentis unless such person shall have an operator’s license
or permit recognized as valid by the laws of the state.
   (D)   Unlawful operation in public areas. It shall be unlawful for any
person who is under the age of 16 years to operate a motor vehicle upon any
highway or public vehicular area within the town unless in possession of an
operator’s license or permit recognized as valid by the laws of the state.
   (E)   Unlawful operation on real or personal property. It shall be unlawful
for any person who is under the age of 16 years to operate a motor vehicle upon
any real or personal property which neither he or her nor his or her parent,
guardian, or person standing in loco parentis owns without the prior consent of
the owner or other person in lawful possession of said property.
(Prior Code, § 26-5) (Ord. 8-86, passed 9-9-1986) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 20-4.01, 20-27(d), and 20-27(d)(1)
§ 70.04 VISIBILITY OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Trees, vines, bushes, shrubbery, or flowers, standing in or upon any
lot or land adjacent to any public street or public place and having branches,
limbs, trunks, or other parts projecting into the public street or place, shall
be kept trimmed by the owner or occupant of the property on which such vines,
trees, bushes, shrubbery or flowers are growing, so as not to interfere with
the free and safe passage, of at least 14 feet in height, along the public way
by pedestrians and vehicular traffic. Intersection site triangles, as defined
by the Unified Development Ordinance, shall be kept trimmed to the same extent
as the public way stated above.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant of such property does not keep this growth
from projecting into or on public ground, then the town shall have the
authority to order its removal. The order shall be in writing to the owner or
occupant responsible for such growth and shall be acted upon within ten days
from the time of the receipt of the order. If after ten days the owner or
occupant has not responded or acted to remove the projecting growth from such
vines, trees, bushes, shrubbery, or flowers, then the town or any member of the
staff shall have the authority to enter upon the property to perform this work.
   (C)   If the provisions of any other law, ordinance, or regulation of the
town or of the state are in conflict with the provisions of this section, the
more stringent provision shall control.
   (D)   The administration of this section shall be under the direction of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer who shall investigate violations, issue such notices
and orders as are required, and perform such other duties as may be necessary
to the enforcement hereof.
(Prior Code, § 26-6) (Ord. 4-94, passed 10-6-1994; Ord 25-24, passed 9-12-2024)
Penalty, see §
70.99
TRUCK ROUTES
§ 70.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SIGN. A sign containing the language “No Thru Truck” or similar language
giving notice that a street is closed to through truck traffic.
   TRUCK. Any vehicle having dual rear tires on one axle.
(Prior Code, § 26-100) (Ord. 9-86, passed 9-9-1986)
§ 70.16 DECLARATION OF TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   Declaration of truck routes. The Town Council shall have the authority
to declare any street or part thereof a truck route. When signs have been
installed pursuant to this section, trucks, as defined in §
70.15, shall travel to their point of destination or from their point of origin
to and from the nearest truck route and shall use the truck routes exclusively
except when making pickups or deliveries at points of designation or points of
origin.
(Prior Code, § 26-101)
   (B)   Specific designation. The following streets within the town are
designated as truck routes: U.S. Highway 21 (Main Street), State Road 1303
(Wagner Street), State Road 2350 (Murdock Road), and State Road 1005 (Old
Mountain Road). Truck routes shall be as otherwise established from time to
time by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 26-102)
(Ord. 9-86, passed 9-9-1986)
§ 70.17 UNLAWFUL OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck along any route in
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 26-103) (Ord. 9-86, passed 9-9-1986) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
70.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 26-1)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
70.02 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 26-4)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
70.15 through
70.17 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, 26-104)
(Ord. 8-85, passed 5-14-1985; Ord. 9-86, passed 9-9-1986; Ord. 12-85, passed 7-
9-1985; Ord. 18-07, passed 6-14-2007; Ord. 28-07, passed 7-13-2007; Ord. 23-09,
passed 8-13-2009; Ord. 3-15, passed 3- 12-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 71: PARKING RULES
Section
Parking Designation
   
71.01   Parking areas established
   
71.02   Handicapped parking spaces
   
71.03   Municipal parking lots
Parking Prohibitions
   
71.15   Stopping prohibited; exceptions
   
71.16   Parking prohibited in certain places
   
71.17   Parking prohibited for certain purposes
   
71.18   Not to obstruct traffic
   
71.19   Direction when parking
   
71.20   Miscellaneous vehicle parking prohibitions
Enforcement
   
71.35   Citations; authority
   
71.36   Towing
 
   
71.99   Penalty
PARKING DESIGNATION
§ 71.01 PARKING AREAS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   When signs are placed, erected, or installed giving notice thereof or
the curbing or pavement has been painted yellow or otherwise marked in lieu of
such signs, no person shall park a vehicle at such locations where parking is
prohibited.
   (B)   Incorporated by reference are diagrams showing the prohibited parking
areas and the exceptions thereto. When parking and loading spaces within the
permitted parking areas are marked off in accordance with the diagram, all
vehicles shall be parked within the boundaries of the spaces.
(Prior Code, § 26-42) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
   When official signs are erected indicating no parking except for the
handicapped, no person other than the handicapped shall park a vehicle in such
designated place.
(Prior Code, § 26-37) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   The Police Chief or the Chief’s representative is hereby authorized to
mark off individual parking spaces, to include handicapped parking spaces, in
all municipal off-street parking lots on the curbing or the surface of the
pavement. Said parking spaces are to be designated by lines painted or durably
marked.
   (B)   (1)   The following regulations shall apply.
         (a)   When signs are properly installed regulating the direction of
all traffic entering municipal parking lots, traffic shall enter the parking
lots following the posted directions of travel.
         (b)   Parking any vehicle across any line or marking of a parking
space or in such a position that the vehicle is not entirely within the area
designated by such lines or markings is a violation.
         (c)   Parking any vehicle within the area designated as a parking
space for the purpose of making sales of any property to any person therefrom
is a violation.
         (d)   Parking any vehicle within a municipal off-street parking lot at
any place other than a designated parking space is a violation.
         (e)   Parking any truck exceeding one ton within any municipal off-
street parking lot is a violation.
         (f)   If signage that reads “No Parking. Towing Enforced.” is present,
vehicles may be towed at owner’s expense.
      (2)   All violations of this section shall be cited as if it were a
parking violation and shall be enforced and punished.
(Prior Code, § 26-40) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018 ; Ord. 42-25, passed 12-11-
2025 ) Penalty, see §
71.99
PARKING PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.15 STOPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop such vehicle in
or upon any street within the town, except for purposes of parking as provided
for in this subchapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of
fire or emergency apparatus, by the approach of a funeral procession, by the
stopping of a public conveyance, by the reason of traffic signals, in the
exercise of the rights of turning at an intersection or upon entering an
intersection, by the passing of another vehicle, for a pedestrian, by reason of
any emergency, or by order of a law enforcement officer.
(Prior Code, § 26-31) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   (A)   Prohibited in certain places.
      (1)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle, tractor-
trailer, commercial vehicle, or recreation-type vehicle (including motor homes
or detached trailers) except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a law enforcement officer or a
traffic control device in any of the following places:
         (a)   On a sidewalk;
         (b)   On a crosswalk;
         (c)   In front or across the street of a public or private driveway;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
         (e)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (f)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing, or parked
at the edge or curb of a street;
         (g)   In or on the space between a sidewalk and a public street;
         (h)   Within a street intersection;
         (i)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (j)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;
         (k)   Within 30 feet of an intersection;
         (l)   Within the circular portion of any cul-de-sac;
         (m)   In or on any common area of the town; and
         (n)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within the town
(except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device) with
the left side of said vehicle to the curb against the traffic flow. Any person
violating this section shall be subject to the general enforcement provisions
and penalties for parking violations.
      (3)   These provisions do not apply to emergency vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 26-32)
   (B)   Prohibited at all times in certain locations. Parking, standing, or
stopping a vehicle shall be prohibited at all times and at all locations in
accordance with the following specifications.
      (1)   When signs are placed, erected, or installed giving notice thereof
or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets designated
on the official traffic maps of the town as areas where parking is prohibited
at all times.
      (2)   No vehicle of one ton or more capacity shall be parked upon either
side of any residential street.
      (3)   No person shall park any recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer of
any kind on any public street at any time.
      (4)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any commercial vehicle, bus,
trailer, and the like on any street except for the temporary purpose of
transacting business (such as moving vans, parcel delivery vehicles, and
similar vehicle types).
(Prior Code, § 26-38)
      (5)   The parking of automobiles, buses, motorcycles, trailers, and other
vehicles in the front yard of lots within residentially zoned districts is
prohibited at all times. The FRONT YARD is defined as the open unoccupied space
on the same lot within a building situated between the nearest roofed portion
of the building and the street line of the lot and extending from the side lot
line to the side lot line; it is not intended to include all or any part of a
paved or gravel driveway or parking pad leading to a legal parking area at the
side or rear of the lot or to an attached or detached garage.
(Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018; Ord. 24-23, passed 9-14-2023) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 20-162
§ 71.17 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   (A)   Prohibited for certain purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person
to stand or park a vehicle upon any street of the town for the principal
purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying it for sale;
      (2)   Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
      (3)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers, or other persons when such
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile
or other vehicle;
      (4)   Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has
been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight
from one vehicle to another; and/or
      (5)   Unless otherwise regulated, parking of any tractor-trailer,
commercial vehicle, or recreation-type vehicle (including motor homes, boats,
and the like) for more than one hour on any given day.
(Prior Code, § 26-33)
   (B)   No parking for purposes of advertising. It shall be unlawful for any
person to stand or park any vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of
advertising unless such owner or driver thereof shall have obtained written
permission from the town.
(Prior Code, § 26-35)
(Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18 NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   In any area within the corporate and annexation limits of the town where
parking spaces are not marked on the pavement, are not designated as “no
parking” zones, and are not otherwise restricted by this subchapter from the
parking of a vehicle, all vehicles shall be parked, stopped, or standing
parallel to the curb or the edge of the pavement and as far right of the
centerline as possible, leaving at least 12 feet of clear, unobstructed roadway
for the safe passage of other vehicles. At no time may a vehicle be directly
across the street from another vehicle unless there will be 12 feet of roadway
open between the two vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 26-34) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.19 DIRECTION WHEN PARKING.
   (A)   Regulated direction of parking.
      (1)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle on any portion of a
street within the town on which the town has otherwise regulated parking by
municipal ordinance (except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic
or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic
control device) with the left side of said vehicle to the curb; except, on one-
way streets, vehicles shall stop or be parked headed in the direction of
traffic.
      (2)   Any person violating this section shall be subject to the general
enforcement provisions and penalties for parking violations as provided in §§
71.35 and
71.99.
(Prior Code, § 26-3)
   (B)   Standing or parking on one-way roads. In the event a street or roadway
is restricted to one direction upon any such street or roadway, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way street
or roadway unless signs are erected to permit such stopping, standing, or
parking.
(Prior Code, § 26-36)
(Ord. 4-86, passed 5-13-1986; Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.20 MISCELLANEOUS VEHICLE PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, park, or otherwise
leave unattended any commercial motor vehicle, dump truck, excursion passenger
vehicle, horse trailer, property hauling vehicle, school bus, school activity
bus, or any other type of passenger or commercial vehicle that exceeds two rear
axles or four tons in or on any driveway, street, common area, park, front
yard, or alley.
   (B)   Provided, however, the provisions of the section do not apply to the
following:
      (1)   The temporary parking for the loading or unloading of moving vans
or trucks;
      (2)   The stopping, standing, or parking when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a law
enforcement officer or traffic control device;
      (3)   The normal stoppage of commercial vehicles or buses for taking on
and discharging passengers or freight;
      (4)   The stopping, standing, or parking of any governmental, emergency,
or utility vehicle as required by the performance of legitimate governmental,
emergency, or utility-related function; or
      (5)   An emergency resulting from breakdown that requires repairs to the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 26-39) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018) Penalty, see §
71.99
ENFORCEMENT
§ 71.35 CITATIONS; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any of
the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this town or by state law, the police
officer finding such vehicle shall take any information displayed on the
vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such
vehicle a parking citation, in such form as prescribed by the Chief of Police,
directing the driver to report, within 15 days after such violation, to the
Police Department during regular business hours to answer the charge against
him or her.
   (B)   (1)   If the penalty is not paid as provided in §
71.99, a notice shall be mailed via the United States Postal Service to the
operator, if known, or the registered owner of the vehicle in violation, if the
operator is not known, within 90 days of the date of occurrence, enclosing a
copy of the citation and stating that unless the civil penalties set forth are
paid within 30 calendar days after mailing of the notice to the operator or
owner, the town will seek civil remedies in the nature of a debt to collect the
same. The Town Police Department will administer and enforce the terms of this
chapter.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal
authority or powers of Town Police Department enforcing other laws or in
otherwise carrying out their duties. The provisions contained herein shall not
prohibit or prevent the implementation or use of any other enforcement
provision as authorized by the state.
      (3)   In the event any person notified, as specified in this section,
fails or refuses to pay the civil penalty specified in said notice, the Chief
of Police may cause criminal process to be issued for such person.
(Prior Code, § 26-41) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018)
§ 71.36 TOWING.
   (A)   Any car or other vehicle parked on any street or other area where
parking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter may be removed,
towed away, and stored as authorized by G.S. § 160A-303. All notice and hearing
procedures required by G.S. § 160A-303 and Chapter 20, Article 7A, are to be
complied with by the town.
   (B)   The Town Police Department, in compliance with division (A) above, may
authorize the removal, towing, and storage of any car or vehicle in violation
of this chapter. The owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable for any costs
incurred in the removal, storage, and subsequent disposition of a vehicle,
cargo, or other personal property under the authority of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 26-43) (Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-303 and Chapter 20, Article 7A
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions, violations of the provisions of
this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty, as authorized by
G.S. § 160A-175(c), upon the issuance of a citation for said violation as
hereinafter provided.
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a parking violation provided for herein, the
owner or operator, if different from the owner of the motor vehicle in
violation, shall pay a civil penalty in the amount of $25 within 15 calendar
days after the issuance of the violation. Upon failure to pay the citation
within 15 calendar days, a late penalty of $25 will be assessed for each
citation not paid within the time required.
      (2)   Penalties for handicap spaces and one ton trucks or more are $50.
The violation is a civil penalty and shall follow the same procedures as
standard parking violation procedures.
      (3)   Any person violating the provisions of any of the restrictions
imposed by ordinance of this town or by state law concerning the parking or
stopping of motor vehicles shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 26-41)
   (B)   Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
violation, subject to citation and enforcement under the terms and conditions
set forth within this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 26-44)
(Ord. 20-18, passed 8-9-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 14-4 and 160A-175(c)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
93.   NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
96.   BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARMS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   County animal control provisions adopted
   
90.02   Control of dogs
   
90.03   Quantity of dogs permissible
Livestock
   
90.15   Livestock
   
90.16   Proximity of animal enclosures to public streets
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Animal Control Ordinance enacted by the Iredell County
Commissioners (effective October 1, 2008), incorporated herein, is hereby
adopted and enacted by the town as its own ordinance and shall be applicable
within the town limits.
   (B)   The county is empowered to enforce this section within the town.
   (C)   All provisions of any ordinances enacted prior to this section within
the town that conflict with the Iredell County Animal Control Ordinance
(effective October 1, 2008), which is incorporated herein, are hereby repealed.
(Prior Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 42-08, passed 12-11-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 14-360 et seq., 14-366 et seq., 80-45, 106-
400 et seq., 130A-184 et seq., 160A-147 et seq., 160A-182, 160A-186 et seq.,
160A-212, and 160A-493 and Chapters 19A, 67, 68, 106, and 130A
§ 90.02 CONTROL OF DOGS.
   (A)   Dogs within the town shall be under the direct control of their
owners.
   (B)   No dog shall be off of the property of its owner, including within any
public right-of-way that adjoins the property of its owner, unless it is under
a direct attendant’s control by use of a leash of not more than 15 feet in
length. At no time shall any dog be allowed to run at large within the town off
of the dog owner’s property nor within any public right-of-way adjoining the
dog owner’s property.
   (C)   Any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having the care, charge,
control, or custody of any dog or other domestic animal shall immediately
remove and thereafter dispose of any fecal matter deposited by said dog or
other domestic animal on public or private property unless the property owner
has given prior approval to use said property for this purpose. For the purpose
of this section, dog or other domestic animal fecal matter shall be immediately
removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter
disposing of it by depositing said matter in a trash receptacle, sanitary
disposal unit, or other closed or sealed container. This division (C) shall not
apply to disabled individuals who, due to their disability, are unable to
comply.
   (D)   This section shall be enforced by the Town Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 4-2) (Ord. 7-00, passed 7-6-2000; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-14-2011;
Ord. 01-18, passed 1-11-2018) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 QUANTITY OF DOGS PERMISSIBLE.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person or persons shall keep or have upon their
property, whether they own the property or have a leasehold interest in the
property, more than six dogs at any one time.
   (B)   Written notice of violation penalty. The animal owner, keeper, or
property owner or leaseholder shall be issued a written notice of violation and
penalty and shall be required to make payment to the town within ten days of
receipt of notice. Notice of the civil penalty and violation shall be delivered
in person to the violator or mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner’s last known address. If the applicable civil penalty
is not paid within the time described, a civil action may be commenced to
recover the penalty and costs associated with collection of the penalty.
   (C)   Injunction and order of abatement. Any provision of this section that
makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be
enforced by injunction and order of abatement. When a violation of such a
provision occurs, the Town Manager or his or her designee, through the Town
Attorney or any resident of the municipality, may apply to the general court of
justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the
unlawful use of the property.
(Prior Code, § 4-3) (Ord. 32-09, passed 11-12-2009) Penalty, see §
90.03
LIVESTOCK
§ 90.15 LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   Livestock. Livestock (such as fowl (hens only), cows, sheep, goats,
horses, donkeys, and mules) may be kept within the corporate limits of the town
with the following provisions. Property utilized for commercial agricultural
uses as defined and regulated in the Unified Development Ordinance of the town
shall continue to be subject to and regulated by the town’s Unified Development
Ordinance and not this subchapter.
      (1)   Such animals shall be kept at a minimum of 150 feet from any public
street, residential structure, or business structure (except the establishment
of the owner of such animals).
      (2)   Every stable place where animals are kept shall always be
maintained in a clean, healthy, and humane condition.
      (3)   Properties upon which animals are to be retained shall be fenced
and fully enclosed in such a manner that prevents the animals from leaving the
property.
      (4)   In addition to the foregoing, animals will only be permitted on
acreage that is sufficient for the welfare of the animals, as specified in the
table below.
Animal Minimum acreage per animal
Animal            Minimum acreage per animal
Horse             2 acres
Cow               2 acres
Sheep             0.25 acres
Goats             0.25 acres
Mules and donkeys 2 acres
Fowl (hens only)  0.25 acres*
*   Maximum 4 birds per property
Source: Cooperative Extension Service at NC State University
 
      (5)   The slaughter of livestock shall not be permitted anywhere in the
town.
   (B)   Exceptions to prohibitions.
      (1)   The provisions contained within this section shall not apply to
livestock and premises where the premises have been used for keeping of
livestock before January 1, 2025. If livestock were kept on premises before
that date it would be prohibited by this section, the livestock may continue to
be kept on those premises, subject to the following:
         (a)   The number and type of livestock on the premises as of that date
do not change or increase; and
         (b)   The physical dimensions or extent of the “premises” are not
increased.
      (2)   If the keeping of livestock on said premises is discontinued for
180 consecutive days or more, the premises will lose the right to keep
livestock and will be required to conform to the provisions of this section.
      (3)   The use of goat grazing to control invasive vegetation species
shall be permitted on a temporary basis under specifically prescribed
conditions, as listed below, and shall be permitted conditioned upon the
issuance of a temporary use permit by the town’s Zoning Administrator.
         (a)   Maximum frequency of grazing.
         (b)   March 1 through November 30.
         (c)   Property fully enclosed with fencing.
         (d)   Well-being of goats.
         (e)   Maximum duration of grazing time.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 2-6-1997; Ord. 04-13, passed 2-14-2013; Ord. 02-25, passed -
- )  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 PROXIMITY OF ANIMAL ENCLOSURES TO PUBLIC STREETS.
   No person shall erect or keep any stable or other enclosures for livestock
nearer than 150 feet to any street of the town. The Town Council may, in
writing, permit to erect or keep any such enclosure, not offensive in its
nature, and at a nearer distance than that above-prescribed whenever the
enforcement of this provision would create a hardship upon such persons, and
such permission would not be injurious or offensive to adjacent property
owners, or injurious or harmful to the animal being kept on the premises.
(Ord. 1-97, passed 2-6-1997; Ord 02-25, passed - - )  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
90.02 shall subject the offender to a written warning by a police officer for
the first offense and shall be given notice of the town ordinance and then to a
civil penalty in the amount of $75 for the second offense, $150 for the third
offense, and $500 for the fourth offense, to be recovered along with court
costs by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does
not pay the penalty within a period of 72 hours after the offender has been
cited for violation of said provisions. These citations shall be in writing,
signed by the appropriate law enforcement officer, and delivered to the
offender at the place where the violation occurred or mailed to the offender
either at the offender’s residence or place of business. Each violation shall
be a separate and distinct offense. After the fourth subsequent offense,
Iredell County Animal Control will be notified to pick up the dog or other
domestic animal. Any fifth offense shall constitute a misdemeanor and the
offender, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 4-2)
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any owner or leaseholder
who violates any provision of §
90.03 shall be subject to a civil penalty for each violation. Each violation
shall be each separate dog above the number six, and each day shall be a
separate violation. For each dog above six and for each day’s violation, the
fine shall be $50 per dog per day. Nothing in this penalty shall prevent the
town representatives from issuing warning violations.
      (2)    Violation of §
90.03 may subject the violator to criminal as well as civil action. In addition
to the civil penalties or fees imposed herein, violation of §
90.03 shall be a misdemeanor for which a criminal summons or warrant may be
issued. Any violator convicted of such violation shall be punishable as
provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day’s violation of §
90.03 and each dog above the number of six is a separate offense and shall be
fined not less than $50 per offense and no more than a maximum of $500 per
offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings pursuant to §
90.03 does not relieve the violator of his or her liability for taxes, civil
penalties, or fees imposed hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 4-3)
   (D)   Any person found to be in violation of §§
90.15 or
90.16 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by G.S. § 14-4. Each day’s
violation shall be a separate and continuing offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-28)
(Ord. 32-09, passed 11-12-2009; Ord. 10-11, passed 4-14-2011; Ord. 01-18,
passed 1-11-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
91.01   Open burning
   
91.02   State Fire Code adopted
   
91.03   County Fire Marshal to enforce code
   
91.04   Violations
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 OPEN BURNING.
   No person shall intentionally or deliberately set fire to or cause the open
burning of leaves, tree branches, garden space, grasslands, or trash materials
inside the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 1-98, passed 1-8-1998; Ord. 20-10, passed 7-8-2010)
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The State Building Code, International Fire Code, and its incorporated
appendices (A through J), codes, references, and standards (as published in the
SBCCI Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association and listed in
Annex A of the NFPA Fire Prevention Code) are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length in this section.
(Prior Code, § 12-21) (Ord. 03-03, passed 3-13-2003; Ord. 31-17, passed 12-14-
2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, seehttps://ww.nfpa.ord/Codes-and-Standards/All-Codes-
and-Standards/List-of-Codes-and-Standards
§ 91.03 COUNTY FIRE MARSHAL TO ENFORCE CODE.
   The County Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the enforcement of this
code. The Fire Marshal may designate such members of the County Fire Marshal’s
office as inspectors, as shall from time to time be necessary, to assist in the
performance of the responsibilities and duties outlined herein.
(Prior Code, § 12-22) (Ord. 03-03, passed 3-13-2003; Ord. 31-17, passed 12-14-
2017)
§ 91.04 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit
or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to
fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as
variation may be allowed by action of the County Fire Marshal in writing. Proof
of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such
act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises.
   (B)   Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, occupant, or the
person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others.
(Prior Code, § 12-23) (Ord. 03-03, passed 3-13-2003; Ord. 31-17, passed 12-14-
2017) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
91.01 shall pay a civil penalty in the amount of $50 to the Town Clerk within
72 hours after receiving a citation for violation. Any unpaid civil penalties
shall be collected by means of a civil action in the nature of debt. Violation
of §
91.01 shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under G.S. § 14-
4.
(Prior Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 1-98, passed 1-8-1998; Ord. 20-10, passed 7-8-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 92: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Abandoned or nuisance vehicle unlawful
   
92.03   Junked motor vehicle regulations
   
92.04   Vehicle exceptions
Administration and Enforcement
   
92.15   Authority
   
92.16   Pre-towing notice; exceptions
   
92.17   Post-towing notice requirements
   
92.18   Probable cause hearing
   
92.19   Vehicle redemption
   
92.20   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
92.21   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicles
   
92.22   Conditions for removal from private property
   
92.23   Protection from criminal or civil liability
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, a vehicle
that is left:
      (1)   Upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance
prohibiting parking;
      (2)   On a public street or highway for longer than seven days;
      (3)   On property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours;
or
      (4)   On private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, or
lessee thereof for longer than two hours.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Town Police Department
or the Town Manager or his or her designee, respectively, is designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2, a
vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that
vehicle and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful;
this includes a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats, or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil, or other
flammable or explosive materials, as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from
the inside such as trunks, hoods, and the like;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-66) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-193, 160A-303, and 160A-303.2
§ 92.02 ABANDONED OR NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicles to be abandoned.
      (2)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(Prior Code, § 10-68)
   (B)   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
      (2)   Upon investigation, the Town Manager or his or her designee may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(Prior Code, § 10-69)
(Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor vehicle on the
premises of public or private property. A single permitted junked motor vehicle
must strictly comply with the location and concealment requirements herein.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession
of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to comply with
the location requirements or the concealment requirements herein.
   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) below, upon investigation,
the Town Manager or his or her designee may order the removal of a junked motor
vehicle after finding, in writing, that the aesthetic benefits of removing the
vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such
finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing
community, neighborhood, or area appearance. The following, among other
relevant factors, may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of the public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community;
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of
area residents; and
      (6)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles.
   (E)   One junked motor vehicle in its entirety can be located in the rear
yard, as defined by the town’s adopted Unified Development Ordinance, if the
junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public
street and from abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The Town Manager
or his or her designee has the authority to determine whether any junked motor
vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering
must remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering
or enclosure must be compatible with the objectives stated in the preamble of
the ordinance from which this section is derived.
   (F)   Any other junked motor vehicle must be kept in a garage or building
structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle
cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A GARAGE or BUILDING
STRUCTURE means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building
structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and
which has been constructed in accordance with all Zoning and Building Code
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 10-70) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 VEHICLE EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:
   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard, as
defined in G.S. § 136-143 and in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act (G.S.
§§ 136-141 et seq.);
   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;
   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the town.
(Prior Code, § 10-79) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq. and 136-143
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 92.15 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Police Department and the Town Manager or his or her designee
shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
The Police Department shall be responsible for administering removal and
disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public streets and
highways within the town and on property owned by the town.
   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance, or junked
motor vehicles located on private property. The town may, on an annual basis,
contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove,
store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles, and junked motor
vehicles in compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal
authority or powers of the officers of the Town Police Department and Fire
Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Prior Code, § 10-67) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
§ 92.16 PRE-TOWING NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Removal of abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing
notice requirements.
      (1)   Except as set forth in division (B) below, an abandoned, nuisance,
or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to
the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the
case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle (if the name and mailing
address of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the
vehicle or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which the
vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence),
the notice shall be given by first-class mail. The person who mails the notice
shall retain a written record to show the name and address to which mailed and
the date mailed. If such name and address cannot be ascertained or if the
vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given, by
affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle,
indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no
sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed unless the vehicle
is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
      (2)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property and nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if
the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned,
a nuisance vehicle, or a junked motor vehicle and that the aesthetic benefits
of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the
Town Council, in writing, and heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Town Council and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed
until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Prior Code, § 10-71)
   (B)   Exceptions to prior notice requirement. The requirement that notice be
given prior to the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle
may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in those
circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate
traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and
welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing
official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal
of vehicles without prior notice includes the following.
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public
streets and highways, the Town Council hereby determines that immediate removal
of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no-stopping or no-standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in loading zones;
         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
herein.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles.
         (a)   With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town-
owned property, other than the streets and highways, and on private property,
such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those
circumstances where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt
action to protect and maintain the public health, safety, and welfare.
         (b)   By way of illustration and not of limitation, such circumstances
include: vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and
residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic
hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public and private property.
(Prior Code, § 10-72)
(Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
§ 92.17 POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or
area by the town truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such
services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town
official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the
vehicle; such notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice (including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
above shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known address unless
this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is removed
and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the
authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the
vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of
the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions
(A)(1) through (A)(5) above.
(Prior Code, § 10-73)
(Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
§ 92.18 PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING.
   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the County
Magistrate and designated by the Chief District Court Judge to receive such
hearing requests. The Magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of
receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 10-74) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 20-219.11
§ 92.19 VEHICLE REDEMPTION.
   (A)   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle.
   (B)   Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled
to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further
violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-75) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.20 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in
accordance with G.S. § 20-219.11
(Prior Code, § 10-76) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 20-219.11
§ 92.21 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this code unless and until all towing and
impounding fees, which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 10-80) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.22 CONDITIONS FOR REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant, or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written request
of the owner, occupant, or lessee except in those cases where a vehicle is a
nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by
the Town Manager or his or her designee. The town may require any person
requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle from
private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense, or liability
incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-77) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
§ 92.23 PROTECTION FROM CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance, or junked motor vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-78) (Ord. 3-98, passed 4-2-1998)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Noise Nuisances
   
93.01   Intent
   
93.02   Loud, disturbing noises prohibited
   
93.03   Determination of unreasonable noise
   
93.04   Sound amplification
   
93.05   Exceptions
Property Nuisances
   
93.20   Unlawful conditions
   
93.21   Notice to abate
   
93.22   Failure to abate
   
93.23   Procedures supplemental to other remedies
 
   
93.99   Penalty
NOISE NUISANCES
§ 93.01 INTENT.
   (A)   Excessive noise creates a significant threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare. There has been an alarming increase in the frequency and
volume of noise from the many sound-reproducing devices available today.
   (B)   It is the intent of this subchapter to strike an appropriate balance
between the right of individuals to obtain information and derive pleasure by
listening to radios and other such devices and the right of the public to a
peaceful and healthful environment.
(Prior Code, § 10-42) (Ord. 3-93, passed 6-3-1993)
§ 93.02 LOUD, DISTURBING NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, or property
owner to cause, make, or contribute to the creation of any loud or disturbing
noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the
life or health of any individual or such noises as disturb the normal quiet and
peace of any citizen of the town.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
annoying, and unnecessary noise in violation of this section, but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   Horns, signal devices. The sounding or blowing of any horn, signal
device, or music from any automobile, motorcycle, motor bus, or other vehicle
(except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of
control or if in motion only as a danger signal), the creation by means of any
signal device of any loud or harsh noise, and the sounding of such device for
any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   Radios, phonographs, and the like. The playing of any radio,
phonograph, amplifying device, or any musical instrument in such a manner or
with such volume as to annoy or disturb any person or the playing of any such
instrument in such a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or
repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel, or other residence;
      (3)   Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent
or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in
the vicinity;
      (4)   Vehicle equipment. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or used or repaired or modified in such
manner as to create loud or unnecessary noises, particularly grating, grinding,
rattling, riveting, or other disturbing noises exceeding 60 dBa measured at a
distance of 50 feet or greater from the motor vehicle;
      (5)   Whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as
a warning of danger;
      (6)   Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust from
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat engine, or
motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
      (7)   Devices using compressed air. The use of any mechanical device
operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively
muffled and reduced;
      (8)   Budding operations. The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration, or repair to the exterior of any building in a
residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday, except in cases of urgent necessity in the
interest of public safety;
      (9)   Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, and like. The creation of
any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, library, sanitarium, hospital, or court (while the same is in
session) or adjacent to any church during church services which interferes with
work or worship in any such place or institution; provided, signs must be
displayed on such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital,
church, library, sanitarium, or court;
      (10)   Loading and unloading operations. The creation of loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or
repairing any vehicle or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates, and
containers;
      (11)   Bells, gongs. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any
building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of any person in the
vicinity excluding church bells thereof;
      (12)   Hawking, peddling, and/or soliciting. Shouting, loud talking,
crying, or soliciting by peddlers, hawkers, taxi drivers, solicitors, vendors,
and the like which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood or any
person therein;
      (13)   Attention-getting devices. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or
other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any
performance or event, show, or sale or the display or advertisement of
merchandise by the creation of noise;
      (14)   Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of any mechanical
loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes, or other vehicles for
advertising or other purposes except by special permission of the Chief of
Police; and
      (15)   Business noise at night near residences. The operation of any
garage, filling station, auto repair business, taxi business, plant, store,
factory, or other place of business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. in such manner as to create loud and disturbing noises of such frequency
or such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet and comfort of any citizen and,
particularly, the creation of disturbing noises of such frequency and volume as
to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, peace, or repose of any person in any
dwelling, hotel, boardinghouse, or other type of residence.
   (C)   Standards, instrumentation, personnel, measurement procedures, and
recording procedures to be used in the measurement of sound, as provided for in
this section, shall be as follows.
      (1)   Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter
using the “A” weighting scale.
      (2)   Sound level meters shall be at least type two, meeting American
National Standard Institute Incorporated requirements.
      (3)   Sound measurement will be done at the curtilage of the property
which is the subject of the complaint or 50 feet from the noise if not on
private property.
      (4)   Daytime hours for the noise restrictions will begin at 7:00 a.m.
and last until 9:00 pm. Nighttime hours will be from 9:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m.
Below are the permitted decibel levels:
 
      Times                  Residential Multi-family Commercial/ Institutional
Day   7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 65 dBa      60 dBa       70 dBa
Night 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 60 dBa      55 dBa       65 dBa
 
   (D)   Exceptions to this section include:
      (1)   Any siren, whistle, or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or
any other alarm systems used in an emergency situation; however, burglar alarms
not terminating within 30 minutes after the responsible person shall be
unlawful;
      (2)   Warning devices required by OSHA or other local, county, state, or
federal safety regulations;
      (3)   Noise created by any aircraft flight operations which are
specifically preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration;
      (4)   Noise created by sporting events, wedding bells, and publicly-
sponsored recreational activities such as permitted events and parades;
      (5)   Equipment used for grass-cutting services not limited to
lawnmowers, weed eaters, blowers, and the like during daylight hours;
      (6)   Any businesses with existing noise violations which have
continuously operated and existed prior to the passage date of the ordinance
from which this section derives shall follow the provisions in place at the
time of its passage, not to exceed five years; and
      (7)   Any permitted event or activity approved by any government agency.
   (E)   The Town Manager, Chief of Police, or their designee(s) shall have
primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained
herein. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Manager or Chief of
Police or their designee(s) from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of
warning, notice, or education.
   (F)   If a person’s conduct violates this section, the person must be
ordered to cease and desist and have the opportunity to move, disperse, or
otherwise remedy the violation prior to arrest or a citation being issued.
(Ord. 04-23, passed 2-9-2023) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 DETERMINATION OF UNREASONABLE NOISE.
   Noise described in §
93.04(A) is hereby declared unreasonable and dangerous to the public health,
safety, and welfare and shall be illegal unless exempted herein.
(Prior Code, § 10-43) (Ord. 3-93, passed 6-3-1993)
§ 93.04 SOUND AMPLIFICATION.
   (A)   Permits for additional amplification.
      (1)   Definition. AMPLIFIED SOUND means any sound using amplifying
equipment whose source is outside or whose source is inside and the sound
propagates to the outside or to other dwellings or interior locations under
separate ownership or occupancy.
      (2)   Application. An application for a permit for amplification of sound
shall be submitted to the town at least 15 working days in advance of the
planned use except in an emergency. The application shall designate an
individual person who shall be in control of the sound amplification equipment
and ensure that its use complies with the term of the permit.
      (3)   Notice of tentative approval. Upon tentative approval, the
applicant for a permit shall be responsible for mailing or otherwise delivering
to the occupants of each property within a 1,000-foot radius of the facility
for which the permit has been granted, as shown on the tax maps of the county,
a notice stating the date and hours of the event. The notice shall be delivered
at least 72 hours in advance of the event. The permit shall not actually be
granted and issued until the applicant submits an affidavit to the town that
such notices have actually been mailed or otherwise delivered.
      (4)   Limits on hours. No permit shall be issued which shall have the
effect of allowing more than 20 hours of excess amplification per year at any
place of public entertainment having a capacity of 1,000 or more persons or ten
hours of excess amplification at any other location. Permits shall be
tentatively approved and subsequently granted by the Police Department in the
order of receipt unless permits for 20 or more hours have previously been
issued for the same or other locations within a 1,000-foot radius of the
facility in the same calendar year; in which event, the applicant shall elect
whether to limit his or her request so as to keep the year’s accumulated hours
of excess amplification in that location below 20 hours or select another
location.
      (5)   Denial; issuance of exceptional permit.
         (a)   If an applicant has been denied a permit under this section and
believes the denial is illegal by virtue of applicable state or federal law, he
or she shall promptly submit a copy of the denied permit application together
with a short statement of the reasons he or she believes he or she is entitled
to a permit to the Town Manager or his or her designee.
         (b)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall have the
discretion to grant an exceptional permit waiving location or time requirements
upon his or her determination that the applicant has made a substantial showing
of legal entitlement. Any such exceptional permit shall be promptly reported to
the Town Council.
   (B)   Sound audible from distance. It shall be unlawful for any person to
play, use, or otherwise operate, either from a motor vehicle or as a
pedestrian, any radio, tape player, or other sound-amplification device
emitting sound that is audible from a distance of 50 or more feet from the
source of the sound unless such device is being used to request assistance or
warn against an unsafe condition.
(Prior Code, § 10-44) (Ord. 3-93, passed 6-3-1993; Ord. 04-23, passed 2-9-2023)
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   Public safety personnel when responding to an emergency call or
engaged in other official business;
   (B)   Persons engaged in a lawful assembly, procession, or community event;
   (C)   The operator of a public utility vehicle when utilizing two-way
communications equipment;
   (D)   The operator of a vehicle being used for advertising purposes in
accordance with existing ordinances; or
   (E)   The activation of a theft alarm signal device.
(Prior Code, § 10-45) (Ord. 3-93, passed 6-3-1993)
PROPERTY NUISANCES
§ 93.20 UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS.
   The following enumerated and described conditions or any combination thereof
are hereby found, deemed, and declared to constitute a detriment, danger, and
hazard to health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
town and are found, deemed, and declared to be public nuisances wherever the
conditions may exist, and the creation, maintenance, or failure to abate any
nuisances is hereby declared unlawful:
   (A)   Overgrown vegetation; on any property, the uncontrolled growth of
noxious weeds or uncontrolled growth of grass, undergrowth, or other vegetation
that exceeds a maximum height of 12 inches.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, NOXIOUS WEED is defined as any weed
appearing in the most recent list of noxious weeds, as designated by either the
United States Department of Agriculture or the State Department of Agriculture.
      (2)   The maximum height restrictions set in this division (A) shall not
apply to the following except that, in all circumstances, adequate sight
distance is required to provide an unobstructed view along streets to increase
safety along roadways:
         (a)   Natural areas including, but not limited to, wetland areas,
wildflower restoration areas, public open spaces, wooded areas and lots,
stormwater retention areas, or rain gardens;
         (b)   On developed lots, overgrowth that, because if its location,
would be difficult to cut using a motorized lawnmower. This would include small
areas around mailboxes, utility poles, steep ditches, and fence lines;
         (c)   On undeveloped lots, because of their location and the nature of
surrounding properties, overgrowth that is not a threat to residential
properties or businesses may exceed 12 inches to a maximum height of 18 inches;
         (d)   Land located within 50 feet of natural or altered creeks, rivers
and streams, and corridors including riparian buffer strips that convey water;
         (e)   Land used for agriculture including, but not limited to,
pastures that are fenced and contain animals;
         (f)   Temporary erosion-controlled measures;
         (g)   Ornamental grasses grown as ornamental plants, trees, ornamental
shrubs, cultured plants, flowers, and growing and producing vegetable plants;
or
         (h)   Utility rights-of-way.
      (3)   Within all parts of the town, individual property owners are
responsible for mowing and grounds maintenance of all areas between their
property lines and the edge of the street. These areas are to include from the
edge of the pavement or from the back of the curb and gutter to the street
right of way or the front, side, or rear property line which is the same as the
street right of way. The individual property owner shall also mow and otherwise
perform grounds maintenance upon any utility strip or planting strip that lies
between the edge of the pavement or the back of the curb and gutter and the
street edge of any sidewalk that runs parallel with the street.
   (B)   Any accumulation of trash and/or garbage which is the result of the
absence of overflowing or improperly closed trash or garbage containers;
   (C)   An opened or unsecured storage or collection place for chemicals,
oils, gasoline, flammable liquids, or other similar harmful or dangerous
substances, gases, or vapors;
   (D)   An open place of concentration of combustible items such as
mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires, and tubs, garbage, trash, refuse,
dry brush, tree limbs, dead vegetation, old clothes, rags, or other rubbish;
   (E)   Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash, or junk causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes, or vermin prejudicial
to the public health;
   (F)   A collection place for sewage and sewage drainage or the seepage from
septic tanks;
   (G)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by
virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats, mice, snakes,
or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health;
   (H)   Barns, animal pens, enclosures, dog lots and runs, or other similar
places that house animals which are not kept in a sanitary condition and that
attracts flies and other pests or admits foul odors;
   (I)   A collection or storage place for old, worn-out, or broken or
discarded machinery, car parts, junk, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
appliances, cans, or containers, household goods, plumbing or electrical
fixtures, or other similar materials;
   (J)   A collection place for lumber, bricks, blocks, nails, building
materials, and equipment such as, but not limited to, trailers, generators,
scaffolds, ladders, and tools unless such conditions are temporary in nature
(lasting no more than three days) or are caused by current construction in
progress pursuant to a lawfully issued building permit;
   (K)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the
rules and regulations of the County Health Department;
   (L)   Any building or other structure which has been burned, partially
burned, or otherwise partially destroyed and which is unsightly or hazardous to
the safety of any person, is a continuing fire hazard, or which is structurally
unsound to the extent that the Town Manager or his or her designee can
reasonably determine that there is a likelihood of personal or property injury
to any person or property entering the premises;
   (M)   A storage place or place of collection of broken bottles, glass, tin,
aluminum, and other sharp, pointed, jagged, or rusted metal;
   (N)   Any condition which blocks, hinders, or obstructs in any way the
natural flow of branches, streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches, or drains
to the extent that the premises is not free from standing water;
   (O)   A collection or pool or pond of stagnate or foul water caused by any
human-made berm, dam, ditch, or impoundment;
   (P)   Any condition or use of property which results in the admission of
pollutants and particles into the atmosphere or causes noxious odors and
stenches to be emitted into the air;
   (Q)   The outside or outdoor use of any furniture originally designed or
intended for interior use such as, but not limited to, couches, sofas, chairs,
recliners, or other like items; and
   (R)   Any other act or condition declared to be a nuisance in the manner
provided in this subchapter by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 10-142) (Ord. 19-07, passed 6-14-2007; Ord. 03-14, passed 2-10-
2014; Ord. 14-14, passed 10-9-2014; Ord. 16-23, passed 5-11-2023) Penalty, see
§
93.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 130A-19, 130A-20, and 160A-193
§ 93.21 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   When any condition in violation of this subchapter is found to exist,
the Enforcement Officer or such persons as may be designated by the Town
Manager (or the Town Manager, himself or herself) shall give notice to the
owners of the premises to abate or remove such conditions within ten days. Such
notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises
sufficient for identification, and shall set forth the violation and state
that, if the violation is not corrected within ten days, the town may proceed
to correct the same as authorized by this subchapter.
   (B)   Service of such notice shall be by any one of the following methods:
      (1)   By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the notice at the
usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the age of 16 years
and a member of the family of the owner;
      (2)   By depositing the notice in the United States post office addressed
to the owner at his or her last known address with postage prepaid thereon; or
      (3)   (a)   By posting and keeping posted, for ten days, a copy of the
notice, in placard form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which the
violation exists when notice cannot be served by the methods outlined in
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above. The town may notify a chronic violator of
the town’s Public Nuisance Ordinance that, if the violator’s property is found
to be in violation of this subchapter, the town shall, without further notice
in the calendar year in which notice is given, take action to remedy the
violation. The expense of such action shall become a lien upon the property and
shall be collected as unpaid taxes.
         (b)   The notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail. When
service is attempted by registered or certified mail, a copy of the notice may
also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the
registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused but the regular mail is
not returned by the post office within ten days after the mailing. If service
by regular mail is used, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected. A chronic violator is a person who owns
property whereupon, in the previous calendar year, the town gave notice of
violation at least three times under any provision of the Public Nuisance
Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10-143) (Ord. 19-07, passed 6-14-2007; Ord. 25-22, passed 9-8-
2022)
Cross-reference:
   Noise nuisances, see §§
93.01 through
93.05
§ 93.22 FAILURE TO ABATE.
   If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to
§
93.21 within ten days after the service of such notice, he or she shall be
subject to prosecution for violations of this subchapter in accordance with
law, and each day that such failure continues shall be a separate offense. In
addition, the Town Manager may have the condition described in the notice
abated, removed, or otherwise corrected and all expenses incurred thereby shall
be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the property and shall be collected
as taxes and levies are collected. All such expenses shall constitute a lien
against the property on which the work was done. All equitable remedies
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175 are available to the town for enforcement of this
subchapter in addition to other remedies and penalties contained in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-144) (Ord. 19-07, passed 6-14-2007; Ord. 14-14, passed 10-9-
2014)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-175
§ 93.23 PROCEDURES SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER REMEDIES.
   The procedure set forth in this subchapter shall be in addition to any other
remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public
nuisances, and this subchapter shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a
criminal action against any person violating the provisions herein, as provided
in G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 10-145) (Ord. 19-07, passed 6-14-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
93.02 shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or by fine not to exceed $50. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 10-46) (Ord. 04-23, passed 2-9-2023)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
94.01   Tobacco, alcohol, and weapon regulations at recreation sites
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 TOBACCO, ALCOHOL, AND WEAPON REGULATIONS AT RECREATION SITES.
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful to consume or partake in any
unfortified wine or alcoholic beverages of any kind within Troutman ESC Park,
Troutman Depot Park Facility, and Troutman Greenway System. However,
unfortified wine and/or beer may be allowed at special events held in Troutman
ESC Park only upon permission and conditions of the Town Manager and Town
Council as set out herein.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, a SPECIAL EVENT is an event sponsored
by any of the following: the town, Troutman Business Council, and/or agencies
or organizations affiliated with such systems, each of which to be considered
an EVENT ORGANIZER under this section.
      (2)   Special events must have liability insurance and list the town as
co-insured. Insurance will be required from all groups requesting to have
alcohol. General liability coverage in the amount of $1,000,000 for each
occurrence combined with single limit for bodily injury and property damage
liabilities and $2,000,000 aggregate is required. The town must be named as
additional insured under this policy of insurance. Certificates of insurance
must be submitted to the Town Manager or his or her designee 14 days prior to
the event.
      (3)   Any special event (with or without the consumption of alcohol) may
require the Town Police Department’s presence. This requirement is at the
discretion of the Town Manager, Parks and Recreation Director, and/or the
Police Department Police Chief. The Parks and Recreation Director will contact
the Town Police Department designee to schedule any police officer(s) on behalf
of the rental applicant. The Parks and Recreation Director will then coordinate
with the rental applicant regarding pertinent information and next steps.
Officers(s) must be scheduled 14 days prior to the event. If alcohol is being
served at the event, officer(s) must be on-site from the time alcohol is being
served until the facility is vacated and closed.
      (4)   The permit holder must designate one person (minimum 21 years of
age) to oversee control of the alcohol. All town, county, and state ordinances,
laws, and statutes pertaining to alcohol will apply and are the responsibility
of the permit holder to uphold. An event organizer obtaining a special event
permit as set out herein may allow vendors to sell or distribute alcoholic
beverages without such vendor or vendors obtaining a special event permit
provided that such event organizer shall be responsible for such vendor having
all state or local permits necessary to sell or distribute such alcoholic
beverages. All servings must be done in accordance with all state and local
laws and guidelines. The permit holder is responsible for the conduct of all
group members.
      (5)   Alcoholic beverages, as provided in this section, can only be
possessed, consumed, sold, or distributed in such area as approved by the Town
Manager or his or her designee. The area is to be conspicuously marked by the
event organizer. Alcoholic beverages must be sold, served, and consumed in a
physical setting that is conducive to control by town personnel and/or
appropriately licensed concession operators, vendors, and/or caterers.
Participants may not remove alcoholic beverages from the controlled setting.
Participants are prohibited from bringing their own alcoholic beverages to any
special event on town premises.
      (6)   It is unlawful for a person authorized to purchase an alcoholic
beverage, as set out herein, to pass on an alcoholic beverage to any other
person under the age of 21.
      (7)   Alcoholic beverages not obtained or acquired as set out in this
section are not permitted, and the possession, consumption, sale, or delivery
of such alcoholic beverages is considered a violation of this section.
      (8)   The Town Manager is authorized to require any applications and
proofs as he or she may deem necessary to make a determination on the ability
of an event organizer to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages as provided
herein.
      (9)   Alcoholic beverages not obtained or acquired as provided herein are
not permitted, and the possession, consumption, sale, or delivery of such
alcoholic beverages is considered a violation of this division (A).
   (B)   Tobacco products. It shall be unlawful to use any tobacco products
within Troutman ESC Park, Troutman Depot Park Facility, and Troutman Greenway
System.
   (C)   Weapons and firearms. It shall be unlawful to possess any weapon of
any kind including firearms and handguns or any air rifle or toy pistol
designed to or capable of hurling a projectile or missile within Troutman ESC
Park, Troutman Depot Park Facility, and Troutman Greenway System. This
prohibition shall not apply to any person with a concealed weapon permit or to
sworn on-duty law enforcement officers and members of the armed services when
acting in the discharge of their official duties.
   (D)   Aviation. It shall be unlawful for any person within the confines of
Troutman ESC Park, Troutman Depot Park, and Troutman Greenway System to
voluntarily launch, take off, land, or cause to descend any airplane, flying
machine, balloon, parachute, drone, or other apparatus of aviation except by
special event permit and/or permission of the Town Manager or his or her
designee. VOLUNTARILY shall mean any action other than a forced landing. This
division (D) shall also apply to radio-controlled airplanes, helicopters,
rockets, drones, and the like on all above-mentioned properties.
   (E)   When effective. This section shall become effective upon the posting
of proper signs at Troutman ESC Park, Troutman Depot Park, and Troutman
Greenway System.
(Prior Code, § 18-1) (Ord. 19-17, passed 9-14-2017; Ord. 01-21, passed 2-11-
2021) Penalty, see §
94.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-350 et seq.
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any violation of §
94.01 is punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, as outlined in G.S. § 14-4, with
a fine of not less than $50 and no more than $500. However, a violation of any
provision of §
94.01 related to tobacco use shall first cause a verbal warning to the person
to cease use at the park or facility. If a second violation occurs by the
person or if the person continues to use tobacco, then the person shall be
required to leave the park and/or facility for a duration of time to be
determined by the enforcing officer. Any person ordered to vacate the premises,
as required herein, and who returns prior to the time as approved by the
enforcing officer or who remains on the property after having been told to
vacate may be charged with trespass.
(Prior Code, § 18-1) (Ord. 19-17, passed 9-14-2017; Ord. 01-21, passed 2-11-
2021)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 95: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
General Provisions
    
95.01   Purpose and intent
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Enforcement
   
95.04   Liability
   
95.05   Town does not endorse; use of town seal or name
   
95.06   Authorized special vendors
   
95.07   Advertisement and ticket sale regulations
   
95.08   Interference with special events prohibited
Applications and Permits
   
95.20   Special use permit required; facility use permit
   
95.21   Exemption from special use permit
   
95.22   Priority of issuance
   
95.23   Applications
   
95.24   Conditions affecting issuance
   
95.25   Denial of application
   
95.26   Insurance
   
95.27   When date of special event confirmed
   
95.28   Contents of permit
   
95.29   Revocation of permit
   
95.30   Issuance does not obligate town services
   
95.31   Costs and fees
   
95.32   Permit display
   
95.33   Cost recovery for unlawful special event
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
 § 95.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Recognizing that special events enhance the quality of life for residents
and visitors alike, it is the purpose of the Town Council to establish a
structured process for permitting the use of public facilities not otherwise
covered in this code including, but not limited to, adequate time for receiving
and acting upon the application for the staging of outdoor special events
conducted by the private sector to use town streets, facilities, or services or
to conduct events that occupy, impact, or consume public resources as a result
of the congregation of people.
(Prior Code, § 22-127) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any temporary or permanent structure, as defined by the Unified
Development Ordinance, or any structure built for support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
   COMMERCIAL SPECIAL EVENT. Any special event organized and conducted by any
person or entity that does not qualify as a tax-exempt nonprofit organization.
   DEMONSTRATION. Any formation, procession, or assembly of persons which, for
the purpose of expressive activity, is to assemble or travel in unison on any
street in a manner that does not comply with normal or usual traffic
regulations or controls.
   EVENT ORGANIZER. Any person who conducts, manages, promotes, organizes,
aids, or solicits attendance at a commercial or noncommercial special event.
   EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITY. Includes conduct, the sole or principal object of which
is the expression, dissemination, or communication by verbal, visual, literary,
or auditory means of opinion, views, or ideas and for which no fee or donation
is charged or required as a condition of participation in or attendance at such
activity. It includes public oratory and distribution of literature and
picketing.
   FACILITY USE PERMIT. A permit issued under the authority of the Town Manager
for temporary or reserved use or occupation of a public facility or an area of
public land, for a defined period of time, and said use does not adversely
impact town resources due to the anticipated congregation of people in such
numbers or in such location as identified.
   FESTIVAL. A thematic, organized, site-specific celebration, performance,
exhibition, or competition occurring upon public or private property or a
combination of private and public property during which commerce occurs for a
defined period of time and is advertised and promoted outside the town that
will have an impact on town resources due to the anticipated congregation of
people in such numbers or in such location as identified.
   GOODS. Wares, personal property, merchandise, or any other similar item or
object than is generally sold.
   GROSS REVENUES. The sum of all revenues received by an event organizer for a
special event including, but not limited to: cash receipts, licensing,
sponsorship, television, advertising, and similar revenues and concessions.
   NONCOMMERCIAL SPECIAL EVENT. Any special event organized and conducted by a
person or entity that qualifies as a tax-exempt nonprofit organization.
   PARADE. Any march, race, presentation, ceremony, pageant, or procession of
any persons and conveyances of any sort moving upon any public street or
sidewalk of the town which does not comply with normal traffic regulations.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by
curbs, barriers, markings, or other delineation for pedestrian travel.
   SIGNAGE. Any sign, pennant, flag, banner, inflatable display, or other
attention-seeking device.
   SPECIAL EVENT.
      (1)   Any organized assemblage, not meeting the criteria for a facilities
use permit, of persons at any private or public property or public park which
is to gather for a common purpose under the direction and control of a person.
      (2)   Any other organized activity conducted by a person or group for a
common or collective use, purpose, or benefit which involves the use of, or has
an impact on, other public property or facilities and the provision of town
public safety services in response thereto.
      (3)   Examples of SPECIAL EVENTS include, but are not limited to:
filming, concerts, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties,
community events, mass participation, and sporting competition such as
marathons and running events, bicycle races or tours, or spectator sports such
as football, basketball, and baseball games or golf tournaments.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. A permit issued under this chapter.
   SPECIAL EVENT VENUE. The defined area identified on a submitted site plan
approved by the Special Events Coordinator for which a special event permit has
been issued.
      STREET.
      (1)   The term STREET means a public right-of-way or way or place of
whatever nature publicly dedicated and/or maintained and open to use of the
public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel.
      (2)   The term STREET includes highways, alleyways, sidewalks, and any
other public area that accommodates vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   TAX-EXEMPT NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempted from
payment of income taxes by federal or state law and which has been in existence
for a minimum of six months preceding the date of application for a special
event permit.
   VENDOR. Any person who sells or offers to sell any goods, food, or beverages
within a special event venue including the event organizer or any person who
contracts with the event organizer for space within the special event venue in
order to vend goods.
(Prior Code, § 22-128) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Town Manager is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and may exercise any enforcement powers as set forth in law.
(Prior Code, § 22-129) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.04 LIABILITY.
   Violations of this chapter shall subject the violator to liability
regardless of intent.
(Prior Code, § 22-150) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.05 TOWN DOES NOT ENDORSE; USE OF TOWN SEAL OR NAME.
   (A)   The issuance of a permit shall not be considered an endorsement of a
special event by the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to represent, hold out, promote,
or publish to another that the town name or town seal is an endorsement of the
event without specific Town Council action authorizing such endorsement.
(Prior Code, § 22-134) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.06 AUTHORIZED SPECIAL VENDORS.
   (A)   The issuance of a special event permit does not confer upon the permit
holder or event organizer the right to control and regulate the sale of goods,
food, and beverages within the special event venue; such sales must comply with
the terms and conditions of the special event permit and town and county rules
and regulations.
   (B)   Vendors authorized to sell goods, food, or beverages in the special
event venue shall display their authorization in the manner required by
applicable law. Only vendors displaying the required authorization shall be
allowed to sell goods, food, or beverages in the special event venue.
   (C)   The issuance of a special event permit does not relieve any person
from the obligation to obtain any other permit or license required pursuant to
this code or other laws including, but not limited to, health codes.
   (D)   The issuance of any other permit or license issued pursuant to this
code does not relieve any person from the obligation to obtain a special event
permit pursuant to this chapter. Specifically, any existing peddler and
itinerant merchant licenses under the applicable ordinance of this code are not
transferable to the use in a special event.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, resell, or offer to sell or
resell, any goods, food, or beverages within the special event venue except in
the manner as set forth in the application approved by the town staff.
(Prior Code, § 22-149) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.07 ADVERTISEMENT AND TICKET SALE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful to conduct or promote attendance at special event without
permit.
      (1)   It is unlawful to conduct a special event without a special event
permit as required pursuant to this section.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to conduct, promote, or manage any
special event for which a special event permit has not been issued or has been
revoked.
(Prior Code, § 22-151)
   (B)   Unlawful selling of tickets to special event within special event
venue. It is unlawful for any person to sell for profit or offer to sell for
profit any ticket of admission to a special event within a special event venue
except:
      (1)   From any ticket office, booth, or other similar place established
and maintained for the purpose of selling tickets; and
      (2)   With the express authorization of the town staff member assigned to
the event pursuant to a special event permit.
(Prior Code, § 22-152)
   (C)   Unlawful to display signs in special event venue except as permitted.
It is unlawful for any person to place, post, paint, erect, display, secure, or
maintain any sign or banner pertaining to the special event unless pre-approved
by the town staff member assigned to the event, based upon the application and
permitting process. The number of signs, sign face size, height, location, and
duration of display shall be addressed in the application. No sign shall
obstruct a sight triangle or be placed within ten feet of the boundary line of
the property serving as the venue. In no case shall the event organizer or his
or her designee place more than one three-foot by two-foot directional sign on
private property along the intersections of state roads and interstate
highways. In no case shall the event organizer or his or her designee advertise
the special event by placing advertising signs along the street rights-of-way.
All sign requirements in this chapter supersede the Town Unified Development
Ordinance (UDO) sign requirements.
(Prior Code, § 22-153)
(Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 INTERFERENCE WITH SPECIAL EVENTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any authorized assembly, person, vehicle, or animal participating in an event
for which a special event permit has been issued.
(Prior Code, § 22-154) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009) Penalty, see §
95.99
APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS
§ 95.20 SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED; FACILITY USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Except as provided herein, no person shall conduct, promote, manage,
aid, or solicit attendance at a special event on public property or on private
property or on a combination of private and public property any event of such
magnitude as to impact public safety, traffic, or the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents or the invitees unless that person shall have obtained
a special event permit from the Town Manager or his or her designee based upon
a complete application detailing the particulars of the event.
   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee is authorized to determine
when a proposed facility use rises to the level of a special event permit based
upon an evaluation of public impact or consumption of public resources,
location, anticipated attendance, and purpose.
   (C)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall consider all special
event permits for events occurring within the town limits pursuant to the
procedures established in this subchapter. He or she shall determine the
special event venue and set reasonable boundaries, balancing the special event
requirements and public health, safety, and welfare.
   (D)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall coordinate the issuance
of a special event permit with other public agencies through whose jurisdiction
or property the event or portion thereof occurs and to issue a special event
permit upon the concurrence of other public agencies involved. The Town Manager
is authorized to establish administrative and operational policies to issue
both the special event permit and the facility use permit. Special event
permits involving the occupation of a public street (except for temporary use
of a public street for a parade or facility use permit, in accordance with §
95.24) shall be approved by the Town Manager.
   (E)   All other licenses, permits, and fees shall be as required by this
code.
(Prior Code, § 22-130) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.21 EXEMPTION FROM SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   The following activities are exempt from the special event permit
requirement:
   (A)   Funeral services and processions;
   (B)   Activities solely conducted by the town;
   (C)   Lawful picketing on sidewalks;
   (D)   Events of 200 or fewer people involving the closing of public streets
or sidewalks by the Town Council or those events requiring a facilities use
permit such as picnic shelters; and
   (E)   Events by public schools and churches or other places of worship.
(Prior Code, § 22-131) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.22 PRIORITY OF ISSUANCE.
   Except for events sponsored by the town, which have first priority, and
wherever possible, priority shall be given for the issuance of a special event
permit to local tax-exempt nonprofit organizations operating in and providing
services to the citizens of the town or the county. Special events that do not
abut residential areas shall be encouraged, and those that abut residential
areas shall be subject to restrictions that protect the quiet and repose of
said districts.
(Prior Code, § 22-133) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.23 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Time for filing application; time limit for notifying town staff.
      (1)   Except for special events at the town civic and recreation centers,
an application for a special event permit shall be filed with the Town Manager
or his or her designee not less than 60 calendar days, or 30 days for a
residential street closing, nor more than two years before the time when it is
proposed to conduct the special event. The application shall be reviewed by
such town departments as designated by the Town Manager. Departmental comments
shall be incorporated in the conditions of the special use permit.
      (2)   Applications for reservation of town facilities through facility
use permits such as picnic shelters shall be submitted in accordance within the
time limits and procedures established for such facilities.
(Prior Code, § 22-135)
   (B)   When application for special event permit is deemed complete. An
application for a special event permit is deemed complete when the applicant
has provided all of the information required in division (C) below (including a
site plan) and any additional information required by the town staff and the
application has been approved by any town departments designated by the Town
Manager or his or her designee. The town staff shall return any incomplete
application to the applicant. Presentation of a completed application does not
confer a right to such a special permit.
(Prior Code, § 22-136)
   (C)   Content of special event permit application. The application for a
special event permit shall include the following, when applicable to the nature
of the event:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the
fax number and e-mail address (if applicable);
      (2)   A certification that the applicant will be financially responsible
for any town fees or costs that may be imposed for the event;
      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, and fax and e-mail (if
applicable) of the event organizer, if any, and the cost that may be imposed
for the event;
      (4)   If the special event is designed to be held by, on behalf of, or
for any organization other than the applicant, the applicant for the special
event permit shall file a written communication from such organization:
         (a)   Authorizing the applicant to apply for the special event permit
on its behalf; and
         (b)   Certifying that the applicant will be financially responsible
for any costs or fees that may be imposed for the event.
      (5)   A copy of the tax exemption letter issued for any applicant
claiming to be a tax-exempt nonprofit organization;
      (6)   A statement of the purpose of the special event;
      (7)   A statement of fees to be charged for the special event;
      (8)   The proposed signage, boundaries, location, map, dates, times,
routes, alternative routes, staging areas, reviewing, parking, or disbanding
stands or areas;
      (9)   The approximate number of persons and kinds and number of animals,
structures, or vehicles that will participate in the special event and the
parking plan for the vehicle;
      (10)   Plan for trash removal;
      (11)   The number of bands or other musical units and the nature of any
equipment to be used to produce sounds or noise;
      (12)   The number and location of portable sanitation facilities;
      (13)   Other equipment or services necessary to conduct the event with
due regard for participant and public health and safety;
      (14)   The number of persons proposed or required to monitor or
facilitate the special event and provide spectator or participant control and
direction for events using town streets, sidewalks, or facilities;
      (15)   Provisions for first aid or emergency medical services, or both,
based on event risk factors;
      (16)   Insurance and surety bond information;
      (17)   Any special or unusual requirements that may be imposed or created
by virtue of the proposed event activity;
      (18)   Relevant information on the location, number, and names of vendors
and the types of goods or services being intended to be marketed within the
boundaries of the special event; and
      (19)   Any other information required by the town staff or Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 22-138)
   (D)   Action on special event permit application.
      (1)   Town staff shall recommend final action upon a completed
application for a special event permit as soon as practicable but no later than
15 working days from the receipt of a complete application.
      (2)   The town staff is not required to recommend final action on an
incomplete or untimely special event permit application.
      (3)   The town staff is not required to process more than one application
for a special event permit per applicant during any two-week period.
      (4)   The Special Events Coordinator is not required to recommend final
action upon two or more special event permit applications submitted by the same
applicant unless two or more weeks shall have elapsed between the respective
dates of submission of each.
      (5)   Final action on a completed special event permit application shall
consist of one of the following:
         (a)   Issuance of a special event permit in accordance with the terms
of the application;
         (b)   Issuance of a special event permit in accordance with the terms
of the application, as modified by mutual agreement between the town staff and
the applicant; or
         (c)   Denial of the special event permit application by the town staff
with the reasons for denial.
(Prior Code, § 22-144)
(Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.24 CONDITIONS AFFECTING ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Town Manager may recommend that, in certain circumstances, the
Town Council may issue a special event permit on behalf of the town.
   (B)   In all other cases, the Town Manager or his or her designee may
approve the issuance of a special event permit when all of the following
conditions are met.
      (1)   The event will not substantially interrupt public transportation or
other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of its route including,
specifically, the displacement of vehicular parking into adjacent or
neighboring commercial areas not part of the venue or into adjacent or
neighboring residential areas.
      (2)   The event will not cause a conflict with construction or
development in the public right-of-way or at a public facility.
      (3)   The event will not block traffic lanes or close streets during peak
commute hours on weekdays or weekends, as determined by the Chief of Police.
      (4)   The event will not require the diversion of a great number of
police, fire, and rescue employees from their normal duties, thereby preventing
reasonable police protection to the remainder of the town.
      (5)   The concentration of persons, animals, or vehicles will not unduly
interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance, and other emergency
vehicles on the streets.
      (6)   The event will move from its assembly location to its disbanding
location expeditiously and without stopping en route.
      (7)   The event will not substantially interfere with any other special
event or demonstration for which a permit has already been granted or with the
provision of town services in support of other scheduled events or unscheduled
governmental functions.
      (8)   The event will not have unmitigable adverse impact upon residential
or business access and traffic circulation in the area.
      (9)   If the event is a marathon, it will not occur within 30 calendar
days of another marathon.
   (C)   To make the determination under this section, the Town Manager or
designee shall consider pedestrian and traffic circulation and parking, traffic
volume, population density, time of year, and neighboring or adjacent zoning
uses.
(Prior Code, § 22-139) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.25 DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Consideration of approval and reasons for denial of a special event
permit.
      (1)   The town staff may deny a special event permit to an applicant who
has not:
         (a)   Provided a sufficient traffic plan or for sufficient traffic
controls by persons appropriately trained, certified, or appointed pursuant to
state law which enables the control of traffic;
         (b)   Provided for an adequate parking plan that does not displace
vehicles into neighboring or adjacent nonparticipating commercial or
residential areas;
         (c)   Provided sufficient monitors and a security plan for crowd
control and safety;
         (d) Provided sufficient safety, health, or sanitation equipment,
services, or facilities that are reasonably necessary to ensure that the event
will be conducted with due regard for public safety and sanitation;
         (e)   Provided sufficient off-site parking or shuttle service, or
both, when required to minimize any substantial adverse impacts on general
parking and traffic circulation in the vicinity of the event;
         (f)   Provided sufficient signage information upon which approval can
be granted;
         (g)   Met all of the requirements for submitting an application for a
special event permit; or
         (h)   Provided the notice required under §
95.23(A).
      (2)   The town staff may also deny a special event permit when:
         (a)   Due to the inadequate internal security or deficient security
plan of the event organizer given the projected attendance or the time, place,
or manner of conducting the event, the event will create the possibility of
violent disorderly conduct likely to endanger public safety or to result in
significant property damage or disturb adjacent activities, events, and
neighborhoods;
         (b)   The event may violate public health or safety laws;
         (c)   The event fails to conform to the requirements of any law;
         (d)   The applicant demonstrates an inability or unwillingness to
conduct an event pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter;
         (e)   The applicant has failed to conduct a previously authorized or
exempted special event in any jurisdiction in accordance with law or the terms
of a permit or both;
         (f)   The applicant has not obtained the approval of any other public
agency within whose jurisdiction the special event or portion thereof will
occur;
         (g)   The applicant has failed to provide an adequate first aid or
emergency medical services plan based on event risk factors; or
         (h)   The applicant has failed to comply with any term of this chapter
or with any condition of a special event permit previously issued to the
applicant.
(Prior Code, § 22-140)
   (B)   Denial of a special event permit and appeal to the review committee.
To the extent the denial of a special event permit is capable of appeal, any
appeal permitted must be made in writing to the Town Clerk within 30 days of
the adverse decision by the Town Manager. The Town Clerk shall place the appeal
on the agenda for the Town Council and such Council shall hear said appeal and
uphold, amend, or reverse the action of the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 22-141)
(Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.26 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The event organizer of a special event must possess or obtain
comprehensive general liability insurance from no less than an A-rated company
to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for damages on account of
bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. Insurance coverage
must be maintained for the duration of the event. Notice of cancellation shall
be provided immediately to the town. When applicable, the town may require
proof of worker’s compensation, auto liability, and any specialty insurance
coverage that may be necessary to protect the town during the event.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) below, comprehensive general
liability insurance coverage required by division (A) above shall be in a
combined single limit of at least $1,000,000.
   (C)   The insurance required by division (A) above shall encompass all
liability insurance requirements imposed for other permits required under other
sections of this code and is to be provided for the benefit of the public and
not as a duty, express or implied, to provide insurance protection for
spectators or participants. The event organizer’s current effective insurance
policy or copy, along with necessary endorsements, shall be filed with the
town’s Risk Manager at least 30 calendar days before the event unless the Risk
Manager, for good cause, modifies the filing requirements.
   (D)   No permit is valid until the applicant shall provide adequate
insurance as required by this section.
(Prior Code, § 22-145) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.27 WHEN DATE OF SPECIAL EVENT CONFIRMED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the town staff’s acceptance of a completed
application, no date shall be considered confirmed until a special event permit
is issued at the direction of the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   The town staff will require the applicant to demonstrate that he or
she has notified abutting property owners of the proposed time and place of the
special event.
(Prior Code, § 22-137) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.28 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   A special event permit shall always be accompanied by the site plan approved
by the town staff and shall contain the following information or conditions:
   (A)   The location of the special event venue which may be identified by a
map attached to the special event permit;
   (B)   The date, assembly area, time for assembly, and starting time of the
special event;
   (C)   The specific route plan to the special event;
   (D)   The number and types of persons, animals, and vehicles; the number of
bands, other musical units, and equipment capable of producing sound, if any;
and limitations thereon pertaining to noise abatement;
   (E)   The portion of the street and sidewalk that is to be occupied by the
event and the location of reviewing or audience stands, if any;
   (F)   The number and location of traffic controllers, monitors, other
support personnel and equipment, and barricades to be furnished by the special
event organizer;
   (G)   The time for disbanding;
   (H)   Conditions or restrictions on the use, sale, or free distribution of
alcoholic beverages and authorization for and conditions of the exclusive
control or regulation of vendors and related sales activity by the event
organizer during the special event;
   (I)   Provisions for any required emergency medical services;
   (J)   The size, manufacturer, and location of any temporary buildings or
structures to be erected specifically for the special event and removed
immediately following the special event;
   (K)   Such other information and conditions as are reasonably necessary for
the conduct of the special event and the enforcement of this chapter including
the requirement for the on-site presence of the event organizer or his or her
designated representative for all event coordination and management purposes;
and
   (L)   As a condition of the issuance of a special event permit, the
applicant shall be required to make adequate provisions, which may include
security deposits in an amount determined by the town staff, for cleaning up
the area or route of the event both during and upon completion of the event and
to return the area or route to the same condition of material preservation and
cleanliness as existed prior to the event.
(Prior Code, § 22-143) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.29 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Any special event permit may be revoked if the town determines:
      (1)   The event cannot be conducted without violating the standards or
conditions for special event permit issuance;
      (2)   The event is being conducted in violation of any condition of the
special event permit;
      (3)   The event poses a threat to health or safety;
      (4)   The event organizer or any person associated with the event has
failed to obtain any other permit required pursuant to this code;
      (5)   The special event permit was issued in error or contrary to law; or
      (6)   The facts or assertions in the application have been falsified or
misrepresented.
   (B)   Notices of revocation shall be in writing and specifically set forth
the reasons for the revocation.
   (C)   If there is an emergency requiring immediate revocation of a special
event permit, the Town Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, or their respective
designees may notify the permit holder verbally of the revocation, and the
permit holder shall immediately comply with any order of the Town Manager,
Police Chief, Fire Chief, or their respective designees.
(Prior Code, § 22-146) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.30 ISSUANCE DOES NOT OBLIGATE TOWN SERVICES.
   (A)   Issuance of a special event permit does not obligate or require the
town to provide town services, equipment, or personnel in support of an event.
   (B)   Town services, equipment, or personnel for commercial special events
may be provided, based upon cost recovery.
   (C)   Cost recovery for noncommercial events may be waived only if the Town
Council finds that a public purpose will be served. A public purpose is served
if the following factors are met:
      (1)   The event is organized and conducted by a tax-exempt nonprofit
organization which operates from or provides services within the town or the
county;
      (2)   The event provides an identified benefit to the general public;
      (3)   The event includes participation by the general public
(notwithstanding an admission or participation fee);
      (4)   Provision of town services will result in improved crowd or event
control and general public safety and does not diminish or detract from the
normal level of service for its citizens, based upon the evaluation, advice,
and approval of the manager; and
      (5)   The Town Council moves to be a co-sponsor of the event.
(Prior Code, § 22-132) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.31 COSTS AND FEES.
   (A)   Cost recovery for special events.
      (1)   For any special event requiring expenditure of public resources,
the town shall charge for the actual cost of:
         (a)   A reasonable fee for town personnel involved in permit
processing, event traffic control, fire safety, EMS support, crowd control, or
any other event support; and
         (b)   Other non-personnel expenses.
      (2)   Cost recovery for events jointly sponsored by the town shall be
mutually agreed upon and established through contract.
      (3)   The town shall require the payment of fees required pursuant to
division (A)(1) above or a reasonable estimate thereof at the time the
completed application is approved unless the town, for good cause, extends time
for payment.
      (4)   (a)   If the event organizer fails to comply with §
95.28(L), the event organizer will be billed for actual town costs for clean up
and repair of the area or route occasioned by the event.
         (b)   If the event organizer failed to comply with a previously issued
special event permit, the event organizer shall deposit adequate surety in the
form of cash or letter of credit drawn on a local bank.
(Prior Code, § 22-147)
   (B)   Payment of flat fee for commercial special events.
      (1)   In addition to cost recovery to be determined by the town, an event
organizer of a commercial special event using any portion of public property
must pay the town any standard fees for such use as determined by the Town
Council from time to time.
      (2)   An event organizer of a special event shall make payment for the
flat fee no later than 30 calendar days prior the event.
(Prior Code, § 22-148)
(Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.32 PERMIT DISPLAY.
   A copy of the special event permit or facility use permit shall be displayed
on location or in the special event venue in the method prescribed by the town
applicable to the particular event and shall be exhibited upon demand of any
town official.
(Prior Code, § 22-142) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.33 COST RECOVERY FOR UNLAWFUL SPECIAL EVENT.
   Whenever a commercial or noncommercial special event is conducted without a
special event permit when one is required or an event is conducted in violation
of the terms of an issued special event permit or an event exceeds the needs
identified in the application, the event organizer shall be responsible for,
and the town staff shall charge the event organizer for, all town costs
incurred for personnel and equipment for a public safety response caused or
necessitated by the adverse impacts of the event or the violation of the
special event permit upon public safety.
(Prior Code, § 22-155) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   The Town Manager is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter and may exercise any enforcement powers as set forth in law. Any
person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil
penalty in the amount of $250 for the first violation and an additional $50 for
each day the violation is not corrected. Penalties under this chapter are
considered restorative and are intended to provide the town with compensation
for costs associated with the town’s program to monitor, control, prosecute,
cure, and/or correct the violation. Violations of any other section of this
code, state or local fire codes, state or local building codes, or any other
rule or regulation may result in the imposition of additional restorative
penalties. Any citizen or organization subjected to such penalty shall have the
right to appeal in civil violations to the Town Council where it may uphold,
amend, or overturn the action of the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 22-129) (Ord. 15-09, passed 6-11-2009)
CHAPTER 96: BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARMS
Section
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   False alarms
   
96.03   Authority to waive reimbursement
   
96.04   Punishment
   
96.05   Prohibited acts
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any electronic or mechanical device which emits any signal
(electronic, visible, audible, silent, recorded, or otherwise) which is
designed, intended, or used to detect an unauthorized entry into a building,
structure, or premises, or to signal an attempted robbery or holdup, or to
alert others of an unlawful act.
   ALARM USER. Person, corporation, partnership, governmental or educational
entity owning or leasing an alarm system that is maintained for the protection
of such premises.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the Troutman Police Department or their
designee.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of
the subscriber, their employees, or agents.
      (1)   A FALSE ALARM shall not include an alarm that can reasonably be
determined to have been activated by adverse weather conditions, a failure in
the electrical power to the alarm, or other conditions beyond the control of
the alarm user.
      (2)   An alarm is false within the meaning of this chapter when, upon
inspection by the Troutman Police Department, evidence indicates that no
unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime was committed or attempted in
or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm
system.
(Ord. 05-25, passed 4-10-2025)
§ 96.02 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Second false alarms. If, within any 60-day period, the Troutman Police
Department responds to two false alarms at the same premises or location, the
Chief of Police may send a letter to the alarm user informing them of the false
alarms and encouraging the prevention of future false alarms. If a third or
subsequent false alarm occurs within a 60-day period, a chargeable false alarm
violation exists.
   (B)   Third and subsequent alarms.
      (1)   If, within any 60-day period, the Troutman Police Department is
dispatched and arrives upon the premises or location of a third or subsequent
false alarm without having the alarm cancelled before arrival, the alarm user
at this premises or location shall reimburse the town. The reimbursement for
any such incident shall be $50 for all such responses after the two initial
responses.
      (2)   The alarm user will continue to be in violation for each subsequent
false alarm activation until 60 sequential days have elapsed without a false
alarm activation. The alarm user is then entitled to begin a new 60-day period
for false alarms as spelled out in §
96.02(A).
   (C)   Maintenance. Each alarm user in the town, on the effective date of
this chapter, shall furnish to the Troutman Police Department or to an alarm
answering service, a current list of the person(s) name(s), address(s) and
telephone number(s) who may be able to deactivate the alarm system. After the
effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to activate an alarm
system without first notifying the Troutman Police Department or an alarm
answering service of the name(s) and telephone number(s) of person(s)
authorized and able to deactivate the alarm system. Failure to comply with this
division (C) will result in a $50 civil penalty for each alarm incident.
   (D)   Audible alarms to discontinue emitting alarms after set time. It shall
be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any audible alarm which does
not automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within 30 minutes after
activation. Failure to comply with this division (D) will result in a $50 civil
penalty.
   (E)   Continuing alarm. An alarm user or their representative shall reset an
alarm system when notified by the Troutman Police Department or an alarm
answering service that such alarm has been activated. When an alarm sounds
continuously for a period of 30 minutes from the time officers responded to the
alarm, due to the failure of the alarm user or their representative to reset
the alarm, every subsequent 30-minute period or portion thereof that such alarm
continues to sound shall be considered a separate false alarm. The alarm user
shall reimburse the town for police services for false alarms under this
division (E) at a flat rate of $25 for each false alarm resulting from the
continuous operation of an alarm, not to exceed $200 for any 24-hour period.
(Ord. 05-25, passed 4-10-2025)
§ 96.03 AUTHORITY TO WAIVE REIMBURSEMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall have the power to waive any fee charged to an
alarm user when such alarm user submits in writing to the Chief of Police
evidence that the false alarm was not the result of negligence and that it
occurred despite a prior test period of at least 30 days for reasonable
training and maintenance, or when such alarm user submits evidence to the Chief
of Police, which indicates that an alarm to which any officer responded was not
a false alarm.
(Ord. 05-25, passed 4-10-2025)
§ 96.04 PUNISHMENT.
   Punishment for a violation of this chapter is a civil violation and subject
to civil penalties as enumerated.
(Ord. 05-25, passed 4-10-2025)
§ 96.05 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to activate a burglary or robbery alarm
for the purpose of summoning police when no burglary, robbery, or crime
dangerous to life is being committed or attempted on the premises.
(Ord. 05-25, passed 4-10-2025)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of §
96.05 is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine up to $50 and/or 30 days in
jail.
(Ord. 05-25, passed 4-10-2025)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
111.   ALCOHOL
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Loud noises; speaking devices
   
110.03   Use of streets
   
110.04   Enforcement
Licenses
   
110.15   License required
   
110.16   Application; contents
   
110.17   Exemptions
   
110.18   Bonds; fees
   
110.19   Appeal from denial
   
110.20   Revocation and expiration
   
110.21   Exhibition of license
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who goes from house to house or place to place selling
or taking orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, books, magazines,
periodicals, educational or commercial plans, and/or any type of tangible or
intangible personal property requiring present or future monetary payment. This
shall include all persons whether acting for himself or herself or as an agent
for any other person.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person acting for himself, herself, or as agent for
another person who attempts to engage in any of the acts set out in the
definition of the term PEDDLER by doing so as a temporary business only and
operating such business out of any motor vehicle, trailer, rolling equipment,
tent, railroad box car, or any other structure, vehicle, or equipment if the
tenure of such business is intended to be temporary only.
(Prior Code, § 8-44) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978)
§ 110.02 LOUD NOISES; SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No licensee nor any person on his or her behalf shall shout, cry out, blow a
horn, ring a bell, or use any sound-amplifying device upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks, or other public places of the town or upon private premises
where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom that is
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or
other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods,
wares, or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
(Prior Code, § 8-50) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 USE OF STREETS.
   No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets nor shall any be permitted a stationary location thereon nor shall any
be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede
or inconvenience the public use of such streets. For the purpose of this
section, the judgment of a police officer shall determine if a location is
congested and the public is impeded or inconvenienced.
(Prior Code, § 8-51) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Duty of police to enforce. It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to
enforce the provisions of this chapter by issuing licenses, collecting fees,
investigating applicants, and requiring peddlers and transient merchants to
produce and display their licenses and to otherwise enforce and administer this
chapter. The police of the town shall also be empowered to have peddlers or
transient merchants produce their licenses and enforce this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-53)
   (B)   Records. The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Clerk all
convictions for violation of this chapter, and the Town Clerk shall maintain a
record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein.
(Prior Code, § 8-54)
(Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978; Ord. 6-97, passed 10-2-1997; Ord. 03-22, passed
3-10-2022)
LICENSES
§ 110.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any peddler or transient merchant to engage in any such
business within the town without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions herein.
(Prior Code, § 8-45) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.16 APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Applicants for a license under this subchapter shall file with the
Town Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town
Clerk which shall give the following information:
      (1)   Name and description of the applicant;
      (2)   Complete permanent and local address of the applicant and, in the
case of the transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales
will be made;
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
      (4)   If employed, the name and address of the employer together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold
or orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located
at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;
      (7)   A valid driver’s license, state-issued identification card, or
other evidence of identification which the Town Clerk shall reasonably require
for proof of identity;
      (8)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance and the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
      (9)   The last cities or towns, not to exceed three, where the applicant
carried on business immediately preceding date of application and the address
from which such business was conducted in those municipalities; and
      (10)   At the time of filing the application, a fee of up to $25 may be
required of the applicant by the Town Clerk to cover the cost of investigation
of the applicant prior to issuing or denying a license. This fee is only
intended to cover actual expenses incurred or to be incurred by the town
therein but shall not include anything for services rendered by a solicited
employee of the town.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall complete his or her investigation within a
reasonable time after the application has been filed. Upon the completion
thereof, he or she shall issue a license upon payment of the license fee, as
set out in §
110.18, or shall deny the issuance of such a license with an explanation to the
applicant of the reasons for such denial. Any unused investigation fee shall be
returned in full to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 8-46) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 66-250 et seq. and 160A-178
§ 110.17 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Business exemptions. This subchapter shall not apply to wholesale or
retail dealers with established businesses (which are not itinerate) who
deliver items purchased in the regular course of business nor to non-itinerate
businesses which establish regular routes for the delivery of newspapers, milk,
or other commodities in the normal course of business operations.
   (B)   Nonprofit exemptions. This subchapter shall not apply to religious,
charitable, or other organizations organized and operating as nonprofit groups.
Unless the Town Clerk has personal knowledge of the exempt qualifications of an
applicant, he or she shall require the applicant to provide reasonable proof of
its exempt status, as provided herein.
   (C)   Permit required. Before engaging in canvassing or solicitation of
funds or the sale of any goods or merchandise, any organization claiming to be
exempt from the license provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the Town
Clerk for a permit to engage in any of these activities and, in such
application, shall furnish to the Town Clerk the following information:
      (1)   Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought;
      (2)   Names and addresses of the officers of the organization;
      (3)   Period during which solicitation is to be carried on; and
      (4)   Whether or not any commission, fees, wages, or emoluments are to be
expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-47) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978)
§ 110.18 BONDS; FEES.
   (A)   Bond.
      (1)   Every nonexempt applicant who is not a resident of the county, owns
no real property in the state, or represents a firm that owns no real property
in the state shall furnish to the Town Clerk a cash bond or an acceptable
surety bond as a condition precedent to obtaining a license. However, no bond
shall be required for less than $100 nor more than $1,000.
         (a)   All bonds shall be payable to the town and/or any person
establishing a valid claim against the licensee in any court of law obtaining
jurisdiction of the parties; provided, such claim shall have arisen from or
been caused by any of the activities for which this license shall have issued.
All cash bonds shall expire 60 days after the license period ends and,
thereafter, shall be immediately refunded to the former licensee.
         (b)   All surety bonds shall expire 12 months after the license
expires. The purpose of these bonds is to protect the town, its residents, or
visitors from losses they might suffer from licensed activities and have no way
of obtaining legal jurisdiction of the guilty party or parties in order to
recover such loss.
      (2)   The bond required in this division (A) is not intended to
unreasonably impede with interstate commerce. This provision is intended for a
reasonable exercise of the town’s police powers to protect the general welfare
of its town and residents.
(Prior Code, § 8-48)
   (B)   License fees.
      (1)   No license shall be issued until a license fee has been paid. A
license fee of $25 shall be charged for any peddler, and a license fee of $50
shall be charged for any transient merchant.
      (2)   Any licensee may apply for a renewal or an extension of the license
period without submitting a new application upon payment of the license fee for
the extended period of time to the Town Clerk and provided that the licensee
has not violated any ordinances of the town or any state or federal law.
      (3)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the beginning of the
license period. No license shall be issued at any one time for longer than 12
months. The annual fees herein provided shall be assessed on a calendar-year
basis, and on or after July 1, the amount of such fee for an annual license
shall be one-half the amount stipulated in division (B)(1) above for the
remainder of the year.
(Prior Code, § 8-49)
(Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978; Ord. 6-97, passed 10-2-1997)
§ 110.19 APPEAL FROM DENIAL.
   (A)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Town Council a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. This written statement of
appeal must be filed with the Town Clerk on behalf of the Council within ten
days from the denial of each permit or license.
   (B)   The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall, within three days after notice of
appeal has been filed, set a time and place for a hearing thereon before the
Council, which hearing shall take place not later than 21 days thereafter.
   (C)   At such hearing, the Council shall receive evidence from the applicant
in support of the appeal and from the Town Clerk in support of his or her
denial of a license or permit. After hearing all of the evidence, the Council
shall make a final decision to authorize the license or permit or to deny the
same.
(Prior Code, § 8-55) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978)
§ 110.20 REVOCATION AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Revocation of license.
      (1)   Licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked temporarily by the Town Clerk, and this action shall be rescinded or
confirmed by the Council within ten days thereafter or at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, whichever shall occur the sooner. At least three days’
notification of such hearing shall be furnished to the licensee prior to such
hearing. Grounds for summary revocation by the Town Clerk shall be confined to
the following:
         (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements contained in
the application for license;
         (b)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements made in the
course of carrying on his or her business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler,
transient merchant, itinerate merchant, or itinerate vendor;
         (c)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; and/or
         (e)   Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor,
transient merchant, itinerate merchant, or itinerate vendor, as the case may
be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the public.
      (2)   At such hearing, the Council shall hear all pertinent evidence from
the Town Clerk and the licensee in connection with such revocation and shall
reinstate such license or permanently revoke the same.
(Prior Code, § 8-56)
   (B)   Reapplication. No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make
further application until at least six months have elapsed since the last
previous revocation.
(Prior Code, § 8-57)
   (C)   Expiration of license. All annual licenses issued under the provisions
of this subchapter shall expire at midnight, December 31, in the year when
issued. Licenses, other than annual licenses, shall expire at midnight on the
date specified in the license.
(Prior Code, § 8-58)
(Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978)
§ 110.21 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.
   Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at the
request of any citizen.
(Prior Code, § 8-52) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $100. Each day of any violation shall be a separate violation.
The town shall also have available civil remedies of an injunction.
(Prior Code, § 8-59) (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-11-1978; Ord. 6-97, passed 10-2-1997;
Ord. 03-22, passed 3-10-2022)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOL
Section
   
111.01   Sales on Sundays
§ 111.01 SALES ON SUNDAYS.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in G.S. § 160A-205.3, the sale of malt
beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages is allowed
within the corporate limits of the town beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays,
pursuant to the licensed premises permit issued under G.S. § 18B-1001.
(Ord. 17-17, passed 7-10-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 18B-1001 and 160A-205.3
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Discharge of firearms
   
130.02   Weapons and minors
   
130.03   Unlawful consumption of alcohol
   
130.04   Weapons prohibited on town property
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm at any time or
place within the town except when used in defense of person or property. This
section shall not apply to the following persons:
   (A)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. Armed Forces when in the
discharge of their official duties;
   (B)   Civil officers of the United States while in the discharge of their
official duties;
   (C)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the militia and the state guard
when in the discharge of their official duties;
   (D)   Law enforcement officers of the state or of any city, county, or town
charged with the execution of the laws of the state, city, county, or town when
acting in the discharge of their official duties; and
   (E)   Persons acting pursuant to lawful directions of law enforcement
officers.
(Prior Code, § 16-1) (Ord. 4-87, passed 7-14-1987) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-189
§ 130.02 WEAPONS AND MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or person standing in loco
parentis to knowingly permit his or her child under the age of 12 years to have
the possession, custody, or use, in any manner whatsoever, of any air rifle,
pellet gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or any other mechanism or device designed
or used to project a missile by compressed air or mechanical action, whether
such mechanism or device is loaded or unloaded, except when such child is under
the supervision of the parent, guardian, or person standing in loco parentis.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish such child
(except when he or she is under the supervision of his or her parent, guardian,
or a person standing in loco parentis) any weapon enumerated herein.
(Prior Code, § 16-3) (Ord. 6-84, passed 12-13-1984) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-174 and 160A-190
§ 130.03 UNLAWFUL CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL.
   It shall be unlawful to drink or consume any alcoholic malt beverages and
unfortified wine on any public road, street, highway, sidewalk, or parking area
within the town. It shall further be unlawful to drink or consume any beer,
wine, or liquor on a private parking lot or area or inside a public building or
a private commercial establishment within the town without the permission of
the owner thereof.
(Prior Code, § 16-2) (Ord. 6-94, passed 12-1-1994) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON TOWN PROPERTY.
   (A)   Unless a person is lawfully carrying a concealed handgun in accordance
with G.S. 14-415.11(c), and subject to division (B) of this section, a person
shall not possess a firearm in town-owned buildings, their appurtenant
premises, and parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, greenways,
designated biking or walking paths, areas that are customarily used as walkways
or bike paths although not specifically designated for uses, open areas or
fields where athletic events may occur, or any other property owned, leased or
operated by the town.
   (B)   A person lawfully permitted to carry a concealed handgun is prohibited
from carrying a concealed handgun, in accordance with G.S. 14-415.11(c): (i) in
or on town buildings; (ii) their appurtenant premises; or (iii) in or on town
recreational facilities, that are posted as set out in this section.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES shall include
the following:
         (a)   Any town-owned or operated athletic field, including any
appurtenant facilities such as restrooms, during an organized athletic event if
the field has been scheduled for use with the Parks and Recreation Department.
         (b)   Any town-owned or operated facility used for athletic events,
including, but not limited to, gymnasiums, athletic centers or courts.
      (2)   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES as that term in defined herein, does not
include any greenway, designated biking or walking path, an area that is
customarily used as a walkway or bike path although not specifically designated
for such use, open areas or fields where athletic events may occur unless that
area qualifies as an "athletic field" pursuant to division (B)(1) herein, any
other area that is not specifically described in this section.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, APPURTENANT PREMISES shall be defined
as connected in use to, or incidental to the use of, another location.
      (4)   Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the securing of a handgun by
a concealed handgun permittee while such permittee is on, or in, a recreational
facility; provided that, such handgun is secured in a locked vehicle within the
trunk, glove box, or other enclosed compartment or area with in or on the motor
vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding division (A) through (B) of this section, the
prohibitions provided for in such divisions shall not apply to the following
persons:
         (a)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces of the
United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting
under orders requiring them to carry arms;
         (b)   Officers of the United States while in the discharge of their
official duties;
         (c)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the National Guard when
called into actual service;
         (d)   Sworn law enforcement officers;
         (e)   Retired law enforcement officers who meet the requirements of
H.R. 218-Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004;
         (f)   Persons having received permission from the Chief of Police to
possess weapons for
ceremonial purposes or funerals; or
         (g)   Persons who are elected officials of the Town of Troutman that
possess a valid concealed carry permit, and have notified the Chief of Police
that they will be in possession of a weapon while on town property.
      (6)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted on any property set forth in
divisions (A) through (B) above, where weapons are prohibited, giving notice
that the possession of a weapon, including concealed handguns, is prohibited.
      (7)   Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
      (8)   Weapons possessed in violation of this section are hereby declared
to be contraband. The Chief of Police of their designee shall hold such weapons
for disposal pursuant to a court order.
(Ord. 30-25, passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-189 et seq. and 14-415.23
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of §
130.01 shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. § 14-4(a).
(Prior Code, § 16-1)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
130.02 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 16-3)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
130.03 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4(a).
(Prior Code, § 16-2)
(Ord. 4-87, passed 7-14-1987; Ord. 6-84, passed 12-13-1984; Ord. 6-94, passed
12-1-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 14-4, 14-4(a), 160A-174, and 160A-190
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
      
152.   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Compliance
   
150.02   Copies on file
   
150.03   Exemptions
Determination of Habitability
   
150.15   Findings, purpose, and authority
   
150.16   Scope
   
150.17   Definitions
   
150.18   Enforcement Officer
   
150.19   Inspections
   
150.20   Preliminary investigations; notices and hearing
   
150.21   Standards for determination of habitability
   
150.22   Procedure after hearing
   
150.23   Failure to comply
   
150.24   Service of complaints and orders
   
150.25   Appeals
   
150.26   Alternative remedies
   
150.27   Conflict; State Building Code to control
   
150.28   Violations
Unsafe Building Procedures
   
150.40   Authority
   
150.41   Responsibility of owner
   
150.42   Notice and hearing
   
150.43   Order to remedy or demolish
   
150.44   Appeals
   
150.45   Failure to comply
   
150.46   Assessment of costs; liens
   
150.47   Notice before action
   
150.48   Presumption of danger
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other
provisions of the State Building Code and the adopted Unified Development
Ordinance of the town (as amended by ordinance on November 14, 2024).
   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy,
or use shall have plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures installed, constructed,
altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in conformance with the minimum
standards, requirements, and other provisions of the State Plumbing Code. All
plumbing systems shall be connected to a sanitary sewer system or other
disposal system that has been approved by the County Health Department.
   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, air-conditioning,
ventilating, and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment, and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used, and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the State Mechanical Code.
   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations, and appurtenances shall be
erected, altered, repaired, used, and maintained in accordance with the minimum
standards, requirements, and other provisions of the State Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, § 6-19) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978; Ord. 18-23, passed 6-8-
2023; Ord. 32-24, passed 11- 14-2024)
Statutory reference:
   State Building Code, see https://codes.iccsafe.org/content/NCBC2()18”r!
   State Electrical Code, see https://www.nfpa.org/codes-and-standards/all-
codes-and-standards/list-of-codes-and-standards/detail?code=70
   State Mechanical Code, see https://codes.iccsqfe.org/content/NCBC2018/
chapter-28-mechanical-systems
   State Plumbing Code, see https://codes.iccsafe.org/content/NCBC2018/chapter-
29-plumbing-systems
§ 150.02 COPIES ON FILE.
   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted by the State Building Code
Council and official copies of all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in
the office of the Town Enforcement Officer. Such copies shall be the official
copies of the codes and amendments.
(Prior Code, § 6-20) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Except for the provisions contained in §
150.01(D), the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to farm use buildings
located on a bona fide farm. When questions arise as to whether or not the use
of certain lands constitute bona fide farming, the Inspections Supervisor shall
consult with the County Extension Service and the Agricultural Stabilization
and Conservation Service (ASCS).
   (B)   Residences on bona fide farms shall be constructed to be in the
category of farm use buildings unless otherwise requested by the owner or
contractor; in which case, all Town Building Code requirements shall be
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 6-21) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
DETERMINATION OF HABITABILITY
§ 150.15 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Pursuant to state statutes, it is hereby found and declared that there
exists in the town corporate limits abandoned dwellings which are unfit for
human habitation due to dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire,
accidents, and other calamities; lack of ventilation; light and sanitary
facilities; and due to other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe,
unsanitary, dangerous, and detrimental to the health, safety, and morals and
otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town.
   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents
of the town, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-440 et seq., it is the purpose of
this subchapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for substandard,
abandoned structures within the town, as expressly authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-
119 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 6-148) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-440 et seq., 160A-441 et seq., 160A-444
§ 150.16 SCOPE.
   (A)   This subchapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are
public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration,
repair, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy of dwellings, apartment houses,
rooming houses, or buildings, structures, or premises which are abandoned
within the town.
   (B)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the town and found to
be abandoned. Portable, mobile, or de-mountable buildings or structures
(including trailers, manufactured homes, and mobile homes when used or intended
for use for housing within the town) shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   This subchapter establishes minimum requirements for the abandoned
buildings, once used or not, for human habitation and does not replace or
modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration, or use of buildings, equipment, or facilities except as provided
herein.
   (C)   The provisions herein shall apply to abandoned structures which are
found, by the Town Council, to be a health or safety hazard as a result of the
attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous
conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as
living quarters in the absence of sanitary conditions.
(Prior Code, § 6-149) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED STRUCTURE. Any structure, whether designed and intended for
residential or other use, which has been vacant or not in active use,
regardless of purpose or reason, for the past two-year period and which is
determined by the Enforcement Officer to be unfit for human habitation or
occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this subchapter.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building which is located partly underground having
access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining
ground.
   CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground having
inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below
the level of the adjoining ground.
   DETERIORATED DWELLING. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can
be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Code Enforcement Officer.
   DILAPIDATED DWELLING. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and
cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this subchapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its
value, as determined by finding of the Code Enforcement Officer.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home or part
thereof used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used and
includes any accessory buildings and structures and appurtenances belonging
thereto or usually enjoyed therewith; except, it does not include any
manufactured home or mobile home which is used solely for a seasonal vacation
purpose.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The person appointed by the Town Manager to carry out
the administration and enforcement of this subchapter.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, and
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods
approved by the Enforcement Officer.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers, or communicating
corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents, or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety, or welfare of the occupants or to the public.
   MANUFACTURED HOME, MOBILE HOME. A structure as defined in G.S. § 143-145(7).
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
   OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part
thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, and corporations who
have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the town, county, or state
relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning
dwellings in the town.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one or
more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or
more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father,
or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials (except garbage and
ashes), and the term shall include, but not be limited to: paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE, ROOMING UNIT, or PREMISES. Whenever
used in this subchapter, this term shall be construed as though it were
followed by the term “or any part thereof.”
(Prior Code, § 6-150) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 143-145(7)
§ 150.18 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   Office created. For the purposes of administering and enforcing the
provisions herein, the office of the Enforcement Officer is hereby created.
   (B)   Appointment; powers and duties. The Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed by the Town Manager and shall have such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
subchapter including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing and in
addition to others herein granted, the following powers:
      (1)   Investigations. To investigate the dwelling and building conditions
in the town in order to determine which dwellings therein are abandoned and
unfit for human habitation and dangerous, being guided in such examination of
dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in this subchapter;
      (2)   Oaths, witnesses, and the like. To administer oaths and
affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence;
      (3)   Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises and dwellings for
the purpose of making examinations and investigations; provided, such entries
shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to
the persons in possession;
      (4)   Warrants, citations, and the like. To swear criminal warrants,
issue civil citations, and take such other actions as may be necessary to carry
out the enforcement procedures of this chapter; and
      (5)   Delegation of functions and the like. To delegate any of his or her
functions and powers under this subchapter to such officers and agents as he or
she may designate.
(Prior Code, § 6-151) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.19 INSPECTIONS.
   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this subchapter, the
Enforcement Officer, upon proper identification, is hereby authorized to enter,
examine, and survey, at all reasonable times, all abandoned structures. The
owners or occupants of every abandoned structure or the person in charge
thereof shall give the Enforcement Officer free access to such structure and
its premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection,
examination, and survey.
(Prior Code, § 6-152) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.20 PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS; NOTICES AND HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Enforcement Officer by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the town charging that any structure
is abandoned or whenever it appears to the Enforcement Officer (on his or her
own motion) that any structure is abandoned, the Enforcement Officer shall, if
his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue
and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in such structure
a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice
stating:
      (1)   A hearing will be held before the Enforcement Officer (or his or
her designated agent) at a place within the town therein fixed not less than
ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint;
      (2)   The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and
      (3)   The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in hearings before the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Upon the issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing pursuant to
this section, the Enforcement Officer may cause the filing of a notice of lis
pendens with a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing attached thereto in
the office of the County Clerk of Superior Court, to be indexed and cross-
indexed in accordance with the indexing procedures of the state statutes.The
Enforcement Officer shall cause a copy of the notice of lis pendens to be
served upon the owners and parties in interest in the dwelling at the time of
filing in accordance with G.S. § 160A-445, as applicable. Upon compliance with
the requirements of any order issued based upon such complaint and hearing, the
Enforcement Officer shall direct the Clerk of Superior Court to cancel the
notice of lis pendens.
(Prior Code, § 6-153) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-445
§ 150.21 STANDARDS FOR DETERMINATION OF HABITABILITY.
   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall determine that an abandoned structure is
unfit for human habitation if he or she finds that any one of the following
conditions exist in such dwelling:
      (1)   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean, or
buckle to such an extent as to render the dwelling unsafe;
      (2)   Supporting members which show 33% or more damage or deterioration
or non-supporting, enclosing, or outside walls or coverings which show 50% or
more of damage or deterioration;
      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads which are
overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose used;
      (4)   Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as to render the
dwelling unsafe;
      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions, or disrepair which is
dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or other people in
the town or jurisdiction;
      (6)   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic;
      (7)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or
other calamities;
      (8)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating, or sanitary
facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety, or general welfare
of the occupants or other residents of the town;
      (9)   Lack of proper electrical, heating, or plumbing facilities required
by this subchapter which constitutes a definite health or safety hazard; and/or
      (10)   Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the public
sewer or other approved sewage disposal system, the lack of either one of which
renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purposes of this
standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the water
supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the water bill or otherwise or
if the system, for any reason, is not receiving a flow of potable water to the
tap.
   (B)   In addition to the conditions stated in divisions (A)(1) through (A)
(10) above, any one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation, the
Enforcement Officer shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he or she finds that a dwelling fails to fully comply with seven
or more of the following enumerated standards of dwelling fitness.
      (1)   Structural standards.
         (a)   Structural integrity. Walls, partitions, supporting members,
sills, joists, rafters, or other structural members shall not list, lean, or
buckle; shall not be rotted, deteriorated, or damaged; and shall not have holes
or cracks which might admit rodents.
         (b)   Supports, floors, and roofs. Supports, floors, or roofs shall
have adequate supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose used.
         (c)   Foundations. Foundations, foundation walls, piers, or other
foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
         (d)   Steps. Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or
collapse.
         (e)   Egress. Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
shall be provided.
         (f)   Interior materials. Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms,
closets, and hallways shall be furnished of suitable materials which will, by
use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness and
shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces.
         (g)   Weatherization. The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement
walls, floors, and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be weather-tight and watertight.
         (h)   Chimneys. There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated, or in danger of falling or in such condition or
location as to constitute a fire hazard.
         (i)   Floors. There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood
floors on the ground.
      (2)   Plumbing standards.
         (a)   Facilities. Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a
kitchen, sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and an adequate supply of
both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved
pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. For the purposes
of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the
water supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the water bill or
otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable
water to the tap.
         (b)   Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of
the State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and
in good working order.
         (c)   Accessible. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located
within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room affording privacy to the
user.
      (3)   Heating standards. Every dwelling shall have facilities for
providing heat in accordance with either divisions (B)(3)(a) or (B)(3)(b)
below. Such facilities shall be maintained in a state of good repair and good
working order.
         (a)   Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling to
which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F, measured at a point
three feet above the floor during average winter conditions.
         (b)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating
system is not provided, each dwelling shall be provided with sufficient
electrical receptacles, fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents whereby
heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and water closet compartments with a minimum temperature of 70°F,
measured three feet above the floor during average winter conditions.
      (4)   Electrical standards.
         (a)   Wiring. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and
convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two floor-
or wall-type electrical convenience receptacles, connected in such manner as
determined by the State Electrical Code. There shall be installed in every
bathroom, water closet room, laundry room, and furnace room at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, each such
habitable room shall contain at least three floor- or wall-type electric
convenience receptacles.
         (b)   Hall lights. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural light is not sufficient.
         (c)   Maintenance. All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring
shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and
installed in accordance with the State Electrical Code.
      (5)   Ventilation standards.
         (a)   Generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area
of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of
any such room and such light obstructions are located less than five feet from
the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever
the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such a room,
the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total
floor area of such room.
         (b)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight which can easily be opened or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight-type window size as required or shall have other approved
equivalent ventilation.
         (c)   Bathroom and water closet room. Every bathroom equipped with
more than one water closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements for habitable rooms.
      (6)   Space, use, and locations standards.
         (a)   Room sizes. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the
minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the Town Minimum
Housing Code, §§
150.15. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling may count for not more
than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of
any room where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not
be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total area of the
room to determine maximum permissible occupancy. Every dwelling unit shall
contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first
occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable area for each of the
next three occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor
area for each additional occupant. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming
unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square
feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
         (b)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six
inches.
         (c)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes unless:
            1.   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
            2.   The total window area, total openable window area, and ceiling
height are equal to those required for a habitable room; and
            3.   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade adjoining such window area except where the windows
face a stairwell, window well, or accessory.
      (7)   Safe and sanitary maintenance standards.
         (a)   Exterior foundation, walls, and roofs. Every foundation wall,
exterior wall, and exterior roof shall be substantially weather-tight and
rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, shall be
capable of affording privacy, and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every
exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to
prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.
         (b)   Interior floors, walls, and ceilings. Every floor, interior
wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
         (c)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door, and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, watertight, and
rodent-proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
         (d)   Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside
stair, porch, and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be
kept in sound condition and good repair.
         (e)   Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every bathroom and kitchen floor
surface and water closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such
floor to be easily kept in sound condition and good repair.
         (f)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment, or utility which is required under this subchapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall
be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
         (g)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain
thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
         (h)   Smoke detector systems. Every dwelling unit shall be provided
with an approved listed smoke detector installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector shall
provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance with and
meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke Detectors.
      (8)   Insect, rodent, and infestation control standards.
         (a)   Screens. For protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other
insects, every dwelling shall have:
            1.   Supplied and installed screens on every door leading directly
from the dwelling to outdoor space; except, sliding doors, doors with self-
closing devices, doors on mobile homes with self-closing devices, and doors
that open into rooms of living spaces that are artificially ventilated or air
conditioned are exempt from this provision; and
            2.   Supplied and installed screens on every window or other device
with an opening to outdoor space; except, this requirement shall not apply for
any rooms of a dwelling that are ventilated year-round with an operable and
installed heating and air-conditioning system.
         (b)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended
to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might
provide an entry for rodents shall be supplied with screens installed or such
other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
         (c)   Infestation. Every dwelling shall be maintained in a manner to
be free of any infestation of insects, rodents, or other pests. Every occupant
of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the
premises; every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than
one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his or
her dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation exists in two
or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts
of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
         (d)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied
with approved containers and covers for the storage of rubbish as required by
town ordinances, and the owner, operator, or agent in control of such dwelling
or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
         (e)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied
with an approved garbage disposal facility which may be an adequate mechanical
garbage disposal unit (such as a mechanical sink grinder in each dwelling unit)
or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the Enforcement Officer, in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit or an approved
outside garbage container, as required by town ordinances.
      (9)   Rooming house standards. All of the provisions and all of the
minimum standards and requirements of this subchapter shall be applicable to
rooming houses and to every person who operates a rooming house or who occupies
or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house except
as provided below.
         (a)   Water closet, hand lavatory, and bath facilities. At least one
water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be
supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever such facilities
are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence building
served, shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway, and
shall not be more than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located
in a cellar.
         (b)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant under 12 years of age.
         (c)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings
and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming house and
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the rooming house
is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
         (d)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory
basin, and bathtub or shower required by division (B)(9)(a) above shall be
located within the rooming house and within rooms which afford privacy and are
separate from the habitable rooms and which are accessible from a common hall
and without going outside the rooming house or through any other room therein.
   (C)   Full compliance with a standard means that if any part of the stated
standard is not complied with by a particular dwelling, then that dwelling has
failed to fully comply with the enumerated standard. For example, in regard to
division (B)(2)(a), if all standards are met in a dwelling except that a supply
of hot water is not provided, then the dwelling fails to fully comply with
division (B)(2)(a).
(Prior Code, § 6-154) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   State Electrical Code, see https://www.nfpa.org/codes-and-standards/all-
codes-and-standards/list-of-codes-and-standards/detail?code=70
   State Mechanical Code, see https://codes.iccsqfe.org/content/NCBC2018/
chapter-28-mechanical-systems
   State Plumbing Code, see https://codes._iccsafe.org/content/NCBC2018/
chapter-29-plumbing-systems
§ 150.22 PROCEDURE AFTER HEARING.
   (A)   If, after the notice and hearing, the Enforcement Officer determines
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation in
accordance with the standards set forth in §
150.21, he or she shall state, in writing, his or her findings of fact in
support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order:
      (1)   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the dwelling requiring the
owner within the time specified, to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in
order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling
as a human habitation, based upon the Enforcement Officer’s standards for
closing dwellings; or
      (2)   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the dwelling requiring the
owner within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve the
dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to remove or
demolish such dwelling.
   (B)   Whenever a determination is made pursuant to this subchapter that a
dwelling must be vacated and closed or removed or demolished, under the
provisions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by first-class
mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for
affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum
period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal
or demolition by action of the Enforcement Officer to allow the opportunity for
any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or
purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The
Enforcement Officer shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the
certifications shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an
organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the
issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order
requiring the Enforcement Officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or
demolition.
(Prior Code, § 6-155) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.23 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or
improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the Enforcement Officer may:
         (a)   Cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be
vacated and closed; and/or
         (b)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a
placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human habitation;
the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and
unlawful.”
      (2)   Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a violation of
this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or
improve or remove or demolish the dwelling, the Enforcement Officer may:
         (a)   Cause such dwelling to be vacated and removed or demolished;
and/or
         (b)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such dwelling, a
placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human habitation;
the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and
unlawful.”
      (2)   Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a violation of
this subchapter.
   (C)   The duties of the Enforcement Officer set forth in divisions (A) and
(B) above shall not be exercised until the Town Council shall have, by
ordinance, ordered the Enforcement Officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose
of this subchapter with respect to the particular property or properties which
the Enforcement Officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and
which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such
ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling unit until the
owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity
with the Housing Code. For the purposes of this division (C), a period of 90
days following the date of the Enforcement Officer’s order shall constitute a
reasonable opportunity. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located
and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
   (D)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or improvements;
vacating and closing; or removal or demolition by the Enforcement Officer shall
be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which
lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessment provided in G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq. If the dwelling is
removed or demolished by the Enforcement Officer, he or she shall sell the
materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixture, or appurtenances
found in or attached to the dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of the sale
against the cost of the removal or demolition; any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the Enforcement Officer, shall be secured in
a manner directed by the Court, and shall be disbursed by the Court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order of the decree of the Court.
   (E)   (1)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
dwelling, the Enforcement Officer may file a civil action in the name of the
town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the
nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint
naming, as parties-defendant, any persons occupying such dwelling. The Clerk of
Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a
Magistrate at a certain time, date, and place not to exceed ten days from the
issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29.
      (2)   The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its
return it appears to have been duly served and if at the hearing the
Enforcement Officer produces the certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the
Town Council pursuant to division (C) above authorizing the Enforcement Officer
to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the Magistrate shall enter judgment
ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The
judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same
manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. § 42-30. An
appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the Magistrate may be taken as
provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as
provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is
a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this division (E) unless such occupant was served with
notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding
that the Town Council has ordered the Enforcement Officer to proceed to
exercise his or her duties under divisions (A) through (C) above to vacate and
close or remove and demolish the dwelling.
   (F)   If the Town Council shall have adopted an ordinance or the Enforcement
Officer shall have issued an order ordering a dwelling to be repaired or
vacated and closed, as provided in §
150.22 and this section, and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling
and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to
the ordinance or order, then (if the Town Council shall find that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in
order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the
dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health,
safety, morals, and welfare of the town in that the dwelling would continue to
deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to
children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities,
would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in
the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might
otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent
and affordable housing in the town), in such circumstances, the Town Council
may, after the expiration of such one-year period, enact an ordinance and serve
such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following.
      (1)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then-
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
      (2)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the
then-current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. The ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the
property is located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in
the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with the ordinance, the
Enforcement Officer shall effect the purpose of the ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-156) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 7A-227, 7A-228, 42-29, 42-30, 160-216 et
seq.
§ 150.24 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Enforcement Officer pursuant to an
ordinance adopted under this subchapter, except those being prosecuted under
this code, shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or
certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of
the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be
deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused
but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after
the mailing; if regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.
   (B)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Enforcement Officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence and the Enforcement Officer makes an affidavit to that
effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the unknown owners or
other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town by at least once no later than the time at which
personal service would be required under the provisions of this subchapter.
When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
(Prior Code, § 6-157) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.25 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment is hereby appointed as the Housing Appeals
Board to which appeals from any decision or order of the Enforcement Officer
may be taken. Except where this subchapter provides for different rules or
procedures, the Board of Adjustment, acting as the Housing Appeals Board, shall
follow its rules of procedure, which may be amended to provide specifically for
this function.
   (B)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Enforcement Officer may be
taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board, or commission
of the town. Any appeal from the Enforcement Officer shall be taken within ten
days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order by filing with
the Enforcement Officer and with the Board a notice of appeal which shall
specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any
notice of appeal, the Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from
was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Enforcement Officer refusing
to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any such act, his or her decision
shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a
decision of the Enforcement Officer requiring the person aggrieved to do any
act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the
hearing by the Board unless the Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board
after the notice of appeal is filed with him or her that, because of facts
stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a
suspension of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In that case, the requirement shall not be suspended except by a
restraining order which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than
one day’s written notice to the Enforcement Officer, by the Board, or by a
court of record upon petition made pursuant to division (E) below.
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its decision
within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
decision or order appealed from and may make any decision and order that, in
its opinion, ought to be made in the matter, and to that end, it shall have all
the powers of the Enforcement Officer, but the concurring vote of four-fifths
of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any
decision or order of the Enforcement Officer.
      (2)   The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, when
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out
the strict letter of this subchapter, to adopt the application of this
subchapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this
subchapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings
in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the
Board but not otherwise.
   (E)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Enforcement Officer or
a decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court for an
injunction restraining the Enforcement Officer from carrying out the order or
decision, and the Court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction
restraining the Enforcement Officer pending a final disposition of the case.
The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or
rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the Court on a petition
within 20 days and shall be given preference over other matters on the Court’s
calendar. The Court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter
such final order or decree as law and justice may require; it shall not be
necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction
under this division (E).
(Prior Code, § 6-158) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.26 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be
construed to impair or limit, in any way, the power of the town to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein
prevent the enforcement of any other remedy provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any
violation of the terms of this subchapter shall subject the violator to the
penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, pursuant to state
statutes and ordinances of the town.
   (B)   No dwelling shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or changed in
occupancy without a certificate of occupancy in any case where the Enforcement
Officer (after notice and hearing as required herein) finds that a dwelling or
dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall withhold issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling unit until such
time that he or she determines that it is fit for human habitation; in
addition, in any case where the Enforcement Officer, after preliminary
investigation (as provided for herein), concludes that (based upon that
investigation) a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation and
believes that the occupancy of such dwelling or dwelling unit could cause
imminent peril to life or property from fire or other hazards, he or she shall
withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or dwelling
unit until such time that he or she determines that it is fit for human
habitation.
   (C)   If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted,
maintained, or used in violation of this subchapter or of any valid order or
decision of the Enforcement Officer or Board made pursuant to any ordinance or
code adopted under authority of the ordinance from which this subchapter is
derived, the Enforcement Officer may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or occupancy; to restrain, correct, or abate the violation; to
prevent the occupancy of the dwellings; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
or use in or about the premises of the dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 6-159) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
§ 150.27 CONFLICT; STATE BUILDING CODE TO CONTROL.
   In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this subchapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
residents of the town’s jurisdiction shall prevail. The State Building Code,
current edition, shall serve as the standard for all alterations, repairs,
additions, removals, demolitions, and other acts of building made or required
pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-160) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   State Building Code, see https://codes.iccsafe.org/content/NCBC2018
§ 150.28 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the conditions, acts, or failures to act that
constitute violations specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the owner of
any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or
improve the same, or to vacate and close or vacate and remove or demolish the
same, upon order of the Enforcement Officer duly made and served as herein
provided, within the time specified in such order. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dwelling, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant
to §§
150.22 through
150.24, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed
in such order for its repair, alteration, or improvement or its vacation and
closing or vacation and removal or demolition.
   (B)   Upon determination of a violation of any section of this subchapter,
the penalty for which is a civil penalty, the Enforcement Officer of the town
shall cause a warning citation to be issued to the violator. Such citation
shall set out the nature of the violation, the section violated, the date of
the violation, and shall contain an order to immediately cease the violation.
If the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an order of
abatement would be appropriate in the civil proceeding, a reasonable period of
time must be stated during which the violation must be abated. The warning
citation shall specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty,
together with costs and attorney fees.
   (C)   An appeal from a warning citation shall be taken within ten days from
the date of said warning citation to the Board of Adjustment. Except, in any
case where the ordinance violated (which is the subject of the warning
citation) specifically grants to the Board of Adjustment other powers in
considering appeals and such appeal is applied for, the Board of Adjustment, in
considering appeals of warning citations, shall have power only in the manner
of administrative review and interpretation where it is alleged that the
Enforcement Officer has made an error on the application of an ordinance, in
the factual situation as it relates to the application of this subchapter, or
both.
   (D)   Where the Enforcement Officer of the town determines that the period
of time stated in the original warning citation is not sufficient for abatement
based upon the work required or consent agreement, the Enforcement Officer may
amend the warning citation to provide for additional time.
   (E)   Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation, a civil
citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the town and either
served directly on the violator or his or her duly designated agent or
registered agent, if a corporation, either in person or posted in the United
States mail service, by first-class mail, and addressed to the last known
address of the violator, as contained in the records of the town or obtained
from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. A violator
shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of said citation. The
citation shall direct the violator to appear before the Town Manager or his or
her designee within 15 days of the date of the citation or, alternatively, to
pay the citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must
have been corrected by the time the citation is paid; otherwise, other
citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense
continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated.
   (F)   Within 15 days from the date the first civil citation is served, the
Town Manager or his or her designee shall have the authority, upon written
request by the violator, to void the civil citation issued to date and relieve
the violator of any civil penalties due. The written request shall state the
reasons why the violator believes that the civil citation should be voided.
Prior to any civil citations being voided, the violation for which the citation
was issued must be fully corrected. The Town Manager or designee shall use
extreme discretion in voiding civil citations, and such action shall be taken
only under extraordinary circumstances. Such circumstances may include, but are
not limited to, an error by an official of the town, civil citations not
reaching the violator due to mail delivery difficulties, and extreme weather
constraints. After 15 days from the first civil citation being served, the Town
Manager or designee may only exercise said authority when correcting an error
by an official of the town. In those circumstances involving an error by an
official of the town, the Town Manager may exercise such authority without a
written request by the violator but must consider the recommendation of the
official making the error.
   (G)   If the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15 days of its
issuance, as prescribed herein, or receive relief from the Town Manager, as
described in this section, the town may institute a civil action in the nature
of debt in the appropriate division of the state general court of justice for
collection of the penalty, costs, attorney fees, and such other relief as
permitted by law.
(Prior Code, § 6-161) (Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008) Penalty, see §
150.99
UNSAFE BUILDING PROCEDURES
§ 150.40 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Duty of Enforcement Officer.
      (1)   Any building, structure, or part thereof partially destroyed or
otherwise which is found by the Enforcement Officer to be in such a dilapidated
or substandard condition as to be dangerous to life, health, or other property
or to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a public nuisance shall be declared
by the Enforcement Officer to be unsafe. Such unsafe condition may be caused by
defective construction, overloaded structural parts, decay, susceptibility to
fire, exits, or any other hazardous conditions or circumstances.
      (2)   The Enforcement Officer shall have the authority, and it shall be
his or her duty to declare all such buildings or structures unsafe and to take
appropriate action to have such conditions corrected or removed. Such
declaration by the Enforcement Officer shall constitute an order of
condemnation for the purposes of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-46)
   (B)   Duty to enforce provisions relating to unfit dwellings. The
Enforcement Officer or other person designated by the Town Council shall be
responsible for the enforcement of any ordinances or codes adopted by the Board
of Aldermen relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of dwellings unfit
for human habitation, pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-111.9 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 6-86)
(Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160D-111.9 et seq.
§ 150.41 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   Whenever any building or structure has been condemned by the Enforcement
Officer and the existence of such building or structure in a dilapidated state
of disrepair or other substandard condition is found and determined by the
Enforcement Officer or upon appeal from or report by the Enforcement Officer,
as hereafter provided by the Town Council, to be dangerous to life, health, or
other property or is in such condition as to constitute a fire or safety hazard
or a public nuisance, the owner of such building or structure shall be required
to demolish and remove the same and remedy such conditions under the
regulations and procedures herein provided. In the event such owner fails or
refuses to do so within the time directed by the Enforcement Officer or the
Town Council, as hereinafter provided, the Town Council may, in its judgment,
cause the same to be demolished and removed or such other steps taken as it may
find to be necessary to suppress and abate the nuisance and remove the fire or
safety hazard and the danger to life, health, or other property found to exist
and specially assess the cost and expense of doing said work against the lot or
parcel of land on which the same building or structure is located.
(Prior Code, § 6-47) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.42 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   Before any building or structure may be ordered to be demolished and
removed, as provided in §
150.41, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner thereof, in writing, by
certified or registered mail to the last known address of such owner by
personal service of such notice by said Enforcement Officer or his or her
assistant or by posting notice, as hereinafter provided, that said building or
structure is in such condition as appears to constitute a fire or safety hazard
or a danger to life, health, or other property or to be a public nuisance and
that a hearing will be held before said Enforcement Officer at a designated
place at a time not less than ten days after the date of such written notice,
at which time and place the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel upon all legal or factual questions relating to the matter and shall be
entitled to offer such evidence as he or she may desire which is relevant or
material to the questions sought to be determined or the remedies sought to be
affected. If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot, after due diligence,
be discovered, the notice herein referred to shall be considered properly and
adequately served if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building or
structure in question at least ten days prior to the date fixed for the hearing
and a notice of the hearing is published on time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town at least one week prior to the date fixed for such
hearing. Such notice shall state the address or location of the building or
structure and the time, place, and purpose of the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 6-48) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.43 ORDER TO REMEDY OR DEMOLISH.
   If, upon such hearing, the Enforcement Officer shall find that the building
or structure in question is in such a dilapidated or substandard state of
disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a danger to life, health,
or other property or is a public nuisance, he or she shall make an order in
writing directed to the owner of said building or structure requiring them to
remedy such conditions so found to exist by demolishing and removing said
building or structure or taking such other steps as may be necessary to abate
the nuisance and remove the hazards within such period, not less than 60 days,
as the Enforcement Officer may prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 6-49) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.44 APPEALS.
   The owner of any building or structure ordered by the Enforcement Officer to
be demolished and removed or who is directed by the Enforcement Officer to take
any other steps to abate a nuisance or remove hazards found by the Enforcement
Officer to exist shall have the right of appeal from such orders to the Town
Council provided such owner gives notice of appeal to the Enforcement Officer
at the time of the hearing at which the order is made or, within ten days after
such order is made, files with the Enforcement Officer a written notice of such
appeal. A notice of appeal shall state the grounds therefor. Unless an appeal
is taken within the time and in the manner herein prescribed, the action of the
Enforcement Officer shall be deemed final, subject only to such action as the
Council may take, as herein elsewhere provided. Where an appeal has been
properly taken and notice thereof given in accordance with the provisions of
this section, it shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to report same to
the Town Clerk who shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda for action
by the Council at its next ensuing regular meeting. The Council shall have the
right to continue the hearing of the appeal from time to time, in its
discretion.
(Prior Code, § 6-50) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.45 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   In the event the owner does not appeal the final order or direction of the
Enforcement Officer requiring that the building or structure be demolished and
removed or the taking of such other steps as may be required to abate the
nuisance and remove the hazards and fails or refuses to comply with such order
and direction, it shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to file a
written report thereof with the Town Clerk, who shall cause such report to be
placed on the agenda for action by the Town Council at its next ensuing regular
meeting or to some subsequent meeting to which the Council may continue same.
The Enforcement Officer shall mail a copy of said report by certified or
registered mail to the owner at his or her last known address or have a copy of
said report delivered to said owner. Said report shall specify the date of the
meeting of the Council for which the matter will be docketed for action.
(Prior Code, § 6-51) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.46 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS; LIENS.
   In all cases referred to in this subchapter which reach the Town Council for
action, either upon appeal of the owner from the ruling of the Enforcement
Officer or upon report of the Enforcement Officer that the owner fails or
refuses to comply with his or her order or direction, the Council shall hear
the matter. If the Council finds and determines that the building or structure
in question is in such a dilapidated or substandard state of disrepair as to
constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to life, health, or other
property or is a public nuisance and the owner of said building or structure
has failed or refused to have such building or structure demolished and removed
or has failed or refused to take such steps as may be necessary to abate the
nuisance and remove the hazards found to exist, the Council may cause the
demolition and removal of such building or structure to be done or effect such
other remedies as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards
and specially access the cost of such work against the lot or parcel of land on
which the building or structure was situated, and such assessment shall
constitute a specific lien upon said lot or parcel of land, which may be
enforced by an action instituted in the name of the town in the nature of an
action to foreclose a mortgage, as provided by G.S. § 160A-233, in the case of
ad valorem taxes and local improvement assessments.
(Prior Code, § 6-52) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 105-414
§ 150.47 NOTICE BEFORE ACTION.
   In cases in which the Enforcement Officer has been unable to give the owner
actual notice by posting and publishing same (as required in the manner
hereinabove provided) and has given such notice by posting and publishing same
(as authorized in § 150.42), the owner has failed or refused to comply with the
order or direction of the Enforcement Officer to demolish and remove the
building or structure or to take such other remedial action as will remove the
hazards, and such case is referred to the Town Council for action, the Council
shall, before taking such action, cause to be posted on the outside of the
building or structure in question, at least ten days prior to the date fixed
for the hearing and published one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town (at least one week prior to the date fixed for such
hearing), a written notice stating the address or location of the building or
structure involved and the time, place, and purpose of the hearing and such
other information as the Council may deem advisable.
(Prior Code, § 6-53) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.48 PRESUMPTION OF DANGER.
   In all cases in which the Town Council, under authority of this subchapter,
causes the demolition and removal of any building or structure to be carried
out or directs such other remedial steps to be taken as may be necessary to
abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, it shall be conclusively presumed
that the public nuisance and the fire and safety hazard and danger to life,
health, or other property created and maintained by the continued presence of
said building or structure in such condition as is found to exist constitutes a
clear and present danger amounting to a situation of emergency involving the
public health, safety, and general welfare which requires entry upon private
property for the summary abatement and removal of such danger in the public
interest.
(Prior Code, § 6-54) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Notwithstanding any and all remedies available to the town
pursuant to this chapter and the laws of the state, each violation of this
chapter shall also constitute a misdemeanor, except as otherwise provided by
statute, and violations of such provisions of this chapter shall be punished by
fine or imprisonment, as provided by law. Each day any violation of this
chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense except as may be
specifically provided.
      (2)   (a)   Violations of this chapter shall constitute either a
misdemeanor or, at the election of the town, shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty upon the issuance of a citation for said violations hereinafter
provided.
         (b)   A civil penalty, if not paid to the town within 15 days of the
issuance of a citation, may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the
nature of debt. Unless otherwise provided by specific provision of this chapter
or the town ordinances, said civil penalties shall be in the amount of $100 for
each violation, and each day any single violation continues shall be a separate
violation.
(Prior Code, § 6-161)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any final order or direction of the Enforcement Officer or the Town
Council made by virtue and in pursuance of §§
150.40(A) and 150.41 through 150.48. Any person violating these provisions
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by G.S. § 14-4 for the
violation of town ordinances. Every day such person shall willfully fail or
refuse to comply with any final order or direction of the Enforcement Officer
or the Town Council, made by virtue and in pursuance of these provisions shall,
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-55)
(Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978; Ord. 29-08, passed 11-13-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Obstruction of water flow
   
151.02   Unlawful deposit of materials in public ways
   
151.03   Unlawful deposit of materials on streets and sidewalks
   
151.04   Placing items in rights-of-way
   
151.05   Maintaining obstructions in rights-of-way
   
154.06   Signage on the Richardson Greenway
Driveway Construction
   
151.20   Property owner responsible
   
151.21   Permit and fee requirements
   
151.22   Conditions for issuance; expiration
   
151.23   When state permit required
   
151.24   Sidewalk thickness
   
151.25   Equitable remedy
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Intersection and roadway improvement agreements, see §
50.62
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 OBSTRUCTION OF WATER FLOW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed
the free flow of water in, over, along, upon, or through any gutter or drainage
way or ditch in any street or other public way in the town by depositing trash,
refuse, or other matter therein.
(Prior Code, § 22-1) (Ord. 3-89, passed 6-1-1989) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.02 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, spill, place, or deposit
in or upon any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place
any dirt, filth, shells, garbage, vegetables, dead carcasses, sewage-slops,
excrement, compost, ashes, soot, tin cans, glass, bottles, nails, tacks, wires,
rags, waste paper, leaves, brush, weeds, grass, hay, excelsior, shavings,
barrels, crates, boxes, litter, loose combustible material, materials subject
to be carried by the wind, oils, greases, or other liquids or substances likely
to injure any person, animal, or vehicle or unwholesome, noisome, or
putrescible matter of any kind.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or any contractor engaged in
construction or improvement of any property abutting upon streets and sidewalks
of the town to allow the deposit of any mud, dirt, construction material, or
other debris upon such streets and sidewalks. If the person responsible for
depositing mud, dirt, construction material, or debris on streets or sidewalks,
after due notice, fails to remove such obstruction, dirt, mud, construction
material, or other debris, the Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to
effect the removal thereof, and in addition to all other remedies, the town may
assess costs incurred by it which shall be a lien against the property from
which any obstruction, dirt, mud, construction material, or other debris has
been removed and deposited upon the streets and sidewalks of the town. In
addition to and separate and apart from the other remedies set forth in this
section, a violator of any of the provisions of this section may be assessed a
civil penalty, as set forth in §
151.99(B), and each and every day during which a violation occurs shall be a
separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 22-2) (Ord. 3-89, passed 6-1-1989; Ord. 05-22, passed 4-14-2022)
Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to spill, pour, place, deposit, or allow to drip,
fall, or run upon the pavement or sidewalk of any street, alley, or other
public place in the town any brine, chemical, oil, grease, liquid, or substance
which tends to disintegrate the pavement or make it slippery or otherwise
dangerous for pedestrians, horses, or vehicles.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, place, or deposit
on any sidewalk or crossing in any street or public place in the town any
portion or part of any fruit, vegetable, or other substance which, when stepped
upon by any person, is liable to cause such person to slip or fall.
   (C)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway or street within the
town any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance
likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle.
   (D)   Any person who drops or throws or permits to be dropped or thrown upon
any highway or street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same or cause it to be removed.
   (E)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway or
street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway or street from such vehicle.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to throw, spill, place, or deposit in or upon any
street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place any dirt, filth,
shells, garbage, vegetables, dead carcasses, sewage, slops, excrement, compost,
stable manure, ashes, soot, tin cans, rags, wastepaper, leaves, brush, weeds,
grass, hay, excelsior, shavings, barrels, crates, boxes, litter, loose
combustible material, materials subject to be carried by the wind, or
unwholesome, noxious to the smell, or putrescible matter of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 22-5) (Ord. 11-09, passed 5-14-2009) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 PLACING ITEMS IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, attempt to erect, cause
to be erected, or to maintain any sign, post, or standard or any other
equipment whatsoever for the display of any sign for any purpose in the space
provided for street right-of-way, public sidewalks, public parking, or between
any sidewalk and street curb or any street within the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, attempt to erect, cause
to be erected, or to maintain any structure object, device, or other items
within the area provided for street rights-of-way, public sidewalk, public
parking, or between the space of ground between any sidewalk and street curb on
any street within the town.
   (C)   The Town Manager or his or her representative may allow the placement
of utility poles and equipment and U.S. postal equipment within the rights-of-
way; however, other items so placed shall be removed as directed by the Town
Manager or his or her representative. It shall be the responsibility of the
abutting property owner to remove same.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch, trench, or
excavation of any kind or make any embankment in or on any street or right-of-
way of the town or to place any wiring, apparatus, piping or any other such
material within the rights-of-way of the town without first securing a permit
therefor in writing from the Town Manager. Each and every day that such an
opening, excavation, trenching, or placement of material remains after
notification from the Town Manager to remove or to properly repair such right-
of-way shall be a separate offense.
   (E)   No permit shall be issued by the Town Manager to cut or excavate in or
through any street or sidewalk of the town unless a satisfactory bond, if
required, has been filed or a cash deposit is made to cover the cost of
replacing such street or sidewalk in as good a condition in all respects as
before excavating. Such estimated cost shall be furnished by the Town Manager,
the amount based on the extent of the proposed opening, cut, or excavation and
the character of paving and the like estimated per square yard.
   (F)   All excavations at work in the streets, sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-
way, or public places of the town shall be under the supervision and control of
the Town Manager or his or her representative, whose duty it shall be to
inspect the same from time to time during the progress thereof. Upon the
completion thereof, he or she shall make a final inspection and shall see to it
that the street, sidewalk, or public place is restored to a condition as good
in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done and that all
debris, material, tools, and equipment are removed therefrom. If such failure
or refusal is continued after notice from the Town Manager or his or her
representative, each day’s continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or do any
work which may create or cause a dangerous condition in, on, or near any
street, alley, sidewalk, or public place of the town without placing proper
guard rails and signal light or other warnings at, in, or around the same,
sufficient to warn the public of such excavation or work and to protect all
persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of same.
   (H)   When any part of any street or right-of-way or public place in the
town shall be torn, dug up, or taken up, the person doing such work shall,
immediately upon the completion of the work and as fast as practical during the
accomplishment thereof, return the earth, ram, and water tamp or puddle to firm
and solid bearing and, in such manner as will entirely prevent settling of the
earth and where such property is unpaved and is grass, shall reseed said area
with substantially the same grass as was present of the time of the beginning
of the work. Such work shall be done to the satisfaction of the Town Manager or
his or her representative. It shall be unlawful for any person to neglect,
refuse, or fail to comply with any provision of this section after notice from
the Town Manager or his or her representative. Each day’s continuance shall
constitute a separate and distinct defense.
   (I)   Paving torn up, disturbed, or removed in any street or place where
openings have been made shall be rebuilt at the expense of the person making or
causing such excavation in a skillful and permanent manner, and the service of
such street or place shall be left in as good a condition as before the opening
was made. All work so done shall be done and performed under the direction of
the Town Manager or his or her representative. Persons making or causing
excavations on streets or other places, when ordered by the Town Manager or his
or her representative to re-pave or replace any such street in as good a
condition as found, shall proceed, with all reasonable dispatch, to properly
complete such work. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail, or
neglect to comply with this division (I). Where such failure, refusal, or
neglect is continuous, each day’s continuance shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 22-4) (Ord. 2-98, passed 2-5-1998) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.05 MAINTAINING OBSTRUCTIONS IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place or maintain an unnecessary obstruction
in any public street or right-of-way in the town. The town may require the
person who has placed or maintains an obstruction in violation of this section
to remove the obstruction and repair or restore the right-of-way within a
reasonable period of time, which time shall be set in consideration of the harm
or risk created by the obstruction and the effort and expense for removal.
   (B)   In addition, the town may summarily remove said obstruction and charge
the expense of the removal, restoration, and repair to the person who placed or
maintained the obstruction. Said charge shall be a civil liability in favor of
the town, for which the town can seek a civil judgment against said person or
property owner.
(Prior Code, § 22-6) (Ord. 36-09, passed 12-10-2009)
§ 151.06 SIGNAGE ON THE RICHARDSON GREENWAY.
   (A)   No person shall place signs of any type on any portion of the
Richardson Greenway except for traffic, public safety, and governmental signs.
   (B)   Local government signs may include permanent and temporary signs per
the following provisions:
      (1)   Permanent signage other than traffic and public safety signs must
be approved by the Town Council;
      (2)   Temporary signage (banners):
         (a)   Are restricted to town-sponsored events;
         (b)   Must be attached to the roof of the north and/or south face of
the Downtown Depot;
         (c)   Must have a maximum size of 32 square feet (per side) and are
restricted to one town event at a time; and
         (d)   May be placed on the Downtown Depot 30 days prior to the event
(45 days is permissible for events that have pre-registered) and must be
removed the next regular business day following the event.
      (3)   Temporary signage (directional):
         (a)   Are restricted to town-sponsored events or town-approved events
that utilize Eastway Drive and/or Main Street for events such as bicycle tours,
road races, and fun runs;
         (b)   Has a maximum size of six square feet;
         (c)   May be placed on the Greenway the day of the event and must be
removed the same day as the event; and
         (d)   Have a number and location of signs reasonable for the event
type and approved by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 22-7) (Ord. 08-14, passed 6-12-2014; Ord. 12-21, passed 8-12-
2021) Penalty, see §
151.99
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION
§ 151.20 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE.
   The owner of every residence, business establishment, church, other
building, or lot of land bordering on any street in the town where there is a
sidewalk abutting, over which a driveway has been constructed giving access to
said owner’s property, shall keep said driveway and the sidewalk over which it
crosses in proper repair. The term PROPER REPAIR will have the same meaning as
the term PROPER REPAIR has in G.S. § 160A-296(a)(1). Upon failure of an owner
to maintain the driveway or the sidewalk over which it crosses, the town may,
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-193, repair said sidewalk, and any expense shall become
a lien upon the land accessed by the driveway and shall be collected as unpaid
taxes.
(Prior Code, § 22-29) (Ord. 4-88, passed 10-6-1988)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-193 and 160A-296(a)(1)
§ 151.21 PERMIT AND FEE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or construct or cause to be
placed or constructed within the town any driveway across any street curb or
sidewalk pavement, upon any area occupied by any street curb or sidewalk
pavement, or from the roadway of any street to property abutting upon said
street without a written permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer for which a
fee, as established from time to time by ordinance, shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 22-27) (Ord. 4-88, passed 10-6-1988) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.22 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The permit required under §
151.21 shall provide for construction to be done in accordance with the
ordinance establishing policy on street and driveway access, as established and
enacted by the State Department of Transportation as said ordinance changes
from time to time, or to such lesser standards as may be approved by the
Council from time to time.
      (2)   Such standards and specifications shall be incorporated in such
permit. No such permit shall be issued except upon written application of the
owner of the abutting property into which such driveway is to be constructed
containing the agreements of such owner that:
      (1)   He or she will not allow construction of such driveway otherwise
than in conformity with specifications incorporated in the permit applied for;
      (2)   He or she will maintain such driveway in a good and safe condition;
      (3)   If use of such driveway is abandoned or substantially abandoned for
a continuous period of one year, he or she will cause the curb and sidewalk
area affected by construction of such driveway to be restored to a condition
equal to the condition thereof prior to such construction;
      (4)   He or she will reimburse the town for any costs which it may incur
in making good any of the aforesaid agreements which said owner shall fail to
make good; and
      (5)   The town shall have a lien upon said abutting property for any such
costs.
   (B)   Any permit issued under this section shall expire 60 days after
issuance thereof.
(Prior Code, § 22-28) (Ord. 4-88, passed 10-6-1988)
§ 151.23 WHEN STATE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   In all instances where access is to be had to a state-maintained road, a
driveway permit will also be obtained from the State Department of
Transportation.
(Prior Code, § 22-30) (Ord. 4-88, passed 10-6-1988)
§ 151.24 SIDEWALK THICKNESS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any lesser requirement that may be set forth in this
chapter, all sidewalks behind a driveway entrance shall be six inches in
thickness.
   (B)   If there is an existing sidewalk that does not meet the above
specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for removing same and
replacing same with an approved sidewalk. In the event the state requirements
are more stringent, those requirements shall control.
(Prior Code, § 22-31) (Ord. 4-88, passed 10-6-1988)
§ 151.25 EQUITABLE REMEDY.
   This chapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-175(d) and (e) issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 22-33) (Ord. 4-88, passed 10-6-1988)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-175(d) and (e)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any violation of §§
151.01 and
151.02 shall subject the offender to a warning letter sent by the town to the
offender by U.S. first-class mail for the first offense, and then to a civil
penalty in the amount of $15 for the second offense, $25 for the third offense,
$50 for the fourth offense, $100 for the fifth offense, $200 for the sixth
offense, and $500 for the seventh offense, to be recovered along with court
costs by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does
not pay the penalty within a period of 72 hours after he or she has been cited
for violation of said provisions.
      (2)   Citation shall be in writing signed by the Town Manager, the Town
Enforcement Officer, or the Planning Director and shall be delivered or mailed
to the offender either at the offender’s residence or place of business or at
the place where the violation occurred. Each day’s continued violation shall be
a separate and distinct offense. Any eighth offense shall constitute a
misdemeanor, and such person, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance
with G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 22-3)
   (C)   Any violation of §
151.03 shall be a misdemeanor punishable under G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 22-5)
   (D)   Violation of any provision of §
151.04 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100, to
be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the
offender does not pay the penalty within a period of 72 hours after he or she
has been cited for violation of the chapter. Citation shall be in writing,
signed by the Town Manager, and shall be delivered or mailed to the offender
either at his or her residence or at his or her place of business or at the
place where the violation occurred. Each day’s continued violation shall be
separate and distinct offense. Any action to recover such civil penalty may be
joined in an action for appropriate equitable or other legal remedy including
injunctions and orders of abatement and including an action to recover damages
owing to the town by reason of expenses incurred by the town and abating,
correcting, limiting, and otherwise dealing with the harmful effects of the
offending action.
(Prior Code, § 22-4)
(Ord. 2-98, passed 2-5-1998; Ord. 11-09, passed 5-14-2009; Ord. 26-10, passed
9-9-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 14-4
CHAPTER 152: TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Use of streets
   
152.02   Erection, removal, and use of poles
   
152.03   Construction progress report
   
152.04   Tests and performance monitoring
Small Wireless Facilities
   
152.15   Purpose
   
152.16   Definitions
   
152.17   Applicability; compliance exemption
   
152.18   Application and permit process
   
152.19   Small wireless facilities in town rights-of-way
   
152.20   Approvals; maintenance; repair; hold harmless
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   Underground installations.
      (1)   All installations shall be underground in those areas of the town
where public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground
at the time of installation.
      (2)   In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are
above ground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its service
above ground provided that at such time as those facilities are required to be
placed underground by the town or are placed underground, the grantee shall
likewise place its services underground without additional cost to the town or
to the individual subscriber so served.
      (3)   Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this
section or the franchise agreement, the grantee’s system shall be located
underground at the request of the adjacent property owner provided that the
excess cost over the aerial location shall be borne by the property owner
making the request.
      (4)   All new cable passing under the roadway shall be installed in
conduit or PVC sheathing no less than 18 inches from the top of the conduit to
the surface of the ground.
   (B)   Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property,
and utilities. The grantee’s system and facilities including poles, lines,
equipment, and all appurtenances shall be located, erected, and maintained so
that such facilities shall:
      (1)   Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety, or lives of
persons;
      (2)   Not interfere with any improvements the town, county, or state may
deem proper to make;
      (3)   Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets,
alleys, bridges, easements, or other public ways, places, or property except to
the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair;
      (4)   Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private
property owners except to the minimum extent possible during actual
construction or repair; and
      (5)   Not obstruct, hinder, or interfere with any gas, electric, water,
or telephone facilities or other utilities located within the town.
   (C)   Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of
pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, the grantee shall (at its own
cost and expense and in a manner approved by the town) replace and restore all
paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street or alley
disturbed in as good a condition as, or better than, before said work was
commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely manner in accordance with standards
for such work set by the town. Such restoration shall be undertaken within no
more than ten days after the disturbance is incurred and shall be completed as
soon as possible thereafter.
   (D)   Restoration of the facilities. In the event that, at any time during
the period of this franchise, the town, county, or state shall lawfully elect
to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the
grantee, upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or
relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes,
and other fixtures at its own expense.
   (E)   Cooperation with building movers.
      (1)   The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the town, temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit
the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal and/or raising
or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the
grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance.
      (2)   The grantee shall be given not less than 15 working days’ advance
notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
   (F)   Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in
conflict with existing town ordinances, to trim any trees upon and overhanging
public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with system facilities except that, at the option of town, such
trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the
expense of the grantee.
   (G)   Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property
shall be arranged for by the grantor. Any easements over or under property
owned by the town other than the public rights-of-way shall be separately
negotiated with the town.
   (H)   Work within right-of-way. The closing of any part of a publicly-
maintained street or right-of-way must be approved by the town or state and
shall not unreasonably impede traffic flow.
      (1)   During repairs or improvements, traffic on streets must be
maintained.
      (2)   Where full closing of the street is required, the request for
approval must be submitted at least ten days in advance.
      (3)   Closings will not be permitted in the central business district
during the holiday shopping season.
      (4)   Where emergency closings are necessary, the town is to be notified
as soon as possible.
      (5)   All closings are to be protected and signed.
   (I)   Removal of town or state property. No town or state property is to be
removed from a right-of-way, including signing on utility poles, without proper
permission from the town.
   (J)   No burden on public rights-of-way. The grantee shall not erect,
install, construct, repair, replace, or maintain its cable system in such a
fashion as to unduly burden the present or future use of the streets or public
rights-of-way. If the town, in its reasonable judgment, determines that any
portion of the cable system is an undue burden, the grantee, at its expense,
shall modify its cable system or take such other actions as the town may
determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and the
grantee shall do so within the time period established by the town.
   (K)   Barriers. While any portion of the streets or public rights-of-way are
open, the grantee shall maintain reasonable barriers, lights at night, and
other warnings to the users of the streets or public rights-of-way in
compliance with applicable government regulations requiring and pertaining to
such barriers.
   (L)   Soil erosion. All construction shall be in accordance with state and
local laws and regulations regarding soil erosion. The grantee or the grantee’s
contractor shall correct any violation at the direction of the town and at the
grantee’s expense.
   (M)   Utility crowding. In areas of town where the town or state finds that
the public rights-of-way will not accommodate further underground facilities,
the town or state may require that the grantee’s conduits be oversized,
duplicated, or placed in multiple configurations, and the grantee shall share
the use of its underground conduits and multiple configurations at such
locations at reasonable rates. Such rates shall be determined by the town or
state if the grantee and third parties cannot agree on same.
   (N)   Removal of obsolete facilities/cooperation. When the grantee opens a
trench, accesses a conduit or boring, or is working on aerial locations, it
shall remove all obsolete cable system facilities from such locations.
      (1)   When the grantee opens a trench or access to underground bores, it
shall notify all other grantees and permittees in advance of such work so that
they may remove their obsolete facilities from such locations. The grantee
shall cooperate with such persons in such activities.
      (2)   When the grantee receives notification from another grantee or
permittee that it is opening a trench or access to underground bores, the
grantee shall remove all of its obsolete facilities from such location while
they are opened.
   (O)   Vacation of rights-of-way. If a public right-of-way is vacated,
eliminated, discontinued, or closed, all rights of the grantee, under its
franchise to use the same, shall terminate, and the grantee, at its expense,
shall immediately remove the cable systems from such public right-of-way unless
the grantee obtains any necessary easements from the affected property owners
to use the former public right-of-way.
   (P)   Acquisition of right-of-way. In acquiring or widening public right-of-
way, the town or state shall determine the minimum right-of-way necessary to
accommodate paved streets, pedestrian walkways, landscaping, traffic signals,
drainage, water and sewer lines, and other governmental facilities.
   (Q)   Pavement cut coordination/additional fees. The grantee shall
coordinate its construction program and all other work in the public rights-of-
way with the town or state program for street construction, rebuilding,
resurfacing, and repair (hereinafter collectively referred to as “street
resurfacing”). The grantee shall meet with the official of the town responsible
for such program at least twice per year to this end.
      (1)   The goals of such coordination shall be to require the grantee to
conduct all work in the public rights-of-way in conjunction with or immediately
prior to any street resurfacing planned by the town. The grantee shall provide
timely notice to the town prior to such work, and the grantee shall have
applied for permits as required.
      (2)   In addition to any other fees or payments required by this chapter
and the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the town any costs required under
local ordinances. This fee is in addition to and not in lieu of the obligation
to restore the public rights-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 24-1)
(Ord. 4-00, passed 5-4-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 66-350 et seq.,66-351(a), and 66-355
§ 152.02 ERECTION, REMOVAL, AND USE OF POLES.
   (A)   Approval required.
      (1)   No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of
the town or state with regard to location, height, types, and any other
pertinent aspect.
      (2)   However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the
grantee shall give rise to a vested interest, and such poles or structures
shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the
town determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
   (B)   Utilization of existing poles. Where poles already in existence for
use in serving the town are available for use by the grantee, the town or state
may require the grantee to use such poles and structures if it determines that
the public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the terms of the use
available to the grantee are just and reasonable.
   (C)   Permitting. Where a public utility serving the town desires to make
use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the grantee but agreement
therefor with the grantee cannot be reached, the town may require the grantee
to permit such use for such consideration and, upon such terms as the town
shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the town determines that the use
would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the
grantee’s operation.
(Prior Code, § 24-2) (Ord. 4-00, passed 5-4-2000)
§ 152.03 CONSTRUCTION PROGRESS REPORT.
   The grantee shall provide the town with a written progress report detailing
construction work completed as specified in the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 24-3) (Ord. 4-00, passed 5-4-2000)
§ 152.04 TESTS AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Technical performance. Not later than 90 days after any new or
substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to
subscribers, and thereafter on the third anniversary of the effective date of
the franchise, the grantee shall conduct technical performance tests to
demonstrate substantial compliance with all technical standards contained in
this chapter and the franchise agreement and the applicable technical standards
and guidelines of the FCC.
      (1)   Such tests shall be performed by or under the supervision of a
qualified registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training
and experience.
      (2)   A copy of said engineer’s report shall be submitted to the town
describing test results, instrumentation, calibration, and test procedures and
the qualification of the engineer responsible for the tests.
   (B)   Monitor test points. System monitor test points shall be established
at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line at or
near trunk line extremities. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test
points as shall be required by the FCC and/or the franchise agreement.
   (C)   FCC tests. In addition to the performance test reports required
herein, a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC shall be
submitted to the town within 60 days of completion.
   (D)   Complaint response. Whenever there have been similar complaints made
within one year from more than 10% of the subscribers to the grantee’s system
or when there exists other substantial evidence which, in the judgment of the
town, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee’s system, the
town shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze,
and report on the performance of its system. Reports on such tests shall be
delivered to the town no later than 30 days after the town reasonably notifies
the grantee and shall include the following information:
      (1)   The nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests;
      (2)   What system component was tested;
      (3)   The equipment used and procedures employed in said testing;
      (4)   The results of such tests; and
      (5)   Methods by which said complaints were resolved.
   (E)   Supervision. Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by a
qualified technician who shall sign all records of the special tests and
forward same to the town with a report interpreting the results of the tests
and recommending what actions, if any, should be taken by the grantee or the
town.
   (F)   Consultants. The town shall have the right to employ, at the town’s
expense, qualified consultants if necessary or desirable to assist in the
administration of this or any other section of this chapter or the franchise
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 24-4) (Ord. 4-00, passed 5-4-2000)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 152.15 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the town by establishing policies and procedures for
the review, permitting, and placement of small wireless facilities in the
public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 02-19, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 152.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW. Review of an application by the Engineering Services
Department relating to the review and issuance of a permit to determine whether
the issuance of a permit is in conformity with the applicable provisions of
this subchapter.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and
receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of
wireless communications services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. The North Carolina State Building Code and any other
uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization together with state or local amendments
to those codes enacted solely to address imminent threats of destruction of
property or injury to persons.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application under this subchapter.
   APPLICATION. A written request that is submitted by an applicant to the town
for a permit to collocate wireless facilities or to approve the installation,
modification, or replacement of a utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless
support structure.
   BASE STATION. A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with
mobile stations, generally consisting of radio receivers, antennas, coaxial
cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics.
   BUILDING PERMIT. An official administrative authorization issued prior to
beginning construction.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. The placement, installation, maintenance,
modification, operation, or replacement of wireless facilities on, under,
within, or on the surface of the earth adjacent to existing structures
including utility poles, town utility poles, water towers, buildings, and other
structures capable of structurally supporting the attachment of wireless
facilities in compliance with applicable codes. The term COLLOCATE or
COLLOCATION does not include the installation of new utility poles, town
utility poles, or wireless support structures.
   COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. The set of equipment and network components
including wires and cables and associated facilities used by a communications
service provider to provide communications service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6);
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); telecommunications
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53); or wireless services.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5); a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24); a
telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51); or a wireless
provider.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. A request for modification of an existing
wireless tower or base station that involves collocation of new transmission
equipment or replacement of transmission equipment but does not include a
substantial modification.
   EQUIPMENT COMPOUND. An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless
support structure within which a wireless facility is located.
   FALL ZONE. The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to
fall in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering
standards.
   LAW. Local, state, or federal law, statute, common law, code, rule,
regulation, order, or ordinance.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is no larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization including a governmental
entity.
   SEARCH RING. The area within which a wireless support facility or wireless
facility must be located in order to meet service objectives of the wireless
service provider using the wireless facility or wireless support structure.
   SHROUD. A box or other container that contains and is designed to camouflage
or conceal the presence of a communications facility, antenna, or accessory
equipment.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements, if enclosed, could fit within an
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a
cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet. For purposes of this division
(2), the following types of ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services, or other support structures.
   STEALTH Any communications facility, wireless support structure, or antenna
that is integrated as an architectural feature of a structure or that is
designed in a manner to camouflage or conceal the presence of the
communications facility, wireless support structure, or antenna so that the
purpose of the facility or structure is not readily apparent to the casual
observer.
   SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION. The mounting of a proposed wireless facility on a
wireless support structure that substantially changes the physical dimensions
of the support structure. A mounting is presumed to be a SUBSTANTIAL
MODIFICATION if it meets any one or more of the criteria listed below. The
burden is on the local government to demonstrate that a mounting that does not
meet the below-listed criteria constitutes a substantial change to the physical
dimensions of the wireless support structure:
      (1)   Increasing the existing vertical height of the structure by the
greater of more than 10% or the height of one additional antenna array with
separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet;
      (2)   Except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement
weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable, adding an
appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes
horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure 20 feet or greater
than the width of the wireless support structure at the level of the
appurtenance; or
      (3)   Increasing the square footage of the existing equipment compound by
more than 2,500 square feet.
   TOWN RIGHT OF-WAY. Right-of-way owned, leased, or operated by the town
including any public street or alley that is not part of the state highway
system.
   TOWN UTILITY POLE. A pole owned by the town in the town right-of-way that
provides lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
   UTILITY POLE. A structure that is designed for and used to carry lines,
cables, wires, lighting facilities, or small wireless facilities for telephone,
cable television, electricity, lighting, or wireless services.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. The equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network including
equipment associated with wireless communications and radio transceivers,
antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cables, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment regardless of technological configuration.
The term includes small wireless facilities. The term shall not include any of
the following: the structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to
which the equipment is collocated; wireline backhaul facilities; and a coaxial
or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or
town utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with a particular antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person with a certificate to provide
telecommunications service in the state who builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support
structures for small wireless facilities but that does not provide wireless
services.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided to the public using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure such as a monopole,
lattice tower, or guyed tower that is designed to support or capable of
supporting wireless facilities. A utility pole or a town utility pole is not a
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 02-19, passed 4-11-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. § 160A-417
§ 152.17 APPLICABILITY; COMPLIANCE EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Applicability. This subchapter shall apply to small wireless
facilities in the town rights-of-way. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
interpreted to excuse compliance with or to be in lieu of any other requirement
of state or local law except as specifically provided herein. Without
limitation, the provisions of this subchapter do not permit placement of small
wireless facilities on privately-owned utility poles or wireless support
structures or on private property without the consent of the property owner or
any person who has an interest in the property.
   (B)   Compliance exemption. Unless expressly set forth herein, the following
categories of small wireless facilities are exempt from the requirements of
this subchapter:
      (1)   Routine maintenance of small wireless facilities, the replacement
of small wireless facilities with small wireless facilities that are the same
size or smaller, or installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of
micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles or town utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or
for a communications service provider authorized to occupy the town rights-of-
way and who is remitting taxes under G.S. § 105-164.4(a)(4c) or G.S. § 105-
164.4(a)(6); and
      (2)   A temporary small wireless facility, upon the declaration of a
state of emergency by federal, state, or local government and a written
determination of public necessity by the town; except, such facility must
comply with all federal and state requirements and must be removed at the
conclusion of the emergency.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 02-19, passed 4-11-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see G.S. §§ 105-164.4(a)(4c) and 105-164.4(a)(6)
§ 152.18 APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   Right-of-way encroachment agreement. Prior to installing any small
wireless facility, a utility pole associated with a small wireless facility, or
wireless support structure in, on, under, or above any town right-of-way, a
person shall enter into a right-of-way encroachment agreement with the town
consistent with the provisions contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   Permitting and applications. Prior to installing any small wireless
facility, a utility pole associated with a small wireless facility or wireless
support structure in, on, under, or above any town right-of-way, a person shall
submit an application for a permit as specified in form and content by the
town. An application shall also be submitted for any eligible facilities
request.
   (C)   Application requirements. An application shall be made by the wireless
provider or its duly authorized representative and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address
including emergency contact information for the applicant;
      (2)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of
all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
filing of the application;
      (3)   A detailed drawing of the type of wireless facility proposed
including proposed height, the location of any ground-mounted equipment,
necessary screening, and the color and design of all antennas;
      (4)   A site plan with sufficient detail to show the proposed location of
items the applicant seeks to install in the right-of-way;
      (5)   An attestation that any small wireless facilities will be
collocated on a utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure
and that the small wireless facilities will be activated for use by a wireless
services provider to provide service no later than one year from the permit
issuance date unless the town and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by a lack of commercial power at the site. In
instances where an applicant seeks to construct a new utility pole, the
applicant shall include a statement regarding the infeasibility of collocation
on existing structures;
      (6)   If applicable, a statement of authorization from the owner of any
privately-owned utility poles or wireless support structures in which the small
wireless facility will be placed or attached;
      (7)   A structural engineering report prepared by an engineer licensed in
the state certifying that the host structure is structurally and mechanically
capable of supporting the proposed additional antenna, configuration of
antennas, and other equipment, extensions, and appurtenances associated with
the installation; and
      (8)   A statement from the applicant that, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge, the statements contained in the application are true.
   (D)   Proprietary information in application. Applications are public
records that may be made publicly available. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an
applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as trade
secret by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. Trade secret
information shall be filed as a separate addendum to the application.
   (E)   Review and approval. All applications received by the town shall be
reviewed by the Engineering Services Department pursuant to the following:
      (1)   Completeness review. Within ten days of receiving an application,
the town will review the application for completeness. An application will be
deemed complete unless the town issues a notice of incompleteness to the
applicant identifying the deficiencies of the application. If an application is
deemed incomplete, the applicant must cure the deficiencies within ten days of
the date of the notice of incompleteness. Any resubmittal received by the town
more than ten days after the date of the notice of incompleteness will be
treated as a new application. The deadlines herein may be extended by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the town.
      (2)   Application review. The town shall review an application within 45
days from the time the application is deemed complete. An application will be
deemed approved if the town fails to approve or deny the application within
this time unless the applicant and the town have mutually agreed to extend this
time frame.
      (3)   Denial.
         (a)   The town may deny an application on the basis that it does not
meet any of the requirements below:
            1.   The town’s applicable codes;
            2.   Local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety, objective design standards for decorative utility poles, town utility
poles, or reasonable and nondiscriminatory concealment requirements including
screening and landscaping for ground-mounted equipment;
            3.   Public safety and reasonable spacing requirements concerning
the location of ground-mounted equipment in a right-of-way; or
            4.   Historic preservation requirements.
         (b)   If the town denies an application, the town must:
            1.   Document the basis for a denial including the specific code
provisions on which the denial was based; and
            2.   Send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day
the town denies the application.
         (c)   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the town
and resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial without paying any
additional application fee. The town shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days of the date on which the application was
resubmitted. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the prior denial.
   (F)   Consolidated application. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities at multiple locations within the town shall be allowed to
file a consolidated application for no more than 25 separate facilities and
receive a permit for the collocation of all the small wireless facilities
meeting the requirements of this subchapter. The town may remove small wireless
facility collocations from a consolidated application and treat separately
small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been
provided or that are denied. The town may issue a separate permit for each
collocation that is approved.
   (G)   Fees. The town reserves the right to impose any fees permitted by
state and federal law.
   (H)   Effect of permit. A permit from the town authorizes an applicant to
undertake only certain activities in accordance with this subchapter and as
specified in the permit. A permit does not create a property right or grant
authority to the applicant to impinge or encroach upon the rights of others who
may already have an interest in the right-of-way.
   (I)   Compliance with permit.
      (1)   All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance
with the approved permit. The town shall be provided access to the work site
and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such
requirements.
      (2)   All work that does not comply with the permit, the approved plans
and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this subchapter shall
be removed at the sole expense of the applicant. The town may stop work in
order to assure compliance with the provision of this subchapter.
   (J)   Duration. Collocation of a small wireless facility shall begin within
six months of approval and shall be activated no later than one year from the
permit issuance date unless a delay is caused by a lack of commercial power at
the site. Failure to begin collocation within six months will void the permit.
A small wireless facility not activated within one year of permit issuance will
be considered abandoned and shall be removed from the right-of-way at the
wireless provider’s expense.
   (K)   Post construction. The applicant shall provide to the town as-built
drawings in an acceptable format as designated by the town upon completion of
the installation.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 02-19, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 152.19 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN TOWN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Standards. Small wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and
utility poles installed to support small wireless facilities in the rights-of-
way shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Each new small wireless facility in the rights-of-way shall not
extend more than ten feet above the existing utility pole, town utility pole,
or wireless support structure on which it is collocated.
      (2)   Each new utility pole and each modified or replacement utility pole
or town utility pole installed in the right-of-way shall not exceed 50 feet
above ground level.
      (3)   In areas zoned single-family residential where utilities are
underground, each new utility pole and each modified or replacement utility
pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure installed in the public
rights-of-way shall not exceed 40 feet above ground level.
      (4)   Collocations of small wireless facilities are preferred on existing
poles where feasible.
      (5)   Small wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility
poles associated with small wireless facilities shall be blended with the
natural and built surroundings as much as possible. Colors and materials shall
be used that are compatible with the surrounding area except when otherwise
required by applicable federal of state regulations.
      (6)   All small wireless facilities, antenna, and accessory equipment
must be shrouded or otherwise concealed to the extent practicable and shall
blend with and match the color of the pole or structure to which they attach.
      (7)   Wireless support structures shall be of a unipole-type; lattice
and/or guyed towers are not permitted.
      (8)   All ground-mounted equipment must be properly screened with
vegetation or other acceptable alternatives as approved by the Engineering
Services Director.
      (9)   The wireless facility shall comply with all historic district
requirements if the wireless facility is located within a historic district.
   (B)   Public safety. No portion of a small wireless facility, wireless
support structure, or a utility pole associated with a small wireless facility
may be placed in the public rights-of-way in a manner that:
      (1)   Obstructs pedestrian, vehicular, or bicycle access; obstructs sight
lines or visibility for traffic, traffic signage, or signals; or interferes
with access by persons with disabilities. An applicant may be required to place
equipment in vaults to avoid obstructions or interference;
      (2)   Interferes with public infrastructure and/or health or safety
facilities including, but not limited to: power lines, fire hydrants, water
valves, gas valves, underground utility vaults, valve housing structures, or
any other public health or safety facilities. New facilities shall not be
installed directly over any water, sewer, gas, or reuse main or service line;
and
      (3)   Involves placement of pole-mounted equipment (other than cabling)
whose lowest point is lower than eight feet above ground level.
   (C)   Removal, relocation, or modification of small wireless facilities.
      (1)   Within 90 days following written notice from the town, wireless
providers shall, at their own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change, or alter the position of any
small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the town has
determined that such removal, relocation, change, or alteration is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
town improvement or the operations of the town in or upon the rights-of-way.
      (2)   The town may require a wireless services provider to remove an
abandoned wireless facility within 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless
services provider fail to timely remove the abandoned wireless facility, the
town may cause such wireless facility to be removed and may recover the actual
cost of such removal including legal fees, if any, from the wireless services
provider. A wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned at the earlier of the
date that the wireless services provider indicates, in any way, that it is
abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days after the date that such
wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal unless the wireless services
provider gives the town reasonable evidence that it is diligently working to
place such wireless facility back in service.
   (D)   General work requirements. The applicant shall employ due care while
performing any installation, maintenance, or other work in the right-of-way and
shall comply with all safety and public right-of-way protection requirements of
applicable laws, applicable codes, standards, and guidelines. If traffic
control is required as part of the installation or maintenance of any device,
the applicant shall submit a traffic control plan to the town and comply with
all town policies and requirements for traffic control.
   (E)   Utility coordination. The wireless provider shall follow all “call 811
before you dig” utility coordination guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 02-19, passed 4-11-2019)
§ 152.20 APPROVALS; MAINTENANCE; REPAIR; HOLD HARMLESS.
   (A)   Other approvals. It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain
all other required permits, authorizations, approvals, agreements, and
declarations that may be required for installation, modification, and/or
operation of the proposed facility under federal, state, or local laws, rules,
or regulations including, but not limited to, encroachment agreements and FCC
approvals. An approval issued under this subchapter is not in lieu of any other
permit required by the town code or the Zoning Ordinance nor is it a franchise,
license, or other authorization to occupy the public rights-of-way or a
license, lease, or agreement authorizing occupancy of any other public or
private property. It does not create a vested right in occupying any particular
location, and an applicant may be required to move or remove facilities at its
expense consistent with other provisions of applicable law. An approval issued
in error based on incomplete or false information submitted by an applicant or
an application that conflicts with other requirements of the town is not valid.
No person may maintain a small wireless facility in place unless required by
state or federal authorization.
   (B)   Operation and maintenance. All wireless support structures, small
wireless facilities, and related equipment (including, but not limited to,
fences, cabinets, poles, and landscaping) shall be maintained in good working
condition over the life of the use. This shall include keeping the structures
maintained to the visual standards established at the time of approval. The
small wireless facility shall remain free from trash, debris, litter, graffiti,
and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as soon as
practicable and, in no instance, more than 30 calendar days from the date of
notification by the town.
   (C)   Repair of damage. A wireless provider shall repair all damage to a
town right-of-way directly caused by the activities of the wireless provider
while occupying, installing, repairing, or maintaining wireless facilities,
wireless support structures, town utility poles, or utility poles and to return
the right-of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage. If the
wireless provider fails to make the repairs required by the town within 30 days
after written notice, the town may undertake those repairs and charge the
applicable party the reasonable and documented cost of the repairs.
   (D)   Hold harmless. Applicant shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless
the town and its commissioners, officials, officers, and employees from and
against any and all loss, damage, liability, claims, suits, costs, and expenses
including reasonable attorney fees resulting from the alleged acts or omissions
of the applicant and its officers, agents, or employees in connection with the
permitted work.
(Prior Code, § 24-5) (Ord. 02-19, passed 4-11-2019)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
   
153.01   Enforcement of zoning ordinances
   
153.02   Affected areas
§ 153.01 ENFORCEMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCES.
   If the Inspection Division or Enforcement Officer is charged with
enforcement of the zoning ordinances, then no permit for the alteration,
repair, or construction of any building or structure shall be issued until a
zoning permit has first been issued by the appropriate official charged with
enforcement of the zoning provisions.
(Prior Code, § 6-116) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
§ 153.02 AFFECTED AREAS.
   This chapter shall affect all properties located within the corporate limits
of the town and within the limits of the one-mile zoning perimeter around the
town.
(Prior Code, § 6-117) (Ord. 4-78-1, passed 4-8-1978)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   [Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
 
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Cites 2023 Code
G.S. Cites                      2023 Code
1-593                           10.03
1A-1                            10.03
7A-227                          150.23
7A-228                          150.23
8-5                             10.01
12-2                            10.11
12-3                            10.03;
                                10.16
12-4                            10.08
                                10.99;
                                31.99;
                                32.99;
                                53.99;
                                70.99;
                                71.99;
14-4                            90.99;
                                91.99;
                                93.23;
                                94.99;
                                130.99;
                                150.99;
                                151.99
14-4(a)                         130.99
Chapter 14, Article 36A         31.01
14-288.7                        31.01
14-288.8(5)                     31.01
14-288.13                       31.01
14-360 et seq.                  90.01
14-366 et seq.                  90.01
14-415.11(c)                    130.04
14-145.23                       130.04
15A-501 et seq.                 31.01
Chapter 17C                     31.35
18B-1001                        111.01
Chapter 19A                     90.01
Chapter 20, Article 7A          71.36
20-162                          71.16
20-219.11                       92.18;
                                92.20
42-29                           150.23
42-30                           150.23
Chapter 62                      50.01
66-250 et seq.                  110.16
66-350 et seq.                  152.01
66-351(a)                       152.01
66-355                          152.01
Chapter 67                      90.01
Chapter 68                      90.01
80-45                           90.01
90-21.20                        31.01
97-1 et seq.                    31.35;
                                31.36
105-164.4(a)(4c)                152.17
105-164.4(a)(6)                 152.17
Chapter 106                     90.01
106-400 et seq.                 90.01
128-16 et seq.                  31.01
Chapter 130A                    90.01
130A-19                         93.20
130A-20                         93.20
130A-184 et seq.                90.01
130A-290 et seq.                53.01
136-18.3                        53.01
136-141 et seq.                 92.04
136-143                         92.04
Chapter 143, Article 8          50.62
Chapter 143, Article 21         52.100
143-128.1                       50.61
143-129                         50.61
143-145(7)                      150.17
143-211 et seq.                 50.01
143-213(18)                     52.002
143-215.1                       52.002;
                                52.061
143-215.1(b)                    52.061
143-215.3(a)(14)                52.002
143-215.6B                      52.100
143-215.6B(f)—143-215.6B(i)   52.100
143-601                         32.01
143B-282 et seq.                50.01
153A-275                        52.001
159-1 et seq.                   Charter
159-2                           10.03
159-80 et seq.                  50.01
Chapter 160A, Article 7, Part 2 Charter
Chapter 160A, Article 13        31.35
160A-189 et seq.                130.04
Chapter 160A, 317               53.06
Chapter 160A, 320               50.60
Chapter 160A, 499               50.60
160A-1                          10.03
160A-63                         Charter
160A-76                         50.01
160A-77                         10.01
160A-77(a)                      10.12
160A-77(b)                      10.13
160A-77(b)(1)                   10.13
160A-79                         10.01
160A-119 et seq.                150.15
160A-147                        30.01
160A-147 et seq.                90.01
160A-148                        30.01
160A-174                        130.02;
                                130.99
160A-174 et seq.                10.99
160A-175                        93.22
160A-175(c)                     71.99
160A-175(d)                     151.25
160A-175(e)                     151.25
160A-176                        50.01
160A-178                        110.16
160A-182                        90.01
160A-185                        50.01
160A-186 et seq.                90.01
160A-189                        130.01
160A-190                        130.02;
                                130.99
                                10.99;
                                50.01;
160A-193                        92.01;
                                93.20;
                                151.20
160A-194                        111.16
160A-205.3                      111.01
160A-212                        90.01
160A-216 et seq.                50.01;
                                150.23
160A-233                        150.46
160A-281 et seq.                31.35
160A-284                        31.35
160A-286                        50.01
160A-296                        50.01
160A-296(a)(1)                  151.20
160A-303                        71.36;
                                92.01
160A-303.1                      53.01
160A-303.2                      92.01
160A-311 et seq.                50.01;
                                53.01
160A-312                        52.001
160A-317(b)                     53.01
160A-319                        50.01
160A-350 et seq.                94.01
160A-360                        50.01
160A-440 et seq.                150.15
160A-441 et seq.                150.15
160A-445                        150.20
160A-493                        90.01
160A-77(b)(1)                   10.13
160A-296(a)(1)                  151.20
160D-111.9 et seq.              150.40
163-292                         Charter
166A                            31.01
166A-19.22                      31.01
                                
 
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code 2023 Code
1-1        10.01
1-2        10.03
1-3        10.17
1-4        10.16
1-5        10.10
1-6        10.08
1-7        10.11
1-8        10.09
1-9        10.99
1-10       10.12
1-11       10.13
2-40       30.01
2-41       30.01
2-42       30.01
4-1        90.01
4-2        90.02;
           90.99
4-3        90.03;
           90.99
4-28       90.99
6-19       150.01
6-20       150.02
6-21       150.03
6-46       150.40
6-47       150.41
6-48       150.42
6-49       150.43
6-50       150.44
6-51       150.45
6-52       150.46
6-53       150.47
6-54       150.48
6-55       150.99
6-86       150.40
6-116      153.01
6-117      153.02
6-148      150.15
6-149      150.16
6-150      150.17
6-151      150.18
6-152      150.19
6-153      150.20
6-154      150.21
6-155      150.22
6-156      150.23
6-157      150.24
6-158      150.25
6-159      150.26
6-160      150.27
6-161      150.28;
           150.99
8-44       110.01
8-45       110.15
8-46       110.16
8-47       110.17
8-48       110.18
8-49       110.18
8-50       110.02
8-51       110.03
8-52       110.21
8-53       110.04
8-54       110.04
8-55       110.19
8-56       110.20
8-57       110.20
8-58       110.20
8-59       110.99
10-42      93.01
10-43      93.03
10-44      93.04
10-45      93.05
10-46      93.99
10-66      92.01
10-67      92.15
10-68      92.02
10-69      92.02
10-70      92.03
10-71      92.16
10-72      92.16
10-73      92.17
10-74      92.18
10-75      92.19
10-76      92.20
10-77      92.22
10-78      92.23
10-79      92.04
10-80      92.21
10-142     93.20
10-143     93.21
10-144     93.22
10-145     93.23
12-1       91.01;
           91.99
12-21      91.02
12-22      91.03
12-23      91.04
14-1       31.99
14-18      31.15
14-19      31.15
14-20      31.16
14-21      31.17
14-22      31.18
14-23      31.19
14-24      31.20
14-52      31.35
14-53      31.36
16-1       130.01;
           130.99
16-2       130.03;
           130.99
16-3       130.02;
           130.99
18-1       94.01;
           94.99
20-19      53.01
20-20      53.02
20-21      53.04
20-22      53.05
20-23      53.03
20-24      53.99
20-56      53.20
20-57      53.21
20-58      53.22
20-59      53.99
22-1       151.01
22-2       151.02
22-3       151.99
22-4       151.04;
           151.99
22-5       151.03;
           151.99
22-6       151.05
22-7       151.06
22-27      151.21
22-28      151.22
22-29      151.20
22-30      151.23
22-31      151.24
22-33      151.25
22-55      32.01
22-58      32.99
22-90      32.02;
           32.15
22-91      32.02;
           32.16
22-92      32.99
22-127     95.01
22-128     95.02
22-129     95.03;
           95.99
22-130     95.20
22-131     95.21
22-132     95.30
22-133     95.22
22-134     95.05
22-135     95.23
22-136     95.23
22-137     95.27
22-138     95.23
22-139     95.24
22-140     95.25
22-141     95.25
22-142     95.32
22-143     95.28
22-144     95.23
22-145     95.26
22-146     95.29
22-147     95.31
22-148     95.31
22-149     95.06
22-150     95.04
22-151     95.07
22-152     95.07
22-153     95.07
22-154     95.08
22-155     95.33
24-1       152.01
24-2       152.02
24-3       152.03
24-4       152.04
24-5       152.15—
           152.20
26-1       70.01;
           70.99
26-3       71.19
26-4       70.02;
           70.99
26-5       70.03
26-6       70.04
26-31      71.15
26-32      71.16
26-33      71.17
26-34      71.18
26-35      71.17
26-36      71.19
26-37      71.02
26-38      71.16
26-39      71.20
26-40      71.03
26-41      71.35;
           71.99
26-42      71.01
26-43      71.36
26-44      71.99
26-100     70.15
26-101     70.16
26-102     70.16
26-103     70.17
26-104     70.99
28-21      50.01
28-22      50.02
28-23      50.22
28-24      50.22
28-25      50.20
28-26      50.20
28-27      50.21
28-28      50.23
28-29      50.03
28-30      50.24
28-31      50.25
28-32      50.26
28-33      50.04
28-34      50.48
28-35      50.08
28-36      50.48
28-37      50.05
28-38      50.03
28-39      50.46
28-40      50.06
28-95      52.025
28-96      52.027
28-97      52.026
28-98      52.029
28-99      52.028
28-100     52.028
28-101     52.028
28-102     52.028
28-103     52.029
28-104     52.030
28-105     52.030
28-134     52.001
28-135     52.002
28-164     52.004
28-165     52.005
28-166     52.007
28-167     52.006
28-168     52.007
28-169     52.008
28-170     52.009
28-171     52.010
28-172     52.011
28-173     52.003
28-174     52.012
28-197     52.045
28-198     52.046
28-199     52.047
28-200     52.048
28-229     52.060
28-230     52.061
28-254     52.075
28-255     52.076
28-256     52.077
28-257     52.078
28-258     52.079
28-259     52.080
28-260     52.081
28-261     52.082
28-263     52.062
28-264     52.062
28-265     52.083
28-266     52.084
28-296     52.095
28-297     52.096
28-298     52.097
28-299     52.098
28-327     52.099
28-328     52.999
28-329     52.100
28-330     52.101
28-331     52.102
28-356     52.103
28-357     52.103
28-358     52.104
28-392     50.40
28-393     50.41
28-394     50.42
28-395     50.09
28-396     50.43
28-397     50.43
28-398     50.43
28-399     50.44
28-400     50.45
28-401     50.47
28-436     50.07
28-466     51.01
28-467     51.02
28-468     51.01
28-469     51.03
28-470     51.04
28-471     51.05
28-472     51.06
28-473     51.04
28-474     51.99
28-475     51.07
28-504     51.20
28-505     51.21
28-506     51.22
28-507     51.23
28-508     51.24
28-509     51.25
Appendix B 33.01
           
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     50.01—
                     50.06;
                     50.08;
12-76A   12-11-1976  50.20—
                     50.26;
                     50.40;
                     50.46;
                     50.48
10-77    10-8-1977   31.15—
                     31.20
                     110.01—
                     110.04;
3-78     3-11-1978   110.15—
                     110.21;
                     110.99
                     150.01—
                     150.03;
                     150.40—
4-78     4-8-1978    150.48;
                     150.99;
                     153.01;
                     153.02
8-81     5-11-1981   70.01
4-84     10-8-1984   31.35
6-84     12-13-1984  130.02;
                     130.99
                     31.16;
-        2-12-1985   31.17;
                     31.19
12-76(B) 3-12-1985   50.03
8-85     5-14-1985   70.02;
                     70.99
                     53.01—
9-85     5-21-1985   53.05;
                     53.99
13-85    9-10-1985   50.46
12-85    7-9-1985    70.02
4-86     5-13-1986   71.19
8-86     9-9-1986    70.03
                     70.15—
9-86     9-9-1986    70.17;
                     70.99
4-87     7-14-1987   130.01;
                     130.99
4-88     10-6-1988   151.20—
                     151.25
2-89     3-2-1989    52.025—
                     52.030
3-89     6-1-1989    151.01;
                     151.02
                     93.01;
3-93     6-3-1993    93.03—
                     93.05
                     32.01;
6-93     9-2-1993    32.02;
                     32.99
4-94     10-6-1994   70.04
6-94     12-1-1994   130.03;
                     130.99
4-96     10-3-1996   53.04;
                     53.05
1-97     2-6-1997    90.15;
                     90.16
                     50.09;
5-97     10-2-1997   50.41—
                     50.45;
                     50.47
                     110.04;
6-97     10-2-1997   110.18;
                     110.99
1-98     1-8-1998    91.01;
                     91.99
2-98     2-5-1998    151.04;
                     151.99
                     92.01—
3-98     4-2-1998    92.04;
                     92.15—
                     92.23
4-00     5-4-2000    152.01—
                     152.04
7-00     7-6-2000    90.02
                     51.01;
9-00     7-6-2000    51.03—
                     51.07;
                     51.99
                     52.001—
                     52.012;
                     52.045—
                     52.048;
                     52.060—
11-00    9-7-2000    52.062;
                     52.075—
                     52.084;
                     52.095—
                     52.104;
                     52.999
12-02    10-10-2002  30.01
13-02    10-10-2002  31.99
01-03    1-9-2003    53.04
03-03    3-13-2003   91.02—
                     91.04
04-03    4-10-2003   50.07
05-03    6-12-2003   51.20—
                     51.25
07-04    4-8-2004    31.36
                     32.15;
03-07    1-11-2007   32.16;
                     32.99
18-07    6-14-2007   70.02;
                     70.99
19-07    6-14-2007   93.20—
                     93.23
28-07    7-13-2007   70.02;
                     70.99
                     150.15—
29-08    11-13-2008  150.28;
                     150.99
42-08    12-11-2008  90.01
11-09    5-14-2009   151.03;
                     151.99
                     95.01—
                     95.08;
15-09    6-11-2009   95.20—
                     95.33;
                     95.99
23-09    8-13-2009   70.02;
                     70.99
32-09    11-12-2009  90.03;
                     90.16
36-09    12-10-2009  151.06
09-10    3-11-2010   33.01
11-10    4-8-2010    33.01
17-10    6-8-2010    51.22
                     33.01;
                     50.07;
                     51.03;
19-10    7-8-2010    51.05;
                     51.23;
                     53.02;
                     53.05
20-10    7-8-2010    91.01;
                     91.99
26-10    9-9-2010    151.99
                     53.20—
02-11    1-13-2011   53.22;
                     53.99
10-11    4-14-2011   90.02;
                     90.16
                     53.20—
07-12    3-9-2012    53.22;
                     53.99
08-12    4-12-2012   10.03
04-13    2-14-2013   90.15
03-14    2-10-2014   93.20
08-14    6-12-2014   151.06
14-14    10-9-2014   93.20;
                     93.22
3-15     3-12-2015   70.02;
                     70.99
17-17    7-10-2017   111.01
19-17    9-14-2017   94.01;
                     94.99
31-17    12-14-2017  91.02—
                     91.04
01-18    1-11-2018   90.02;
                     90.99
                     71.01—
                     71.03;
                     71.15—
20-18    8-9-2018    71.20;
                     71.35;
                     71.36;
                     71.99
02-19    4-11-2019   152.15—
                     152.20
01-21    2-11-2021   94.01;
                     94.99
12-21    8-12-2021   151.05
                     31.16;
03-22    3-10-2022   110.04;
                     110.99
05-22    4-14-2022   151.02
25-22    9-8-2022    93.21
                     93.02;
04-23    2-9-2023    93.04;
                     93.99
16-23    5-11-2023   93.20
18-23    6-8-2023    150.01
24-23    9-14-2023   71.16
38-23    11-9-2023   50.60—
                     50.63
-        11-9-2023   33.01
20-24    8-8-2024    Adopting Ordinance
24-24    8-8-2024    53.06
-        9-12-2024   33.01
25-24    9-12-2024   70.04
-        10-10-2024  33.01
32-24    11-14-2024  150.01
02-25    - -         90.15,
                     90.16
-        2-13-2025   33.01
                     96.01—
05-25    4-10-2025   96.05,
                     96.99
-        4-10-2025   33.01
-        5-8-2025    33.01
-        4-10-2025   33.01
-        5-8-2025    33.01
-        7-1-2025    33.01
-        10-9-2025   33.01
30-25    - -         130.04
42-25    12-11-2025  71.03
                    
 
 
Comprehensive Ordinance List
Publisher's Note: The following table lists all ordinances passed by the Town
of Troutman. The table includes links to the ordinances, as maintained in PDF
format. For other legislation, including ordinances passed prior to 2024,
please contact the Town of Trouman.
 
Ordinances that amend the Code and are not yet effective have their
identifiying information highlighted in yellow. Changes made by those
ordinances are not incorporated into the text of the Code until the amending
ordinances are effective. Ordinances that do not affect the code have been
grayed out.
 
Jump to:
2024 Ordinances
2025 Ordinances
2024 Ordinances
 
Ord. No.      Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
20-24         8-8-2024   Enacting code of ordinances for the town of Troutman,
                         NC
                         Mandating all participating properties remain solid
24-24         8-8-2024   waste service customers
                          
                         53.06
                         Amending 70.04 regarding obstructions in public right-
25-24         9-12-2024  of-ways
                          
                         70.04
                         Schedule of Fees
Fees_9-12-24  9-12-2024   
                         33.01
                         Schedule of Fees
Fees_10-10-24 10-10-2024  
                         33.01
                         Amending UDO regarding periodic reviews to surety
32-24         11-14-2024 bonds
                          
                         9.4.5
 
2025 Ordinances
Ord. No. Eff. Date Short Title and Code Sections Affected
Ord. No.     Eff. Date  Short Title and Code Sections Affected
                        Amending livestock regulations
02-25        --          
                        90.15, 90.16
                        Schedule of Fees
Fees_2-13-25 2-13-2025   
                        33.01
                        Adding Ch. 96 regulating Alarms
05-25        4-10-2025   
                        96.01 - 96.063
                        Schedule of Fees
Fees_4-10-25 4-10-2025   
                        33.01
                        Schedule of Fees
Fees_5-8-25  5-8-2025    
                        33.01
                        Schedule of Fees
Fees_7-1-25  7-1-2025    
                        33.01
                        Weapons prohibited on town property
30-25        --          
                        130.04
                        Schedule of Fees
Fees_10-9-25 10-9-2025   
                        33.01
                        Municipal Parking Lots
42-25        12-11-2025  
                        71.03
                       
 
 
