TOWN OF WINGATE, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance passed 9-17-2024; and
State legislation current through 2024 North Carolina Legislative Service,
Pamphlet No. 3
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
PRIVATE LAWS
OF THE
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 1901
Chapter 55
AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE TOWN OF WINGATE, IN UNION COUNTY
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:
Section 1.
   That the Town of Wingate, in the County of Union, be and the same is hereby
incorporated under the name and style of “Wingate,” and it shall have the
benefit of, and be subject to all the provisions of law now existing in
reference to incorporated towns not inconsistent with this act.
Sec. 2.
   The corporate limits of the said town shall be as follows: Beginning at a
stake in the center of the street directly in front of G. M. Stewart’s
residence, where he now lives, which is to be the center of said corporation,
and measure north six hundred yards; thence east six hundred yards to a stake;
thence south twelve hundred yards to a stake; thence north twelve hundred yards
to a stake; thence east six hundred yards to the beginning.
Sec. 3.
   That the officers of said town shall consist of a Mayor and five
Commissioners, who shall be elected on the first Tuesday in November, nineteen
hundred and two, and annually thereafter; the election for said officers to be
held under the same rules and regulations as county and State elections are
held; and all residents of said incorporation who are qualified to vote for
county officers, shall be entitled to vote in said election.
Sec. 4.
   That until their successors have been duly elected and qualified, the
following named persons shall fill said offices, to wit: Mayor, J. T. Lowery;
Commissioners, W. M. Perry; J. W. Outen and J. L. Austin, and said
Commissioners shall have power to elect a Town Marshal and a Secretary and
Treasurer, and designate the salaries of said officers.
Sec. 5.
   That the Treasurer and Marshal shall each be required to give bond, payable
to the State of North Carolina, in the sum of two hundred ($200.00) dollars, to
be approved by the Mayor and Commissioners of said town.
Sec. 6.
   That the said Commissioners shall have power to pass all by-laws, rules and
regulations for the good government of said town, not inconsistent with the
laws of this State or the United States; and to levy and collect a tax on all
subjects of State taxation not to exceed twenty cents on the one hundred
dollars valuation of property, and sixty cents on the poll; and to impose fines
for the violation of town ordinances, and to collect the same; also, to levy
and collect all such license and privilege taxes as are mentioned in chapter
one hundred ten of The Code, and all acts amendatory thereto.
Sec. 7.
   That the taxes levied and the fines imposed shall be collected by the
Marshal in the same manner as other taxes are collected, and paid over to the
Treasurer; and shall be paid out by order of the Mayor and a majority of the
Commissioners of said town.
Sec. 8.
   That it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture, sell or
give away, or dispose of in any way, directly or indirectly, any vinous,
spirituous or malt liquors, wine or cider, or intoxicating drink of any kind
within the corporate limits of said town, and any person or persons violating
the provisions of this act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the discretion of
the Court.
Sec. 9.
   That when it shall be necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
good order and common decency, or the protection of life, liberty, person or
property of individuals, the Town Marshal shall have the authority, and it
shall be the duty of such Marshal to arrest the body of offending parties who
have violated the law in the presence of such Marshal, without warrant, and to
take such person or persons before the Mayor of said town as early as
practicable, to be dealt with as the law directs.
Sec. 10.
   That this act shall be in force from and after its ratification.
   In the General Assembly read three times, and ratified this the 5th day of
February, A.D. 1901.
PRIVATE LAWS OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 1905
Chapter 84.
AN ACT TO AMEND THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF WINGATE, UNION COUNTY, NORTH
CAROLINA.
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:
Section 1.
   That chapter fifty-five of the Private Laws of one thousand nine hundred and
one be and the same is hereby amended as follows, viz., that section two of
said act be stricken out and the following inserted in lieu thereof: “The
corporate limits of said town shall be as follows: Beginning at a stake in the
center of Main Street, at a point where the street leading from H. M.
Nicholson’s residence westward intersects Main Street and runs east one-half
mile to a stone; thence north one half mile; thence west one mile; thence south
one mile; thence east one mile; thence north one-half mile to a stone, the
beginning point in said boundary.”
Sec. 2.
   That section three of said act be amended by striking out the words,
“nineteen hundred and two” in line three and inserting in lieu thereof the
words “nineteen hundred and five.”
Editor’s Note:
   The phrase “line three” and subsequent phrases like it refer to the original
typography and layout of the 1901 Act of Incorporation.
Sec. 3.
   That section four be amended by striking out “J. T. Lowry” after the word
mayor in line three and inserting in lieu thereof “O. M. Sanders,” and further
by striking out “W. M. Perry, J. W. Outen and J. L. Austin” after the word
“commissioners” in line three of said section and inserting in lieu thereof
“Thos. Evans, J. W. Bivens and B. D. Austin.”
Sec. 4.
   That section six be amended by striking out the word “twenty” in line five
of said section and inserting in lieu thereof the word “twenty-five” and also
by striking out the word “sixty” in line six and inserting in lieu thereof the
word “seventy-five.”
Sec. 5.
   That section eight be amended by inserting after the word “kind” in line
four of said section the words “or cigarettes or cigarette tobacco.”
Sec. 6.
   That this act shall be in force from and after its ratification.
   In the General Assembly read three times, and ratified this the 14th day of
February, A.D. 1905.
PRIVATE LAWS OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 1909
Chapter 386.
AN ACT TO CREATE THE MAYOR IN WINGATE, IN THE COUNTY OF UNION, A JUSTICE OF THE
PEACE.
The General Assembly of North Carolina do enact:
Section 1.
   That the Mayor of Wingate, in the County of Union, shall be and he is hereby
created a Justice of the Peace, and as such shall have concurrent jurisdiction
with the recorder’s court of the city of Monroe of all offenses cognizable in
courts of justice of the peace committed within the corporate limits of said
town and of all violations of any of the ordinances of said town.
Sec. 2.
   This act shall be in force from and after its ratification.
   Ratified this the 8th day of March, A.D. 1909.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Wingate shall be
designated as the “Code of Wingate, North Carolina”, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense; however, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of the Town of Wingate, North
Carolina.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Wingate, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNTY. Union County, North Carolina.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this town.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      TOWN. The Town of Wingate, in the County of Union, North Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. One designated by the Board of Commissioners.
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or public way in
the town;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
town; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, Town of Wingate, North Carolina, is hereby amended as
follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Town of Wingate, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, divisions, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, division or chapter number, as the
case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and any and all amending ordinances, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
      (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
      (G.S. § 160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §       ).” The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to
exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of the
provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
(G.S. § 14-4(a))
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
      
32.   FINANCE AND PURCHASING
      
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   CHARTER AMENDMENTS
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Committees
Meetings; Procedures
   
30.15   Regular meetings
   
30.16   Special meetings
   
30.17   Mayor to preside
   
30.18   Mayor not to vote
   
30.19   Quorum
   
30.20   Minutes
Ordinances
   
30.35   Effective date
   
30.36   Ordinances confined to one subject
   
30.37   Official copy
   
30.38   Ordinances appropriating money
Cross-reference:
   Town officials, see
Chapter 31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor and the Board of Commissioners may create such committees of the
Board of Commissioners for special purposes as they deem best.
(Prior Code, § 30.01)
MEETINGS; PROCEDURES
§ 30.15 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be held on the
third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the Town Hall, unless otherwise
designated by the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 30.15)
§ 30.16 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore or any two members of the Board of
Commissioners may at any time call a special meeting of the Board of
Commissioners by signing a written notice stating the time and place of the
meeting and the subjects to be considered. The notice shall be delivered to the
Mayor and each Board of Commissioners member or left at his or her usual
dwelling place at least six hours before the meeting. Only those items of
business specified in the notice may be transacted at a special meeting, unless
all members are present, or have signed a written waiver of notice. In addition
to the procedures set out in this section, a person or persons calling a
special meeting of the Board of Commissioners shall comply with the notice
requirements of G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33C.
   (B)   Special meetings may be held at any time when the Mayor and all
members of the Board of Commissioners are present and consent thereto, or when
those not present have signed a written waiver of notice.
   (C)   During any regular meeting, or any duly called special meeting, the
Board of Commissioners may call or schedule a special meeting, provided that
the motion or resolution calling or scheduling any such special meeting shall
specify the time, place and purposes of such meeting and shall be adopted
during an open session.
   (D)   Any regular or duly called special meeting may be recessed to
reconvene at a time and place certain, or may be adjourned to reconvene at a
time and place certain, by the Board of Commissioners.
(G.S. § 160A-71(b)) (Prior Code, § 30.16)
§ 30.17 MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Commissioners, and
in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside.
(Prior Code, § 30.17)
§ 30.18 MAYOR NOT TO VOTE.
   The Mayor shall not vote on any question before the Board of Commissioners,
except in the case of a tie vote deadlocking a decision of the Board of
Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 30.18)
§ 30.19 QUORUM.
   (A)   A majority of the actual membership of the Board of Commissioners,
plus the Mayor, excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a quorum. A member who
has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused by majority vote of the
remaining members present shall be counted as present for purposes of
determining whether or not a quorum is present.
   (B)   Any member present by means of simultaneous communication in
accordance with G.S. § 166A-19.24 shall be counted as present for the purposes
of whether a quorum is present only during the period while simultaneous
communication is maintained for that member.
(G.S. § 160A-74) (Prior Code, § 30.19)
§ 30.20 MINUTES.
   Full and accurate minutes of Board of Commissioners proceedings shall be
kept, and shall be open to the inspection of the public. The results of each
vote shall be recorded in the minutes, and upon the request of any member of
the Board of Commissioners, the ayes and noes upon any question shall be taken.
(G.S. § 160A-72) (Prior Code, § 30.20)
ORDINANCES
§ 30.35 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof, except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinances required by state
law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.
(Prior Code, § 30.30)
§ 30.36 ORDINANCES CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.
   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject, except appropriation
ordinances which shall be confined to the subject of appropriations only.
(Prior Code, § 30.31)
§ 30.37 OFFICIAL COPY.
   A true copy of an ordinance, which has been enacted by the Board of
Commissioners, signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk, shall be known as
an official copy of any ordinance for the town. All ordinances or a true copy
thereof shall be inserted in this code in the proper chapter.
(Prior Code, § 30.32)
§ 30.38 ORDINANCES APPROPRIATING MONEY.
   No appropriation ordinance or an ordinance to alter or repeal an
appropriation ordinance shall be enacted at any meeting other than a regular
meeting except by a unanimous vote of the entire Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 30.33)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Mayor and Manager
   
31.02   Clerk
   
31.03   Other officers and employees
   
31.04   Employees’ bonds
   
31.05   Mayor to declare a state of emergency
§ 31.01 MAYOR AND MANAGER.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor and Town Manager to preside over all
meetings of the Board of Commissioners. It shall be duty of the Town Manager to
enforce ordinances, report budgets, CEO and other duties. It shall further be
the duty of the Mayor to within 30 days after the close of each year require a
report to the Board of Commissioners from the various departments of the town
government for the previous year and recommend such adjustments as he or she
may see fit. The Mayor shall perform such other duties as the Board of
Commissioners may from time to time require. The Mayor shall be the chief
executive officer of the town.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.02 CLERK.
   (A)   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Board of Commissioners and
shall regularly and fairly record all of its proceedings in a book to be kept
by him or her for that purpose. He or she shall also keep a well-bound book to
be styled the code of ordinances, in which he or she shall fairly and correctly
transcribe all ordinances which are enacted by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to keep true, accurate and just
books of accounts of the dealings and transactions of the town, which books
shall show at all times the true condition of the said town, its resources and
liabilities and the disposition and use of the monies coming under the control
of the town.
   (C)   The Clerk shall keep or cause to be kept in a safe place all monies,
records and accounts.
   (D)   The Clerk shall disburse funds for the various purposes of the town
only when an appropriation for such purpose has been made in the annual budget
and the disbursement is authorized by the Board of Commissioners.
   (E)   The Clerk shall perform such other duties as the Board of
Commissioners may from time to time require.
(Prior Code, § 31.02)
§ 31.03 OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Such other officers and employees that are deemed necessary shall be
appointed by the Board of Commissioners at the first meeting in May each year.
All officers and employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of
Commissioners and receive such compensation as from time to time may be
prescribed by the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.04 EMPLOYEES’ BONDS.
   The Clerk and other officers or employees required by the Board of
Commissioners shall, before entering upon their duties, post bond in amounts
specified by the state statutes. All bond premiums shall be paid from town
funds, provided that when two offices are combined, such as Clerk and
Treasurer, only one bond shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.05 MAYOR TO DECLARE A STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   When emergency deemed to exist. A state of emergency shall be deemed
to exist whenever, during times of public crisis, disaster, rioting,
catastrophe or similar public emergency, for any reason,
municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or
afford adequate protection for lives or property.
   (B)   Declaration by Mayor. In the event of an existing or threatened state
of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people
within the town, or threatening danger to or destruction of property, the Mayor
is authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives, safety and property of people within the town,
to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized.
   (C)   Authority of Mayor. The Mayor is authorized and empowered to limit, by
the declaration, the
application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area specifically
designated and described within the town limits and to specific hours of the
day or night, and to exempt from any or all such restrictions police officers,
firefighters , doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as may be
essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to
serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the town.
   (D)   End of state of emergency, or of restrictions. The Board of
Commissioners or Mayor shall pass a resolution in order to proclaim the end of
such state of emergency or all or any part of the restrictions as declared
under this section as soon as circumstances warrant.
   (E)   Restrictions during emergency. During the existence of a proclaimed
state of emergency, the Mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the
following restrictions:
      (1)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or
roadway or upon public property unless in search of medical assistance, food or
other commodities or services necessary to sustain the well-being of themselves
or their families. The Mayor may also direct and compel the evacuation of all
or part of a stricken or threatened area.
      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of any
explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapon of any kind, and prohibit
the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof except this section
does not authorize a prohibition or restriction on lawfully possessed firearms
or ammunition.
      (3)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wines or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one's own premises.
      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline or any other similar
petroleum products, or any other flammable or explosive substances.
      (5)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or
participation therein when taking place on any public ways or upon any public
property.
      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any
business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other public assembly of any nature
whatsoever.
      (7)   Prohibit or regulate other activities or conditions the control of
which may be reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or
property during the state of emergency.
   (F)   Extension of proclamation declaring state of emergency. Any
proclamation declaring a state of emergency may be extended, altered or
repealed in any particular during the continued or threatened existence of a
state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.
   (G)   Unlawful to violate restriction imposed by proclamation. During the
existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any
person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation
authorized by this section.
   (H)   Penalty for violation of section; restrictions imposed by
proclamation. The violation of this section, or any provision of any
restrictions imposed by any proclamation authorized by this section, shall
constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor in accordance with G.S. § 14-288.20.
(Ord. passed 6-23-2020)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND PURCHASING
Section
   
32.01   Disbursement of funds
   
32.02   Purchasing
   
32.03   Disposing of personal property valued at less than $30,000
§ 32.01 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   No money shall be disbursed from the town treasury, except in accordance
with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, being G.S. §§ 159.7 et
seq.
(Prior Code, § 32.01)
§ 32.02 PURCHASING.
   (A)   Before any order is given for items to be paid by the town or any
purchase made by any town employee, a purchasing order must first be obtained
from the town purchasing agent.
   (B)   Any town employee purchasing goods without a purchase order from the
town purchasing agent will be held responsible for the cost of same.
(Prior Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 DISPOSING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY VALUED AT LESS THAN $30,000.
   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to dispose of any surplus
personal property owned by the town, whenever he or she determines, in his or
her discretion, that:
      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than
$30,000;
      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and
      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interest of the town would best be served by disposing of the
property.
   (B)   The Town Manager may dispose of any such surplus personal property by
any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest
attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including, but not
limited to, the methods of sale provided in G.S. § 160A-12. Such sale may be
public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting period.
   (C)   Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the sale of such
property by electronic auction as prescribed in G.S. § 160A-270 is hereby
authorized, including by use of an existing private or public electronic
auction service as determined by the Town Manager. Notice of an electronic
auction, setting forth the electronic address where information about the
property to be sold and the electronic address and time where electronic bids
may be posted, may be given by electronic means only at
www.wingate.govoffice.com and the electronic address of the electronic auction
service. The Town Manager is authorized to enter into contracts with such
electronic auction service to conduct the electronic auction.
   (D)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the
highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the town if
greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Town Manager is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents.
      (1)   If no offers are received within a reasonable time, the Town
Manager may retain the property, obtain any reasonably available salvage value,
or cause it to be disposed of as waste material.
      (2)   No surplus property may be donated to any individual or
organization, except by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
   (E)   The Town Manager shall keep a record of all property sold under
authority of this section, and that record shall generally describe the
property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and
the amount of money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange.
   (F)   This section is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-266
(c).
(Ord. passed 5-18-2010)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Organization
   
33.02   Board of Commissioners to have control
   
33.03   Chief of Police
   
33.04   Duties of police
   
33.05   Uniforms
   
33.06   Reserve/auxiliary police officer
Drug Testing Policy
   
33.20   Purpose
   
33.21   Policy
   
33.22   Definitions
   
33.23   Applicant and lateral transferee drug testing; procedures
   
33.24   Specimen collection procedures
   
33.25   Drug testing methodology
   
33.26   Medical Review Officer
   
33.27   Chain of evidence; storage
   
33.28   Confidentiality of test results
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 ORGANIZATION.
   The Police Department of the town shall consist of a Chief and as many
police officers as the Board of Commissioners shall from time to time determine
and elect, and as many special police officers as the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners may deem necessary to appoint for special purposes.
(Prior Code, § 33.01)
§ 33.02 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS TO HAVE CONTROL.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall have general supervision over the Police
Department.
   (B)   The Town Manager may suspend, for good cause, any member of the Police
Department until the next regular meeting, at which time final disposition
shall be made.
(Prior Code, § 33.02)
§ 33.03 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   The Chief shall have control over the Police Department under the
supervision of the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The Chief shall keep the Board of Commissioners informed of the
Department’s activities and make such reports that the Board of Commissioners
may from time to time require, and he or she shall perform such other duties as
may be required of him or her by the Board.
(Prior Code, § 33.03)
 § 33.04 DUTIES OF POLICE.
   The Police Department shall carry out all orders of the Board of
Commissioners, enforce all laws and ordinances of the town and the state, and
shall at all times preserve the peace, protect the property and the safety of
the citizens of the town.
(Prior Code, § 33.04)
§ 33.05 UNIFORMS.
   All police officers shall wear uniforms as shall be provided by the town and
shall keep such uniforms in a neat and clean condition, and shall surrender all
uniforms and equipment upon leaving the police service of the town if such
uniforms and equipment were furnished by the town.
(Prior Code, § 33.05)
§ 33.06 RESERVE/AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   There is hereby established within the Town Police Department, as a
division thereof, an Auxiliary Police Division.
   (B)   The Auxiliary Police Division shall be a volunteer organization, whose
members shall serve without compensation, composed of as many members as may
from time to time be determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the Town
Manager.
(Ord. passed 10-21-2008)
DRUG TESTING POLICY
§ 33.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to provide all applicants for employment with
the Town Police Department with notice of the provisions of the department’s
drug testing program.
(Prior Code, § 33.20) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.21 POLICY.
   (A)   Due to the critical mission of criminal justice officers and the
reliance by the citizens of the community upon this department for law
enforcement and general safety and protection, it is the policy of this
department to maintain a drug-free work environment through the use of an
applicant and lateral transferee testing program.
   (B)   The criminal justice profession has several uniquely compelling
interests that justify the implementation of a drug testing program. The public
has a right to expect that those who are sworn to protect them are at all times
both physically and mentally prepared to assume these duties. There is
sufficient evidence to conclude that the use of controlled substances and other
forms of drug abuse will seriously impair an employee’s physical and mental
health and, thus, job performance.
   (C)   Where criminal justice officers participate in illegal drug use and
drug activity, the integrity of the criminal justice profession and public
confidence in the profession are destroyed. This confidence is further eroded
by the potential for corruption created by illegal drug use. This department
has a compelling interest in ensuring that every criminal justice officer,
sworn to uphold the law, has unimpeachable integrity.
   (D)   This department also has a compelling interest in preventing any
unwarranted risk to the life of the citizens of the community posed by the
potential use of deadly force by armed officers suffering from impaired
perception and judgment.
   (E)   Local confinement personnel routinely have regular access to inmate
populations and are responsible for the general health, safety and security of
prisoners. These officers must work at “optimum mental and physical levels” in
order to effectively deal with and control prisoners, to prevent breaches of
the peace and/or escape and to prevent prisoners and others from smuggling
drugs, weapons or other contraband into the local confinement facility.
   (F)   This department places a great deal of trust and confidence in the
integrity and loyalty of each of its employees. Illegal drug use by employees
of this department evidences less than the complete reliability, stability and
good judgment that is consistent with law enforcement employees and creates the
possibility of coercion, influence and irresponsible action under pressure that
may pose a threat to effective enforcement of the law and maintenance of the
peace. Additionally, employees who use illegal drugs, on or off duty, tend to
be less productive, less reliable and prone to greater tardiness and
absenteeism than their fellow employees who do not use drugs.
   (G)   Therefore, in order to ensure the integrity of this department, to
protect the citizens of this community, and to preserve public trust and
confidence in a fit and drug-free criminal justice profession, this department
shall implement a drug testing program. This program is designed to reduce the
likelihood that drug-dependent applicants and lateral transferees will be
employed by this department.
(Prior Code, § 33.21) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.22 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person, other than a lateral transferee, who applies for
employment or appointment as a criminal justice officer.
   CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICER. A sworn law enforcement officer with power of
arrest, and officers, supervisors and administrative personnel at local
confinement facilities.
   DRUG TEST. The compulsory production and submission of urine by an applicant
or lateral transferee in accordance with departmental procedures for chemical
analysis to detect drug use.
   LATERAL TRANSFEREE. A criminal justice officer who applies for employment or
appointment where the officer has previously held general certification and has
been separated by an agency in good standing or transferred to this agency, and
the officer has been separated from a criminal justice officer position for no
more than twelve months.
(Prior Code, § 33.22) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.23 APPLICANT AND LATERAL TRANSFEREE DRUG TESTING; PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Applicants and lateral transferees applying for criminal justice
officer positions shall be required to take a drug test as a condition of
employment during the application process, but not more than 60 days prior to
the date of employment as a criminal justice officer.
   (B)   Applicants and lateral transferees shall be disqualified from further
consideration for employment under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Refusal to submit to a required drug test; or
      (2)   A confirmed positive drug test indicating drug use prohibited by
this policy.
(Prior Code, § 33.23) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.24 SPECIMEN COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The testing procedures and safeguards provided in this policy to
ensure the integrity of department drug testing shall be adhered to by all
personnel administering drug tests.
   (B)   The individual to be tested (hereinafter referred to as “donor”)
should be positively identified by presenting one of the following:
      (1)   North Carolina driver’s license;
      (2)   Division of Motor Vehicles Identification Card; and
      (3)   Other government-issued picture ID.
   (C)   The donor will be required to complete an Applicant Consent Form.
   (D)   The donor will have completed an Applicant Medication Information
Form.
   (E)   The room where the sample is to be obtained must have been checked to
ensure that it is private, secure and free of any foreign substance.
   (F)   A toilet bluing agent should be placed in the toilet bowl to ensure
that the donor does not use toilet water to dilute the specimen.
   (G)   The donor should be asked to remove any unnecessary outer garments
such as a coat or jacket.
   (H)   All personal belongings such as a purse or briefcase should be left
outside the collection room. A donor should be allowed to retain his or her
wallet.
   (I)   Donor should be instructed to wash and dry hands.
   (J)   Donor should be provided with a new and/or unadultered specimen
collection bottle/container. The donor should be instructed that a specimen of
60 milliliters or two ounces is necessary for urinalysis.
   (K)   Donor should be instructed that, while alone in the collection room,
he or she may not run any water, flush the toilet or handle anything else in
the room.
   (L)   Donor enters the collection room and the collector stands outside the
door. Collector should note on the urine specimen collection checklist if he or
she hears any unusual activity. If the donor runs water or flushes the toilet
while alone in the collection room, then the specimen is invalid and the
process must begin anew.
   (M)   Collector should receive the sample from the donor. Should the
specimen need to be transferred from the collection container to other
containers, the donor should make such transfer while under observation by the
collector. The specimen should be kept in full view of both the collector and
donor until it is sealed.
   (N)   Collector should check to see that a specimen of sufficient quantity
has been collected.
      (1)   Should a specimen of insufficient quantity be presented to the
collector, that specimen should be discarded and another specimen should be
collected in a new container.
      (2)   If a donor is unable to provide a specimen at that time, it is
recommended that the donor be given eight ounces of liquid (water, coffee, soft
drink) every 30 minutes. This should enable the donor to produce a sample
within two hours.
      (3)   The donor must stay at the collection site until a specimen of
sufficient quantity is obtained.
   (O)   If the specimen is of sufficient quantity, the collector should check
the temperature of the specimen. Temperature must fall between 90.5°F and
99.8°F and time from urination to temperature measurement shall not exceed four
minutes.
   (P)   Collector should inspect the specimen’s color and look for any signs
of contaminants. Any concerns should be noted on the urine specimen collection
checklist. Should there be reasonable suspicion that the donor tampered with
the specimen, the collector must notify the employing agency and send the
specimen to the laboratory for testing.
   (Q)   Collector should seal the specimen container and be sure that
appropriate identification is added to the container’s other label(s).
   (R)   Donor may now wash hands.
   (S)   Collector should see that the specimen is appropriately safeguarded
until such time as it is prepared for and delivered to the laboratory.
(Prior Code, § 33.24) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.25 DRUG TESTING METHODOLOGY.
   (A)   The testing or processing phase shall consist of a two-step procedure:
      (1)   Initial screening test using an immunoassay testing method; and
      (2)   Confirmation test using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/
MS) method.
   (B)   When the lab receives a urine sample it will conduct an initial
screening test to check for the presence of illegal drugs. This initial
screening test involves using an immunoassay testing method.
   (C)   The drugs whose use shall be tested for shall include cannabis,
cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP), opiates and amphetamines or their metabolites.
   (D)   The threshold levels established by the Department of Health and Human
Services for Federal Workplace Drug Testing programs are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall automatically include any later amendments and editions of
said adopted matter.
   (E)   The laboratory conducting the test must be certified for federal
workplace drug testing programs and must adhere to applicable federal rules,
regulations and guidelines pertaining to the handling, testing, storage and
preservation of samples.
   (F)   Should the initial test produce a positive result for the presence of
an illegal drug, the lab will automatically perform a second test. Known as a
confirmation test, the second screening involves using a technologically
different and more sensitive gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS)
testing method.
   (G)   The laboratory will report a test result as positive if, and only if,
both the initial test and the confirmation test show the presence of an illegal
drug.
   (H)   The laboratory will report all test results directly to the Medical
Review Officer.
(Prior Code, § 33.25) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.26 MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER.
   (A)   In order to provide the greatest extent possible for the privacy and
confidentiality of applicants who are required to submit to drug testing, all
laboratory results will be sent directly to the Medical Review Officer. All
specimens reported by the laboratory as negative will in turn be reported to
the agency by the Medical Review Officer as negative.
   (B)   With respect to confirmed positive results, the Medical Review
Officer:
      (1)   May conduct medical interviews with the applicant;
      (2)   May review applicant medical histories or any other biomedical
factors;
      (3)   Shall review all medical records made available by the tested
employee when a confirmed positive could have resulted from legally prescribed
medication; and
      (4)   May deem the results scientifically insufficient for further action
and declare the result to be negative based on a review of such data or facts
as he or she may deem appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 33.26) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.27 CHAIN OF EVIDENCE; STORAGE.
   (A)   Each step in the collecting and processing of the urine specimens
shall be documented to establish procedural integrity and the chain of custody.
   (B)   Where a positive result is confirmed, urine specimens shall be
maintained by the laboratory in secured, refrigerated storage for an indefinite
period.
(Prior Code, § 33.27) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
§ 33.28 CONFIDENTIALITY OF TEST RESULTS.
   (A)   A positive result which the Medical Review Officer justifies by
appropriate medical or scientific documentation to account for the result as
other than the intentional ingestion of an illegal drug will be reported as a
negative result and may not be released for purposes of identifying illegal
drug use. Records of the Medical Review Officer shall only be released to the
agency head or appropriate agency coordinator and, when necessary, to the State
Criminal Justice Education and Training Standards Commission.
   (B)   All records and information of personnel actions taken on applicants
with verified positive test results shall be maintained in accordance with
state and local personnel policies and procedures.
(Prior Code, § 33.28) (Ord. passed 11-19-1990)
CHAPTER 34: TOWN ORGANIZATIONS
Section
ABC Board
   
34.01   Membership
   
34.02   Qualifications
   
34.03   Vacancy
   
34.04   Removal
   
34.05   Salary
   
34.06   Conflicts of interest
   
34.07   Bond
   
34.08   Limited liability
County Historic Preservation Commission
   
34.20   Purpose
   
34.21   General provisions
   
34.22   Designation of Historic Districts
   
34.23   Designation of landmarks
   
34.24   Alteration or demolition of designated landmark or historic district
   
34.25   Delay in demolition of landmarks and buildings within historic
districts
   
34.26   Records of Commission
   
34.27   Receipt and expenditure of funds
   
34.28   Staff and technical services
   
34.29   Ownership of property
   
34.30   Ordinance to apply to publicly owned buildings and structures
   
34.31   Conflict with other laws
   
34.32   Remedies
ABC BOARD
§ 34.01 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Town ABC Board shall consist of three members appointed for three-year
terms. The Board of Commissioners shall appoint one member for a three-year
term, one member for a two-year term and one member for a one-year term. As the
terms of the original Board members expire, their successors shall be appointed
for three-year terms. The Board of Commissioners shall designate one member as
Chairperson.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.02 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Members shall be appointed on the basis of their interest in public affairs,
good judgment, knowledge, ability and good moral character.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.03 VACANCY.
   A vacancy shall be filled by the Board of Commissioners for the remaining of
the unexpired term. If the Chairperson’s seat becomes vacant, the Board of
Commissioners may designate either the new member or an existing member of the
Wingate ABC Board to complete the Chairperson’s term.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.04 REMOVAL.
   A member of the Town ABC Board may be removed for cause at any time by the
appointing authority. Local Board members are subject to the removal provisions
of G.S. § 18B-202. Board members may be removed by a judge upon conviction of a
violation of G.S. Chapter 18, or upon a conviction of a felony. Once convicted,
the Board member is ineligible for membership of the Town ABC Board for a
period of not longer than three years.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.05 SALARY.
   A Town ABC Board member may be compensated as determined by the Board of
Commissioners .
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.06 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   The provisions of G.S. § 18B-201 shall apply.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.07 BOND.
   Each local Board member shall be bonded in an amount not less than $5,000,
secured by a corporate surety, for the faithful performance of his or her
duties. A public employees’ blanket position bond in the required amount
satisfies the requirements of this section. The bond shall be payable to the
Town ABC Board and shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners. The Board
of Commissioners may waive this requirement for Board members who do not handle
Board funds, and may increase the amount for members who handle Board funds.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
§ 34.08 LIMITED LIABILITY.
   A person serving as a member of the Town ABC Board shall be immune
individually from civil liability for monetary damages, except to the extent
covered by insurance, for any act or failure to act arising out of this
service, except where the person:
   (A)   Was not acting within the scope of his or her official duties;
   (B)   Was not acting in good faith;
   (C)   Committed gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct that
resulted in the damage or injury;
   (D)   Derived an improper personal financial benefit from the transaction;
or
   (E)   Incurred the liability from the operation of a motor vehicle.
(Ord. passed 2-23-2010)
COUNTY HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 34.20 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The historical heritage of the county is one of its most valued and
important assets. Conservation of historic districts and landmarks will
stabilize and increase the values in their areas and strengthen the overall
economy of the county and state.
   (B)   By means of listing, regulation and acquisition of historic districts
and landmarks, the county, Monroe, Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw,
Weddington and Wingate seek within their respective zoning jurisdictions:
      (1)   To safeguard its heritage by preserving any district or landmark
therein that embodies important elements of its culture, history, architectural
history or prehistory; and
      (2)   To promote the use and conservation of such district or landmark
for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of the county and
state as a whole.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Creation.
      (1)   There is hereby established by authority of G.S. Chapter 160A,
Article 19, Part 3C, the County Joint Historic Preservation Commission,
hereafter referred to as the Historic Preservation Commission or Commission, to
consist of 13 members with four appointed by the County Commissioners, three
appointed by the Monroe City Council, and one appointed by the Town Councils of
each of Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington and Wingate.
      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission members shall serve without
monetary compensation. In establishing the Historic Preservation Commission and
making appointments to it, the above-named Board and Councils may seek the
advice of such state or local historical agencies, societies or organizations
as it may deem necessary.
   (B)   Joint ordinance.
      (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of state law, the county, the City of
Monroe, and the Towns of Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw,
Weddington and Wingate do hereby adopt this subchapter as a joint ordinance. It
is the intent of this subchapter that the county and each city or town
subscribing to this subchapter shall have complete control of all historic
districts or landmarks located within its incorporated municipal limits, at the
present and in the future, except to the extent that any functions are
specifically delegated to the Historic Preservation Commission. Any references
in this subchapter to all of the subscribing parties shall be construed to be
in the disjunctive rather than the conjunctive, it not being the intent of this
subchapter that any governmental entity have any authority beyond its municipal
limits. At the present time, the City of Monroe, and the Towns of Stallings,
Waxhaw and Weddington exercise zoning jurisdiction independent of the county.
The Towns of Indian Trail, Marshville and Wingate do not exercise independent
zoning jurisdiction, with all zoning matters within those towns being
administered by the county. To the extent that this subchapter requires acts to
be performed incident to a zoning ordinance, the county shall perform those
functions on behalf of Indian Trail, Marshville and Wingate, until such time as
those towns shall adopt their own zoning ordinances. It is the intent of this
subchapter that upon the adoption of zoning ordinances by Indian Trail,
Marshville and Wingate that those towns would assume full authority as to all
acts required under this subchapter.
      (2)   To the extent that any prior ordinances adopted by any governmental
entity is inconsistent with this subchapter, then such prior ordinances are
hereby repealed.
   (C)   Representation. All members of the Historic Preservation Commission
shall be residents of the county and each shall reside within the jurisdiction
of the Board or Council appointing them representative. A majority of the
members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in
history, architecture, archaeology or related fields.
   (D)   Tenure. Members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall serve
overlapping terms of four years. Initially, two appointees by the county, and
one appointee each from Monroe, Indian Trail, Marshville and Stallings shall be
for two years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term of four years.
A member may be reappointed for a second consecutive term, but after two
consecutive terms a member shall be ineligible for reappointment until one
calendar year has elapsed from the date of the termination of his or her second
term. Appointments to any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the term of the
vacant position for which the appointment is made. For purposes of
reappointment to the Historic Preservation Commission, an initial two-year
term, or serving the balance of an unexpired term of two years or less shall
not be considered to be one of the two consecutive terms, and such person would
be eligible to serve two consecutive full terms in addition to the partial
term.
   (E)   Attendance of meetings. Any member of the Historic Preservation
Commission who misses more than three consecutive regular meetings or one-half
the regular meetings in a calendar year without excuse granted by the Historic
Preservation Commission shall lose his or her status as a member of the
Historic Preservation Commission and shall be replaced or reappointed by the
appropriate governing Board or Council to divisions (A) and (C) above.
   (F)   Meetings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold meetings
regularly at least once each quarter, and more often as it shall determine and
require. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the North Carolina Open
Meetings Law, G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33C. Reasonable notice of the time and
place thereof shall be given to the public.
   (G)   Rules of procedure. The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt
rules of procedure for the conduct of its business, and an annual written
report shall be prepared and submitted to the County Board of Commissioners,
the Monroe City Council, and the Town Councils of Indian Trail, Marshville,
Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington and Wingate. Such report shall include a
comprehensive and detailed review of the activities, problems and actions of
the Historic Preservation Commission as well as any budget requests or
recommendations. The Historic Preservation Commission shall keep a record of
its members’ attendance, and of its resolutions, findings and recommendations,
which record shall be a public record.
   (H)   Quorum and vote required for recommendation. Seven members of the
Historic Preservation Commission shall constitute a quorum. The concurrence of
at least a majority of those members present will be required before any
recommendation or action is made on any matter considered.
   (I)   Private interest of members. No member of the Historic Preservation
Commission may discuss, advocate or vote on any matter in which he or she has a
separate, private or monetary interest, either direct or indirect, and no
member may discuss before a governing Board or Council any matter which has
been, is, or will be considered by the Historic Preservation Commission on
which he or she serves, and in which he or she has a separate, private or
monetary interest, either direct or indirect. Any member who violates this
provision may be subject to removal from the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (J)   Commission powers. The Historic Preservation Commission is authorized
and empowered to undertake such actions reasonably necessary to the discharge
and conduct of its duties and responsibilities as outlined in this subchapter:
      (1)   Undertake an inventory of properties of historical, prehistorical,
architectural and/or cultural significance;
      (2)   Recommend to the County Board of Commissioners, the Monroe City
Councils, and the Town Councils of Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw,
Weddington and Wingate, areas to be designated by ordinance as “Historic
Districts”; and individual structures, buildings, sites, areas or objects to be
designated by ordinance as “Landmarks”;
      (3)   Acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included
interest, including options to purchase, to properties within established
districts or to any such properties designated as landmarks, to hold, manage,
preserve, restore and improve the same, and to exchange or dispose of the
property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or
other legally binding restrictions which will secure appropriate rights of
public access and promote the preservation of the property;
      (4)   Restore, preserve and operate historic properties;
      (5)   Recommend to the Board or Council that designation of any area as a
historic district or part thereof, or designation of any building, structure,
site, area or object as a landmark, be revoked or removed for cause;
      (6)   Conduct an educational program with respect to historic properties
and districts within its jurisdiction;
      (7)   Cooperate with the state, federal and local governments in
pursuance of the purposes of this subchapter. The Historic Preservation
Commission when authorized by the local governing Board and Councils may
contract with the state, or the United States of America, or any agency of
either, or with any other organization provided the terms are not inconsistent
with state or federal law;
      (8)   Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at
reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof;
however, no member, employee or agent of the Historic Preservation Commission
may enter any private building or structure without the express consent of the
owner or occupant thereof;
      (9)   Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation
element as part of the comprehensive plan of the county, the City of Monroe,
and the Towns of Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington and
Wingate;
      (10)   Review and act upon proposals for alterations, demolitions or new
construction within historic districts, or for the alteration or demolition of
designated landmarks, pursuant to this subchapter;
      (11)   Negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure,
site, area or object for its acquisition or its preservation, when such action
is reasonably necessary or appropriate;
      (12)   Accept funds granted to the Historic Preservation Commission for
preservation purposes from private individuals and organizations;
      (13)   Organize itself and conduct its business; and
      (14)   Any other powers as allowed by law.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.22 DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Adoption of an ordinance of designation of an Historic District. Upon
compliance with the procedures set out in division (C) below, the County Board
of Commissioners, the Monroe City Council, or the Indian Trail, Marshville,
Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or the Wingate Town Councils may as part of a
zoning or other ordinance enacted or amended pursuant to this subchapter
designate and from time to time amend one or more historic districts within the
area subject to the ordinance. Such ordinance may treat historic districts
either as a separate use district classification or as districts which overlay
other zoning districts. Where historic districts are designated as separate use
districts, the zoning ordinance may include as uses by right or as conditional
or special uses those uses found by the Historical Preservation Commission to
have existed during the period sought to be restored or preserved, or to be
compatible with the restoration or preservation of the district.
   (B)   Definition of character of an Historic District. Historic Districts
established pursuant to this subchapter shall consist of areas which are deemed
and found by the Historic Preservation Commission to be of special significance
in terms of their history, prehistory architecture and/or culture, and to
possess integrity of design, setting, materials, feeling and association.
   (C)   Required procedures.
      (1)   No historic district or districts shall be designated until:
         (a)   An investigation and report describing the significance of the
buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings included in any such
proposed district, and a description of the boundaries of such district has
been prepared; and
         (b)   The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the State
Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee, shall have made an
analysis of and recommendations concerning such report and description of
proposed boundaries. Failure of the department to submit its written analysis
and recommendations to the governing board within 30 calendar days after a
written request for such analysis has been received by the Department of
Cultural Resources shall relieve the governing board of any responsibility for
awaiting such analysis, and said board may at any time thereafter take any
necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning ordinance.
      (2)   The governing board may also, in its discretion, refer the report
and the proposed boundaries to any other interested body for its recommendation
prior to taking action to amend the zoning ordinance. With respect to any
changes in the boundaries of such district subsequent to its initial
establishment, or the creation of additional districts within the jurisdiction,
the investigative studies and reports required by division (C)(1)(a) above
shall be prepared by the commission and shall be referred to the local planning
agency for its review and comment according to procedures set forth in the
zoning ordinance. Changes in the boundaries of an initial district or proposal
for additional districts shall also be submitted to the Department of Cultural
Resources in accordance with the provisions of division (C)(1)(b) above.
      (3)   On receipt of these reports and recommendations, the governing
board may proceed in the same manner as would otherwise be required for the
adoption or amendment of any appropriate zoning ordinance provisions.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.23 DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS.
   (A)   Adoption of an ordinance of designation of landmarks.
      (1)   Upon complying with the landmark designation procedures as set
forth in this subchapter, the County Board of Commissioners, the Monroe City
Council, or the Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or
Wingate Town Councils may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal an
ordinance designating one or more historic landmarks. No property shall be
recommended for designation as a landmark unless it is deemed and found by the
Historic Preservation Commission to be of special significance in terms of its
historical, prehistorical, architectural or cultural importance and to possess
integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or
association.
      (2)   The ordinance shall describe each property designated in the
ordinance, the name or names of the owner or owners of the property, those
elements of the property that are integral to its historical, architectural or
prehistorical value, including the land areas of the property so designated and
any other information the governing board deems necessary. For each building,
structure, site, area or object so designated as a historic landmark, the
ordinance shall require that the waiting period set forth in G.S. Part 3C be
observed prior to its demolition. For each designated landmark, the ordinance
may also provide for a suitable sign on the property indicating that the
property has been so designated. If the owner consents, the sign shall be
placed upon the property. If an owner objects, the sign shall be placed on a
nearby public right-of-way.
   (B)   Inventory of landmarks. As a guide for the identification and
evaluation of landmarks, the Historic Preservation Commission shall undertake
at the earliest possible time and consistent with the resources available to it
an inventory of properties of historical, architectural, prehistorical and
cultural significance within its jurisdiction. Such inventories and any
additions or revisions thereof shall be submitted as expeditiously as possible
to the Division of Archives and History.
   (C)   Required procedures. No ordinance designating a historic building,
structure, site, area or object as a landmark nor any amendment thereto may be
adopted, nor may any property be accepted or acquired by the Historic
Preservation Commission or the County Board of Commissioners, the Monroe City
Council, or the Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or Town
Councils until all of the following procedural steps have been taken.
      (1)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare and adopt rules
of procedure and principles and guidelines for altering, restoring, moving or
demolishing properties designated as landmarks.
      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall make or cause to be made
an investigation and report on the historic, architectural, prehistorical,
educational or cultural significance of each building, structure, site, area or
object proposed for designation or acquisition. The investigation and report
shall be forwarded to the Division of Archives and History, North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources.
      (3)   The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the State
Historic Preservation Officer, shall either upon request of the department or
at the initiative of the Historic Preservation Commission be given an
opportunity to review and comment upon the substance and effect of the
designation of any landmark. Comments shall be provided in writing within 30
days following receipt by the Department of the investigation and report. The
County Board of Commissioners, the Monroe City Council, or the Indian Trail,
Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or Wingate Town Councils shall be
relieved of any responsibility to consider Department comments if such comments
are not received within 30 days.
      (4)   The owner of the property proposed to be designated as a “landmark”
shall have filed an application with the Historic Preservation Commission
requesting that the property be designated as a landmark.
      (5)   The Historic Preservation Commission and the local Board or Council
shall hold a joint public hearing or separate public hearings on the proposed
ordinance. Notice of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be
mailed to all adjoining property owners (including the owners of properties
located across any street or road from the property proposed to be a
“landmark”) at least two weeks prior to the hearing, by first class mail.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area once a week for two successive weeks, the first notice
to be published not less than ten days nor more than 25 days prior to the date
established for the hearing. In computing such time, the date of publication is
not to be included, but the date of the hearing shall be included.
      (6)   Following the public hearing, the local board or council may adopt
the ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems
necessary, or reject the proposed ordinance.
      (7)   Upon adoption of the ordinance, the owners and occupants of each
designated landmark shall be given written notification of such designation
insofar as reasonable diligence permits. One copy of the ordinance and all
amendments thereto shall be filed by the Historic Preservation Commission in
the office of the Register of Deeds for the county. Each designated landmark
shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the
grantee and grantor indexes in the Register of Deeds office. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. In
case of any property lying in the county, a second copy of the ordinance and
all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the County Clerk
and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. In case of
any property lying within the cities or municipalities of Monroe, Indian Trail,
Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or Wingate, a second copy of the
ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be kept on file in the Office of the
City or Town Clerk, and be made available for public inspection at any
reasonable time. A third copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall
be given to the County Building Inspector. The fact that a building, structure,
site, area or building has been designated a landmark shall be clearly
indicated on all tax maps maintained by the county for such time as the
designation remains in effect.
      (8)   Upon the adoption of the landmarks ordinance or any amendment
thereto, it shall be the duty of the Historic Preservation Commission to give
notice thereof to the tax supervisor of the county. The designation and any
recorded restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation
purposes shall be considered by the tax supervisor in appraising it for tax
purposes.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.24 ALTERATION OR DEMOLITION OF DESIGNATED LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   (A)   Certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   From and after the designation of a landmark or a historic
district, no exterior portion of any building or other structure (including
masonry walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant
features), nor any above-ground utility structure nor any type of outdoor
advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished on
such landmark (or within such district) until after an application for a
certificate of appropriateness as to exterior features has been submitted to
and approved by the commission. Such a certificate is required to be issued by
the Commission prior to the issuance of a building permit or other permit
granted for the purposes of constructing, altering, moving or demolishing
structures, which certificate may be issued subject to reasonable conditions
necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building or other permit is
required.
      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter, EXTERIOR FEATURES shall include
the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior
of a building or other structure, including the kind and texture of the
building material, the size and scale of the building, and the type and style
of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant features. In
the case of outdoor advertising signs, EXTERIOR FEATURES shall be construed to
mean the style, material, size and location of all such signs. Such “exterior
features” may, in the discretion of the County Board of Commissioners, the
Monroe City Council, or the Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw,
Weddington or Wingate Town Councils include historic signs, color and
significant landscape, archaeological and natural features of the area.
      (3)   Except as provided in division (B) below, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement and shall take
no action under this section, except to prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of buildings,
structures, appurtenant features, outdoor advertising signs or other
significant features in the district or of the landmark which would be
incongruous with the special character of the landmark or district.
   (B)   Limitation on jurisdiction over interior spaces. Notwithstanding
division (A) above, the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission
over interior spaces shall be limited to specific interior features of
architectural, artistic or historical significance in publicly owned landmarks;
and of privately owned historic landmarks for which consent for interior review
has been given by the owner. Said consent of any owner for interior review
shall bind future owners and/or successors in title, provided such consent has
been filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county and indexed
according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor
indexes. The landmark designation shall specify the interior features to be
reviewed and the specific nature of the Historic Preservation Commission’s
jurisdiction over the interior.
   (C)   Application for certificate of appropriateness. An application for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation
Commission, and when completed, filed with the Historic Preservation
Commission.
   (D)   Contents of an application for certificate of appropriateness. The
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall, in accordance with the
Historic Preservation Commission’s rules of procedure, contain data that is
reasonably necessary to determine the nature of the application. An application
for a certificate of appropriateness shall not be considered complete until all
required data has been submitted.
   (E)   Time for hearing applications of certificate of appropriateness.
Applications shall be considered by the Historic Preservation Commission at its
next regular meeting, provided they have been filed, complete in form and
content, at least 30 calendar days before the regularly scheduled meeting of
the Commission. Otherwise, they shall be deferred until the next meeting or
considered at a special called meeting of the Commission. Nothing shall prevent
the applicant from filing with the application additional relevant information
bearing on the application.
   (F)   Notification by Historic Preservation Commission of Affected Property
Owners. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness,
the Historic Preservation Commission shall notify the owners of any property
likely to be materially affected by the application, in writing at least ten
days before the regularly scheduled meeting at which the application is to be
heard. Notice to property owners likely to be materially affected by the
application shall include all adjoining property owners and the owners of
properties located across any roadway from the affected property. Such owners
shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
   (G)   Public hearing. When an application for a certificate of
appropriateness is presented to the Historic Preservation Commission a public
hearing shall be held. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public in accordance with the North Carolina Open Meetings Law, G.S. Chapter
143, Article 33C.
   (H)   Action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   The action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall be approval, approval with modification or denial.
      (2)   Prior to any final action on an application the review criteria in
division (I) below shall be used to make findings of fact indicating the extent
to which the application for a certificate of appropriateness is or is not
congruous with the historic aspects of the district or landmark.
      (3)   All applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be
reviewed and acted upon within a reasonable time as defined by the rules of
procedure, and not exceeding 60 days from the date the application is filed. As
part of its review procedure the commission may view the premises and seek the
advice of the Department of Cultural Resources or other such experts as it may
deem necessary under the circumstances.
   (I)   Review criteria for certificates of appropriateness.
      (1)   It is the intent of these criteria, and the design guidelines, to
insure, insofar as possible, that changes to a designated landmark (or
structures in a historic district) shall be in harmony with the reasons for
designation.
      (2)   When considering a certificate of appropriateness the Historic
Preservation Commission shall take into account the historic or architectural
significance of the structure under consideration and the exterior form and
appearance of any proposed additions or modifications to that structure, as
well as the effect of such change or additions upon other structures in the
vicinity. In a historic district it is not the intention of these criteria or
the guidelines to require the reconstruction or restoration of individual or
original buildings or prohibit the demolition or removal of same or to impose
architectural styles from particular historic period. In considering new
construction in a historic district the Historic Preservation Commission shall
encourage contemporary design which is harmonious with the character of the
district.
      (3)   The following criteria shall be considered, when relevant, along
with companion design guidelines and the guidelines of the Secretary of the
Interior in reviewing for a certificate of appropriateness:
         (a)   Lot coverage, defined as the percentage of lot area covered by
primary structures;
         (b)   Setback, defined as the distance from the lot lines to the
building(s);
         (c)   Building height;
         (d)   Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance between adjacent
buildings;
         (e)   Building materials;
         (f)   Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern and sizes of
any elements of fenestration;
         (g)   Surface textures;
         (h)   Roof shapes, form and materials;
         (i)   Use of local or regional architectural traditions;
         (j)   General form and proportions of buildings and structures, and
relationship of any additions to the main structure;
         (k)   Expression of architectural detailing, such as lintels,
cornices, brick bond and decorative elements;
         (l)   Orientation of the building to the street;
         (m)   Scale, determined by the size of the units of construction and
architectural details in relation to the human scale and also by the
relationship of the building mass to adjoining open space and nearby buildings
and structures;
         (n)   Proportion of width to height of the total building facade;
         (o)   Archaeological sites and resources associated with standing
structures;
         (p)   Major landscaping efforts that would impact known archaeological
sites;
         (q)   Appurtenant features and other features such as lighting; and
         (r)   Structural condition and soundness.
   (J)   Minor work. A certificate of appropriateness application when
determined to involve minor work, may be reviewed and approved by an
administrative official according to specific review criteria and guidelines.
MINOR WORK is defined as those exterior changes that do not involve substantial
alterations, additions or removals that could impair the integrity of the
property (and/or the district as a whole). Such minor works shall be limited to
those listed in the Commission’s rules of procedure. No application involving a
minor work may be denied without the formal action of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
   (K)   Certain changes not prohibited.
      (1)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the
ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of a
historic landmark or in a historic district which does not involve a change in
design, materials or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition of any such feature which
the Building Inspector or similar official shall certify is required by the
public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. Nothing herein shall
be construed to prevent a property owner from making any use of his property
not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations.
      (2)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the
maintenance or in the event of an emergency, the immediate restoration of any
existing above-ground utility structure without approval by the Commission.
   (L)   Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the appropriate Board of Adjustment
from the Historic Preservation Commission’s action in granting or denying any
certificate. Appeals from decisions of the Historic Preservation Commission for
properties lying in the towns having no Board of Adjustments shall lie to the
County Board of Adjustment. The appeals may be taken by any aggrieved party,
shall be taken within times prescribed by the commission in the rules of
procedure, and shall be in the nature of certiorari. Any appeal from the
appropriate Board of Adjustment’s decision in any such case shall be heard by
the Superior Court of the county.
   (M)   Submission of new applications. If a certificate of appropriateness is
denied, a new application affecting the same property may be submitted only if
substantial change is made in plans for the proposed construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration or moving.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.25 DELAY IN DEMOLITION OF LANDMARKS AND BUILDINGS WITHIN HISTORIC
DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Delay by Historic Preservation Commission.
      (1)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition or destruction of a designated landmark or a building, structure or
site within the district may not be denied, except as provided in division (C)
below; however, the effective date of such a certificate may be delayed for a
period of up to 180 days from the date of approval.
      (2)   The maximum period of delay authorized this section shall be
reduced by the Historic Preservation Commission where it finds that the owner
would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use
or return from such property by virtue of the delay.
      (3)   During such period, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find a
means of preserving the buildings or site. If the Historic Preservation
Commission finds that a building or site within the historic district has no
special significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district,
it shall waive all or part of such period and authorize earlier demolition or
removal.
   (B)   Delay Pending Designation as District or Landmark. If the Historic
Preservation Commission has voted to recommend designation of a property
proposed by an owner to be so designated as a landmark or designation of an
area as a district, and final designation has not been made by the County Board
of Commissioners, the Monroe City Council, or the Town Councils of Indian
Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or Wingate, the demolition or
destruction of any building, site or structure located on the property of the
proposed landmark or in the proposed district may be delayed by the County
Board of Commissioners, the Monroe City Council, or the Town Councils of Indian
Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or Wingate for a period of up
to 180 days or until the County Board of Commissioners, the Monroe City
Council, or the Town Councils of Indian Trail, Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw,
Weddington or Wingate take final action on the designation, whichever occurs
first.
   (C)   Prevention of demolition by neglect. The County Board of
Commissioners, the Monroe City Council, or the Town Councils of Indian Trail,
Marshville, Stallings, Waxhaw, Weddington or Wingate may enact an ordinance to
prevent the demolition by neglect of any designated landmark or any building or
structure within an established historic district. Such ordinance shall provide
appropriate safeguards to protect property owners from undue economic hardship.
   (D)   Structures having statewide significance. An application for a
certificate of appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a
building, site or structure determined by the State Historic Preservation
Officer as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the
National Register of Historic Places may be denied, except where the Commission
finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived
of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.26 RECORDS OF COMMISSION.
   The Historic Preservation Commission shall maintain a file containing
records of all written notices of proposed actions submitted to the Historic
Preservation Commission, reasons underlying all actions, drawings submitted for
review and subsequent amendments.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.27 RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   The Board of Commissioners is authorized to make appropriations to the
Historic Preservation Commission established pursuant to this subchapter in any
amount that it may determine necessary for the expenses of the operation of the
Historic Preservation Commission and may make available any additional amounts
necessary for the acquisition, restoration, preservation, operation and
management of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects
designated as historic properties, or of land on which historic buildings or
structures are located, or to which they may be removed.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.28 STAFF AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend to the local governing
board suitable arrangements for the procurement or provision of staff or
technical services to the Historic Preservation Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.29 OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY.
   All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds
appropriated by a governing Board or Council shall be acquired in the name of
the governing Board or Council. So long as owned by a city, town or the county,
historic properties may be maintained by or under the supervision and control
of the city, town or the county; however, all lands, buildings or structures
acquired by the County Joint Historic Preservation Commission from funds other
than those appropriated by a city, town or the county, may be acquired and held
in the name of the County Joint Historic Preservation Commission, the city,
town or the county, or both.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.30 ORDINANCE TO APPLY TO PUBLICLY OWNED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   All of the provisions of this subchapter are applicable to the construction,
alteration, moving and demolition by the state its political subdivisions,
agencies and instrumentalities; provided, however, that they shall not apply to
interiors of buildings or structures owned by the state. The state and its
agencies shall have a right of appeal to the State Historical Commission or any
successor agency assuming its responsibilities under G.S. § 121-12(a) from any
decision of the Historic Properties Commission. The current edition of the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings shall be the sole principles and guidelines
used in reviewing applications of the state for certificates of
appropriateness. The decision of the Historical Commission shall be binding
upon both the state and the Historic Preservation Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.31 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Whenever any ordinance adopted for the designation of landmarks or districts
requires a longer waiting period or imposes higher standards with respect to a
designated landmark (or district) than are established under any other statute,
Charter provision or regulation, this subchapter shall govern. Whenever the
provisions of any other statute, Charter provision or regulation require a
longer waiting period or impose higher standards than are established under
this subchapter, such other statute, charter provision, ordinance or regulation
shall govern.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
§ 34.32 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Compliance with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness shall
be enforced by the designated zoning enforcement officer of the county, or the
zoning enforcement officer of the cities and municipalities having in effect
zoning ordinances. Enforcement as to landmarks or districts in municipalities
not having zoning ordinances shall be by the zoning enforcement officer of the
county.
   (B)   Failure to comply with the certificate of appropriateness shall be a
violation of the applicable zoning ordinance and is punishable according to
established procedures and penalties for such violations. A certificate of
appropriateness shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance if the work
authorized by the certificate has not been commenced. If after commencement the
work is discontinued for a period of six months the permit therefor shall
immediately expire. No work authorized by any certificate which has expired
shall thereafter be performed until a new certificate has been secured.
   (C)   In case any building, structure, site, area or objects designated an
historic property is about to be demolished whether as the result of deliberate
neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled or removed, except in
compliance with an ordinance, a city, town or the county, may institute an
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful demolition, material
alteration, remodeling or removal, and may restrain, correct or abate such
violation, or to prevent such illegal act or conduct with respect to such
historic property.
   (D)   In case any building, structure, site, area or object designated as a
historic landmark (or located within a historic district established) pursuant
to this subchapter is about to be demolished whether as result of deliberate
neglect or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed,
except in compliance with the ordinance, the county, the applicable city or
municipality may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful demolition, destruction, material alteration, remodeling or removal,
to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent any illegal act or
conduct with respect to such a building, structure, site, area or object. Such
remedies shall be in addition to any others authorized for violation of a
county or municipal ordinance.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1992)
CHAPTER 35: CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Section
   
35.01   Four-year staggered terms
   
35.02   Council-Manager form of government
§ 35.01 FOUR-YEAR STAGGERED TERMS.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. 160A-101 and 160A-102, the Charter of the town, as
set forth in Chapter 55 of the Private Session Laws of the year 1901 of North
Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended to provide that the members of
the Board of Commissioners shall hereafter be elected for four-year terms on a
staggered basis as set forth in division (B) below.
   (B)   At the regular municipal election to be held in 1999, the three
candidates who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected for four-
year terms, while the two candidates who receive the next highest number of
votes shall be elected for two-year terms. At the regular municipal election to
be held in 2001 and every four years thereafter, two members of the Board of
Commissioners shall be elected to serve for four-year terms. At the regular
municipal election to be held in 2003 and every four years thereafter, three
members of the Board of Commissioners shall be elected to four-year terms.
   (C)   The Town Clerk shall cause a notice to be duly published, stating that
an ordinance amending the Charter to implement four-year staggered terms for
the members of the Board of Commissioners has been adopted. Subject to any
referendum petitioned for and conducted pursuant to G.S. § 160A-103, this
section shall be in full force and effect from and after June 15, 1999.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1999)
§ 35.02 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The town shall operate under the Council-Manager form of government, in
accordance with G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 7, Part 2.
(Ord. passed 10-19-2010)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   WATER AND SEWERS
      
52.   WATER CONSERVATION
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Prompt removal of garbage
   
50.03   Wet garbage
   
50.04   Deposit of garbage in public places and on private property
   
50.05   Prohibited deposits
   
50.06   Transportation of garbage
   
50.07   Removal of dead animals
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All refuse, animal, fruit and other vegetable matter; all tin cans,
glassware and crockery in which any such matter has been put up or stored; and
all rags, waste paper, floor sweepings and other combustible refuse, except
building material, scraps and tree trimmings.
   LIMITED-USE DUMPSTER or TRASH RECEPTACLE. Any dumpster or other trash
receptacle placed and intended for deposit of garbage, trash and other
materials only by residents of immediately surrounding apartment or residential
units, or by employees of immediately surrounding business establishments, and
which are emptied on a regular basis by arrangement with the Sanitation or
Public Works Department of the town. Garbage and trash collection vehicles
owned, leased or used by the town shall fall within this definition, as well as
receptacles or dumpsters placed by residents or business.
   UNAUTHORIZED PERSON. Any person who is neither a resident or a guest of a
resident of an apartment or residential unit in immediate proximity to a
limited-use dumpster or trash receptacle, as defined above, nor an employee or
patron of a business establishment in immediate proximity to such a dumpster or
receptacle. A person visiting a resident of the town shall not be deemed a
“guest” exempt from this chapter if the purpose or part of the purpose of the
visit, whether or not preconceived, is to dump garbage, trash or other
materials originating from outside the corporate limits of the town into a
dumpster or receptacle as above defined.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. passed 7-1-1991)
§ 50.02 PROMPT REMOVAL OF GARBAGE.
   No garbage that has become decayed or that shall otherwise be a menace to
health or cleanliness shall be allowed to remain in any dwelling, house, hotel,
boarding house, safe, restaurant, lunch stand, fruit stand, meat market, store
or other building or on any premises a longer time than shall be necessary to
remove and deposit the same in a can or cans as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 WET GARBAGE.
   All wet garbage shall have the liquid drained off and shall be wrapped in
paper or other combustible material before it is placed in the garbage can,
thus preventing smell and the breeding of flies in summer and freezing and
adhesion to the can in winter.
(Prior Code, § 50.03)
§ 50.04 DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw, place or deposit any garbage in any street, alley,
public place or private property within the town limits, except in garbage cans
or garbage vehicles as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.04) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 PROHIBITED DEPOSITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deposit garbage, trash
or any other materials in any limited-use dumpster or trash receptacle located
within the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 50.05) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 TRANSPORTATION OF GARBAGE.
   No person or persons shall collect, handle, haul or transport on any of the
streets, alleys, public ways or places of the town, any garbage without first
having procured a permit therefor from the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 50.06) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   Dead animals will be removed by the town at any time.
(Prior Code, § 50.07)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $50, or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Furthermore, violation of any ordinance in this chapter shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty of $50 to be recovered by the town within 30
days after such offender has been cited for violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.99) (Ord. passed 7-1-1991)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Board of Commissioners to regulate
   
51.002   Public Works Director
   
51.003   Work on water and sewer system
   
51.004   Private sewage disposal systems
   
51.005   Tampering with water and sewer lines or town equipment
   
51.006   Water and sewer rates
   
51.007   System development fees
Connections
   
51.020   Connection required
   
51.021   Exceptions to connection requirements
   
51.022   Separate connections
   
51.023   Permit required
   
51.024   Tap-on fees
   
51.025   Connection of vacant lot
   
51.026   Unlawful use of house sewers
   
51.027   Compliance with state rules and regulations
   
51.028   Maintenance of connections
   
51.029   Relocation of town-owned facilities
   
51.030   Plumbing work to be inspected by county
   
51.031   Grease interceptors required
   
51.032   Water quality protection
Extension of Water and Sewer Lines
   
51.045   Application for and approval of extensions required
   
51.046   General extension requirements
   
51.047   Application for extensions
   
51.048   Specifications; ownership
   
51.049   Construction
   
51.050   Additional subdivision improvement requirement
Sewer Use Regulations
   
51.065   Definitions
   
51.066   Prohibited discharges
   
51.067   Industrial waste structures required
   
51.068   Permits
   
51.069   Outside connections
   
51.070   Powers and authority for inspection
   
51.071   Measurement of flow
   
51.072   Determining of character and concentration of wastes
   
51.073   Surcharge for treatment of industrial wastes
   
51.074   Protection from damages
 
   
51.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS TO REGULATE.
   The sewer and water system of the town shall be under the control of the
Board of Commissioners or its authorized agent. The duty of prescribing and
enforcing full compliance with all the rules and regulations governing all
connections with the public sewer and water system shall be vested in the Board
of Commissioners or its authorized agent.
(Prior Code, § 51.01)
§ 51.002 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   The Board of Commissioners may select some competent person to supervise
under its general control the entire water and sewer system of the town. The
Board of Commissioners may from time to time prescribe the duties and
responsibilities of the Director. The Director or his or her assistant shall,
at all reasonable hours, have free access to all premises for the purpose of
examining hydrants, fixtures or connections on which town water pressure is
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 51.02)
§ 51.003 WORK ON WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   All work on the water and sewer system and all connections or
disconnections thereto shall be performed by the authorized employees of the
town or their representatives, or by plumbers approved by the town.
   (B)   All work shall be performed in accordance with the Plumbing Code of
the town and such amendments thereto that the Board of Commissioners may from
time to time adopt.
(Prior Code, § 51.03)
§ 51.004 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Privies regulated. No privy of any kind shall be permitted in the town
where a town sewer is reasonably accessible. When privies are permitted they
shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations of the State Board of
Health. Privies altered or reconstructed shall also conform to these
regulations.
   (B)   Septic tanks regulated. Septic tanks may be installed where a sewer is
not reasonably accessible, provided such tank is constructed in accordance with
the specifications of the State Board of Health, and a permit therefor is
issued by the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 51.04)
§ 51.005 TAMPERING WITH WATER AND SEWER LINES OR TOWN EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall touch, tamper or in any manner manipulate or turn the
cut-offs on the water mains forming a part of the water system of the town, nor
shall any person tamper with or harm in any manner whatsoever any water or
sewer line, main or any appurtenance thereto. No person shall throw or deposit
any material or substance in any water or sewer line that will in any manner
obstruct such line.
   (B)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or
materials belonging to the town used for the purpose of making tests or
examinations and left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the
sewers
(Prior Code, § 51.05) (Ord. passed 1-30-1973) Penalty, see §
51.999 
§ 51.006 WATER AND SEWER RATES.
   Water rates and water and sewer connection charges shall be determined from
time to time by the Board of Commissioners and shall be kept on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 51.06)
Cross-reference:
   Tap-on fees, see §
51.024
§ 51.007 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEES.
   (A)   Established.
      (1)   System development fees shall be charged with respect to new
development to fund costs of capital improvements necessitated by and
attributable to such new development, to recoup costs of existing facilities
which serve such new development, or a combination of those costs as permitted
under G.S. Chapter 162A, Article 8. The term includes amortized charges, lump
sum charges, and any other fee that functions as described by the definitions
in G.S. § 162A-201. Terms used in this section have the same meaning as those
in G.S. Chapter 162A, Article 8. System development fees shall be charged
consistent with the requirements of G.S. Chapter 162A, Article 8, as such may
be amended from time to time.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, NEW DEVELOPMENT includes any of the
following occurring after January 19, 2021 (the date the town adopted the fee
schedule and ordinance):
         (a)   The subdivision of land;
         (b)   The construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure which
increases the number of service units; or
         (c)   Any use or extension of the use of land which increases the
number of service units.
   (B)   Charges not included. System development fees shall not include and
separate charges may be assessed for:
      (1)   A charge or fee to pay administrative, plan review, or inspection
costs associated with permits required for development;
      (2)   Tap or hook up charges for the purpose of reimbursing the town for
the actual costs of connecting the service unit to the system;
      (3)   Dedication of capital improvements onsite, adjacent, or ancillary
to a development absent a written agreement providing credit or reimbursement
to the developer pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-320, 160A-499 or Chapter 160A, Part
D, Article 19, as may be amended from time to time; and
      (4)   Reimbursement to the town for its expenses in constructing or
providing water or sewer utility capital improvements adjacent or ancillary to
the development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially
responsible for such expenses; however, such reimbursement shall be credited to
any system development fee charge as required per G.S. § 162-207(c).
   (C)   Building improvements or changes.
      (1)   System development fees will not be charged on buildings or other
improvements constructed to replace like buildings provided that the
replacement will not result in any increased capacity requirements over those
required to serve the replaced building. System development fees are
transferable between locations on different parcels of property as long as the
parcels are contiguous or separated only by a street or alley and part of a
single or multiphased project shown on an approved site plan at the time of
issuance of a building permit.
      (2)   Additions, alterations to or replacements or change in use of
existing buildings shall be required to pay a system development fee based on
the rates applicable at the time of connection or at the time such addition,
alteration, replacement or change in use is placed into service. When a change
in use occurs, the new use will pay the difference calculated between the
existing use and the proposed use.
      (3)   Buildings that contain more than one use shall have the system
development fee calculated from the sum of each use in the building.
   (D)   Time of collection.
      (1)   (a)   For new developments involving the subdivision of land, the
system development fee shall be collected by the town at the later of either of
the following:
            1.   The time of application for a building permit; or
            2.   When water or sewer service is committed by the town.
         (b)   Union County shall require proof of the collection of the system
development fee prior to issuing the building permit.
      (2)   Other new development. For all other new development, Wingate shall
collect the system development fee at the earlier of either of the following:
         (a)   The time of application for connection of the individual unit of
development to the service or facilities.
         (b)   When water or sewer service is committed by the town.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, water service shall be deemed
committed by the town at such time as the Public Works Department has approved
the connection and building permit(s) for the development are issued. Fees
shall be assessed based on Wingate's schedule of fees in effect at the time the
fees are collected.
      (4)   No system development fee shall be charged or assessed with respect
to any new development for which a system development fee under this section
has been collected at the time of plat recordation involving the subdivision of
land and the amount of capacity associated with that payment of the system
development fee has not increased at the time of application for the building
permit. If the amount of capacity is increased at the time of application for
the building permit, then the system development fee may be charged for the
difference in the amount of the increased capacity minus the system development
fee previously paid under this section.
   (E)   Method of calculation.
      (1)   The system development fee shall be paid for connection to the town
municipal water system based on the customer's calculated anticipated daily
flow rate in gallons per day (GPD), in an amount not to exceed the calculated
charge based on the cost per gallon development costs as defined herein
multiplied by the daily flow rate set out in the North Carolina Administrative
Code sections referenced herein. The system development fee shall be the same
regardless of the customer's location inside or outside the municipal limits of
the town. At the time of adoption of this section, the maximum calculated cost
per gallon as determined by the Wooten Company is $7.73 (with $2.40 for water
and $5.33 for sewer) for the connection of new water and sewer using meter
size. At the time of adoption of this section, the fees shall be $2.38 for
water and $5.30 for sewer for a total of $7.68 but may be amended pursuant to
statutes and the procedures in this section.
      (2)   System development fees shall be based on the calculated GPD flow
rate of the anticipated use or increase in use of the proposed structure. Flow
rates shall be determined in accordance with the flow rates established in the
North Carolina Administrative Code, 15A NCAC 2T.0114 and 15A NCAC 18C.0409, as
such may be amended from time to time. A licensed professional engineer is
required to calculate flow rates for other uses not included in North Carolina
Administrative Code, 15A NCAC 2T.0114 and 15A NCAC 18C.0409. The Town of
Wingate shall not incur any expenses associated with this requirement.
      (3)   In calculating system development fees with respect to new
development, the town will credit the value of costs in excess of the
development's proportionate share of connecting facilities required to be
oversized for use of others outside of the development. No credit shall be
applied, however, for water or sewer capital improvements on-site or to connect
new development to water or sewer facilities.
      (4)   All system development fees collected by the town shall be
deposited to the town's water capital reserve funds and expended as provided by
G.S. § 162A-211, as such may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 1-19-2021)
CONNECTIONS
§ 51.020 CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any owner of a house or building or other place of human habitation or
occupancy within the corporate limits of the town, upon a lot which abuts or
adjoins a street, alley or sewer right-of-way along which is located a public
sewer collection line accessible within 200 feet of such lot, shall make a
sewer connection between each house or building or other place of human
habitation and each public sewer collection line, except when sewer connection
cannot be made without cost for right-of-way or easement.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge or control of
any such lot or premises thereafter to use any dry closet or septic tank or
other means of sewage disposal, or to cause, permit or suffer the same to be
used.
(Prior Code, § 51.20) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.021 EXCEPTIONS TO CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   This subchapter shall be amended to allow future constructed residences
(including those presently under construction but which cannot be connected to
the system because of division (A) below) to be omitted from the requirements
set out in this subchapter, under the following conditions:
   (A)   The town is prohibited by directive or order from another governmental
agency or unit from allowing or permitting new connections to its waste water
collection system;
   (B)   The County Health Department will issue a sewage disposal system
permit to the owner after the subject property complies with and meets the
required standards required by the department as prerequisite for issuance of
such permit;
   (C)   The owner of said property on which a sewage disposal system is
installed shall henceforth be responsible to the town and its citizens to keep
said system in good maintenance and working order and to comply with all
requirements of state law and rules and regulations of the County Health
Department;
   (D)   In event the subject property on which a residence is constructed is
located within 200 feet of a sewer collection line of the town, and the town at
any time in the future advises the then owner of said property that a sewer
tap/connection should be made, said owner shall pay the then required tap-on
fee and connect to the town’s sewer collection system in accordance with this
code and any applicable ordinances of the town requiring connections within six
months from the date that written notice is mailed by the town to the owner;
   (E)   Any sewage disposal system permit issued by the County Health
Department shall refer to and contain a copy of this section attached to the
same; and/or
   (F)   The County Health Department, prior to issuance of such permit,
request of the Town Clerk written notification that this section is still in
effect.
(Prior Code, § 51.21) (Ord. passed 10-2-1978)
§ 51.022 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   Every house or building required to be connected to a public sewer
collection line hereunder shall be separately and independently connected.
(Prior Code, § 51.22) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.023 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person desiring to connect any premises with the sewer system of
the town shall first obtain a permit therefor from the Public Works Department.
   (B)   Any person desiring a permit shall make application therefor to the
Public Works Department, such application to state the name of the owner of the
premises involved, number of lot and name of street upon which the premises are
located, size and number of connection, type of street in front of connection,
and a rough sketch (but accurate as possible) of the lot, house and street.
   (C)   A tap-on fee shall be paid to the town as a prerequisite to issuance
of a permit.
(Prior Code, § 51.23) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.024 TAP-ON FEES.
   (A)   Every owner hereunder who shall be required to connect his premises
with the town sewer system shall be required to pay a tap-on fee.
   (B)   The fee shall be determined from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners and shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 51.24) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.025 CONNECTION OF VACANT LOT.
   In the event a vacant lot is connected to the sewer system, the monthly
minimum for sewer charge will be billed to the owner after completion of the
sewer system until a building is connected to the system, at which time normal
sewer rates will be charged.
(Prior Code, § 51.25) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.026 UNLAWFUL USE OF HOUSE SEWERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use house sewers for any other
purpose or to place in any house sewer any foreign matter that will not be
promptly dissolved by the sewage or may cause damage to the sewers.
(Prior Code, § 51.26) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.027 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All sewer connections shall be made by or under the supervision of a
licensed plumber and in accordance with any applicable Building Code regulation
of the town and the county, and the laws of the state.
   (B)   The sewer service line from the premises to the main shall be
installed by and at the expense of the owner in accordance with all laws and
regulations governing same as set forth in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 51.27) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.028 MAINTENANCE OF CONNECTIONS.
   The sewer service line and the connection (tap-on) with the main shall be
maintained by the owner at his sole expense.
(Prior Code, § 51.28) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.029 RELOCATION OF TOWN-OWNED FACILITIES.
   Relocation of existing town-owned facilities for individual improvement or
development shall be done by the town at the expense of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 51.29) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.030 PLUMBING WORK TO BE INSPECTED BY COUNTY.
   All plumbing work done by an owner in connection with the installation or
repair of a sewer system shall be inspected by the County Plumbing Inspector,
and all such owners who engage in installation or repair shall be required to
secure any necessary permits from the County Inspection Department prior to
beginning work or causing same to begin.
(Prior Code, § 51.30) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.031 GREASE INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Users operating commercial food preparation, processing or serving
facilities shall install and maintain at the user’s expense an approved oil and
grease interceptor through which the wastewater from this area of the facility
shall pass before being discharged to the public sewer.
   (B)   Such interceptor shall be constructed in accordance with town standard
details or in accordance with a submitted design by a professional engineer who
certifies to the town under professional seal that the design will achieve oil
and grease removals required by the town’s ordinance at specified maximum
operating conditions of the user with proper and specified operation and
maintenance.
   (C)   Oil and grease interceptors for commercial food facilities shall be
serviced and emptied of their waste content as often as required to prevent
release of any oil and grease initially contained by the interceptor, and such
wastes removed by the emptying of the interceptor shall not be discharged to
the public sewer.
   (D)   The user shall maintain a written record for three years of history of
each date that the interceptor is serviced along with the quantity of waste
removed, and waste hauler performing the service.
(Ord. passed 10-26-2004)
§ 51.032 WATER QUALITY PROTECTION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AIR-GAP SEPARATION. An unobstructed vertical distance through the
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle. An approved AIR-GAP VERTICAL SEPARATION shall be at least double
the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the AIR-GAP be less than one
inch.
      APPROVED. Certified in writing by the Wingate Director of Public Works as
an acceptable device or methodology for the purpose of backflow prevention.
      AUXILIARY INTAKE. Any piping connection or other device whereby water may
be secured from a source other than public water supply.
      BACKFLOW. Any flow of water into the public water supply from any other
source due to a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, interconnection,
backpressure, back-siphonage, any combination thereof or other cause.
      BACKPRESSURE. Any pressure on any source of water other than the public
water supply that may be greater than the pressure on the public water supply
and may result in a backflow.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. An approved effective device method used to
prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply. The type of device
required shall be based on degree of hazard, existing or potential.
      BACK-SIPHONAGE. Any circumstance in which the pressure on the public
water supply may be reduced to the point that the elevation and atmospheric
pressure on a source of water other than the public water supply may result in
a pressure to be greater than the pressure on the public water supply and may
result in a backflow.
      CERTIFIED TESTER. A person who has proven his or her competency to test,
repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention devices as evidenced
by certification of successful completion of a training program approved by the
Town Director of Public Works.
      CONFINEMENT DEVICE. A backflow prevention device, as approved and
required, installed within a private plumbing or distribution system to isolate
a localized hazard from the remainder of said system.
      CONSUMER. Any person, firm or corporation responsible for any property at
which water from the town public water supply is received. In the absence of
other parties or the failure of other parties to accept the responsibilities
herein set forth, the owner of record shall be ultimately responsible. A
backflow prevention device as approved installed at the point of separation
between the public water supply and a private service or private distribution
system or at the point of metering.
      CONTAMINATION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
      CONTAINMENT DEVICE. A backflow prevention device, as approved and
required, installed at the point of separation between the public water supply
and a private service or private distribution system or at the point of
metering.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection whereby the public water supply
is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private,
either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such a manner that a
flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the
manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves,
or because of any other arrangement.
      CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL COORDINATOR. The official position established
and authorized by the town designated by the person in responsible charge to
administer and interpret this section and who shall be a certified tester.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. An approved assembly
composed of two single, spring-loaded independently operating check valves,
including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly,
and having suitable connections for testing the water- tightness of each check
valve.
      DUAL CHECK VALVE. An approved device containing two independently acting
check valves in series.
      FIRE LINE. A system of pipes and equipment used to supply water in an
emergency for extinguishing fire.
      INTERCONNECTION. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the
public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool,
heat exchanger, storage reservoir or other device which does or may contain
sewage or other waste or substance which would be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply.
      PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An approved assembly containing an independently
operating spring loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air
inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly must
be equipped with suitable connections for testing the proper operation of the
device and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.  The water and waterworks system of the town and its
customers outside the town corporate limits, for general use and which supply
is recognized as the public water supply by the State Department of
Environmental Health and Natural Resources.
      REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE (RPZ). An
approved device containing within its structure, two spring loaded
independently operating check valves, together with an automatically operating
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. The
first check valve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that
during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow the pressure between the
checks shall be less than the supply pressures. In case of leakage of either
check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere,
shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves less than the
supply pressure. This device shall have suitable connections for testing the
proper operation of the device, including tightly closing shut-off valves
located at each end of the device.
   (B)   Compliance with federal and state law. The town will comply with the
Federal Safe Drinking Water Act being 42 U.S.C. § 3001 et seq., the North
Carolina Drinking Water Act being G.S. §§ 130A-311 et seq. and North Carolina
State Building Code being G.S. §§ 143-138 et seq., which pertain to cross-
connections, auxiliary intakes and interconnections, and establish an effective
ongoing program to control potential sources of contamination of the public
water supply.
   (C)   Unlawful connections. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a
cross-connection, auxiliary intake or inter-connection to be made; or allow one
to exist for any purpose whatsoever.
   (D)   Inspection of property. It shall be the duty, upon request of the
person in responsible charge, of the Cross-Connection Coordinator to cause
inspections to be made of properties served by the public water supply where
cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and re-inspections shall be set by the operator in
responsible charge.
   (E)   Right of access. The person in responsible charge, or authorized
representative, shall have the right to enter, at reasonable time, any
nonresidential property served by a connection to the town public water supply
for the purpose of performing the duties of this section. In those cases in
which the property owner chooses not to provide such access, the person in
responsible charge, or authorized representative, may designate the location as
a high hazard in accordance with division (G) below.
   (F)   Existing conditions. Any consumer shall be allowed 90 days to correct
any cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, interconnections or other hazard as
defined by division (G) below in violation of the provisions of this section.
The 90 days will be from the date of receipt of the notification given by the
Cross-Connection Coordinator.
   (G)   Hazardous uses.
      (1)   The following uses shall be classified as hazardous uses:
         (a)   Hazardous uses include, but are not limited to: pumps and tanks
handling sewage, radioactive, lethal or toxic substances, boiler and steam
connections, sewer waste lines, low inlets to receptacles containing toxic
substances, coils or jackets used as heat exchangers, flush valve toilets
without vacuum breaks, bacterial and viral materials, private wells or other
private water supply, irrigation systems, water systems or hose connections,
with booster pumps, carbonation equipment, or similar hazard potential as
determined by the Cross-Connection Coordinator;
         (b)   Any location at which the nature or mode of operations within a
premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing or at
which there is a likelihood in the determination of the Cross-Connection
Coordinator that protective measures may be subverted, altered or disconnected;
and
         (c)   Any facility which contains, but is not limited to, a bottling
plant, cannery, building have five or more stories, battery manufacturer,
exterminator, greenhouse, chemical processing plant, dairy, dye works, film
laboratory, car wash, hospital, commercial laboratory, laundry, metal
fabricating operations, mortuary, swimming pool, morgue, x-ray equipment,
medical office with laboratory, aspirator, medical washing equipment, packing
house, plating plant, poultry house, power plant, nuclear reactor, those fire
sprinkler systems equipped with facilities for introduction of freeze
preventive chemicals or other substances other than water, dental office, any
radioactive material, restaurant, shopping mall with tenant conducting any
activity listed in this section and sewage pump or treatment facilities.
      (2)   All installations described in division (G)(1) above shall be
deemed hazardous uses, and must have a containment device in the form of a
reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device provided that the consumer
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Cross-Connection Coordinator that
sufficient internal confinement devices have been installed and tested. The
Cross-Connection Coordinator may require that the consumer provide engineering
drawings sealed by a professional engineer of installations within the
premises, which provide complete internal protection against cross-connection
as approved by the Cross-Connection Coordinator. Any such connection shall be
considered another connection for determining the type of containment device
required. Each internal confinement device shall be one of the following, as
approved by the person in responsible charge or his or her authorized
representative: reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device,
double check valve backflow prevention device, air gap, vacuum break-pressure
type or dual check valve. Each reduced pressure zone principal backflow
prevention device serving as an internal confinement device shall have a mesh
strainer immediately upstream of the inlet gate valve.
      (3)   No person shall fill any tanks or tankers which include the
following: those containing pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or
residues, flush trucks, street sweepers and non-potable water tankers from a
public water system except with an approved air gap fill or an approved reduced
pressure backflow preventer properly installed on the tank or tanker or on the
public water supply fill pipeline or hose.
   (H)   Other connections.
      (1)   Services to single family residential units, not otherwise required
by this code to have other containment devices, may have a containment device
in the form of an approved dual check valve on all such services which meters
are applied more than 90 days following the date of adoption of this section,
said dual check valves or other containment devices as required shall be
installed by the owner’s representative prior to the installation of the meter
by the Town Public Works Department. On all such services for which meters have
been applied prior to that date, said dual check valve shall be installed by
the Town Public Works Department, provided that the town reserves the right to
charge the owner or occupant of any residence for the cost of said device and
its installation. Maintenance of dual check valve containment devices installed
in accordance with this section shall be conducted by the Town Public Works
Department. Testable containment devices that are required on lawn irrigation
water systems must be tested every three years by a contractor that has been
approved by the town.
      (2)   All other connections to the public water supply of the town shall
have containment devices in the form of a double check valve backflow
prevention device as set forth in division (I) below. This shall include water
mains installed to the town’s standard, and with town supervision, but which
are not maintained by the town, including, but not limited to, manufactured
home parks, apartments, group housing projects and other private distribution
systems, or similar hazard potential as determined by the person in responsible
charge, or his or her authorized representative. Private distribution systems
shall be configured so as to provide looped mains, with two or more containment
devices on each building water service connection and at dead-end branch mains.
   (I)   Installation of containment devices.
      (1)   The containment devices shall be located off street right-of-way on
the water main side of any plumbing connections. When installed in a building,
the device shall be located on the service line immediately after its entrance
into the building. Each containment and confinement device shall be installed
in a location that is physically accessible for inspection and testing as
determined by the cross-connection coordinator. Containment devices, which have
been buried in the ground, do not satisfy the provisions of this code. Each
reduced pressure principle zone device shall be installed such that flooding of
the device is unlikely as determined by the Cross-Connection Coordinator.
      (2)   The person in responsible charge shall maintain a list of approved
manufacturers and models of hazard containment devices and drawings of standard
installation, copies to be made available through the Office of the Director of
Public Works. All reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention devices
and double check valve backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. All vacuum
breaks and dual check valve devices shall be approved by the American Society
for Sanitary Engineers. All installations and materials shall conform to town’s
standards as set by the person in responsible charge.
      (3)   In those cases in which containment and/or confinement devices have
been previously installed by prior owners, the town, or other parties, the
responsibility for maintenance, testing and replacement as applicable shall be
with the consumer.
      (4)   The cost of said means of containment, and any other plumbing
modifications necessary and convenient thereto, and the testing and maintenance
thereof is to be paid for by the consumer.
   (J)   New construction. All buildings, proposing to connect to the public
water system of the town on or after the effective date of this section, shall
be equipped with an approved and tested as properly functioning backflow
prevention device(s), as prescribed herein, prior to the issuance of a
certificate of zoning compliance and/or certificate of occupancy for that
building. If a building permit was issued for the building prior to the
effective date of the article, or a building permit was not required, the
building shall be considered to be an existing building prior to the effective
date, in accordance with division (D) above.
   (K)   Notification of consumer.
      (1)   Upon identification of a hazard, or hazard potential, as defined in
divisions (G) and (H) above, the cross-connection coordinator, shall notify the
consumer, of record, of the property on which the hazard exists of the
following:
         (a)   Location of hazard;
         (b)   Nature of hazard observed;
         (c)   Date hazard observed;
         (d)   Section of code applicable; and
         (e)   Requirements of code.
      (2)   Such notification is to be made by certified mail, with return
receipt requested.
   (L)   Change in nature of use. The person in responsible charge shall be
notified by the consumer the nature of use of the property changes so as to
change the hazard classification of that property, as set forth in divisions
(G) and (H) above.
   (M)   Consumer responsibilities.
      (1)   The consumer shall, upon notification, as defined in division (K)
above, install the hazard containment device(s) as required within 90 days from
the date of notification.
      (2)   If, after expiration of 90 days, the containment device(s) has not
been installed in conformance with standards set by the person in responsible
charge, in a proper working condition, the person in responsible charge may
discontinue the public water supply service at that premises, and service shall
not be restored until such devices have been installed. The person in
responsible charge may permit an extension of up to 90 additional days if
compliance efforts are underway and the existence of hardship can be
demonstrated.
      (3)   The town shall bear no liability for direct or consequential
damages proximately caused by the discontinuance of service pursuant to this
section.
   (N)   Testing and maintenance of devices. The consumer at each property at
which containment and/or confinement device(s) have been installed, except
those with devices installed in accordance with division (I)(1), shall have
each containment and/or confinement device(s) tested on an annual basis, and
perform any routine maintenance to such device as recommended by the
manufacturer, and provide the Cross-Connection Coordinator with a report of
that inspection and work. The consumer shall cause such maintenance, or repairs
to be made, rendering the device fully operational. Failure of the consumer to
perform that testing and maintenance shall be cause for the premises to be
deemed an immediate public health hazard. The person in responsible charge may
immediately thereafter discontinue public water supply service to that premises
and service shall not be restored until such devices have been rendered
operational. Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal
operations or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicated containment
or confinement devices shall be provided by the property owner to avoid the
necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the device or
devices.
   (O)   Limitation of liability. The town shall not be held liable, for any
cause, for failure to detect any unit failing to operate adequately, or failure
to identify any specific hazard, which may result in contamination of its
public water supply, nor shall this section diminish the responsibility of any
property owner from whose property a contamination of the public water supply
may originate.
(Ord. passed 9-30-2003)
EXTENSION OF WATER AND SEWER LINES
§ 51.045 APPLICATION FOR AND APPROVAL OF EXTENSIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this subchapter (January 30,
1973), any property owner or owners desiring water or sanitary sewer service
shall apply in writing to the Board of Commissioners requesting the extension
of water or sanitary sewer service or both. No request for the extension of
services shall be considered, unless submitted in writing in accordance with
the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   The town shall require the applicant to submit as part of the written
application such information, plans or other data as may be required to
adequately determine if the requirements of this subchapter are to be met.
   (C)   When application is made for a water or sewer extension or both to
serve an area or development that is planned as part of a larger development
project or subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time
application is made, the owner or owners shall submit plans in sufficient
detail in order to determine the size and type of facilities which will be
necessary to serve the entire development or subdivision when completed.
   (D)   No extension to the water or sanitary sewer system of the town shall
be made and no application shall be approved, except in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.40) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.046 GENERAL EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   All extensions of either water or sanitary sewer service shall be governed
by the following.
   (A)   The minimum distance for any extension of a water main or sanitary
sewer main shall be determined by the Board of Commissioners. In general, the
minimum distance for extensions shall be one platted block, or in the case of
water mains from main line valve to valve, and in the case of sanitary sewer
extension from manhole to manhole or as approved by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The size of water mains and sanitary sewer mains to be installed and
the other required system facilities shall be determined by the Board of
Commissioners in accordance with the recognized standards and accepted
engineering practices and design and in accordance with applicable system plans
adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   All water and sewer line extensions shall be approved by the State
Board of Health and the State Department of Natural and Economic Resources,
Office of Water and Air Resources before any construction of the facilities can
begin.
(Prior Code, § 51.41) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.047 APPLICATION FOR EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   To secure water or sewer line extensions, the applicant must instigate
the following procedures:
      (1)   Furnish the Board of Commissioners with a scaled map of the
proposed subdivision or area to which the system is to be extended, preferably
one inch to 100 foot scale, designating all building lots to be served by the
extension. Said map shall conform to the requirements of the County Subdivision
Ordinance for preliminary sketches and should bear the stamp of approval of the
County Planning Council as such.
      (2)   Request, in writing, a preliminary cost estimate from the Board of
Commissioners using the prescribed form furnished by the town.
      (3)   Make a cash deposit of 10% of the preliminary cost estimate of the
proposed extension to secure a contract for preparation of the construction
plans and specifications.
      (4)   After the agreement is executed with the town and prior to the
beginning of any construction, the applicant shall make an additional deposit
in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Commissioners to assure the Board of
Commissioners that the applicant will pay 100% of all construction,
administrative, legal, engineering, right-of-way, inspection, testing and all
other costs associated with the proposed extension of the system which shall be
performed by or through the town or for which the Board of Commissioners may
become liable.
   (B)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the town for
which a separate accounting will be made.
   (C)   When an approved water or sanitary sewer extension project has been
completed and the total cost of such water or sanitary sewer extension has been
determined, the town will notify the applicant of said total costs. If the
initial amount deposited with the town is more than the total cost, said
difference will be refunded to the applicant by the town. If the initial amount
deposited by the applicant is less than the total cost, the applicant will make
an additional payment to cover the total cost of installation before the water
or sewer system is put into service.
   (D)   When the town determines that it is advisable to install larger size
facilities than are necessary to serve the property requesting such extension,
the difference in the cost of the larger size facilities over and above the
cost of the facilities required to serve the property requesting such extension
shall be paid for by the town and excluded from the total cost to be paid by
the applicant.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the Board of Commissioners from
extending water or sanitary sewer mains or both on their own motion without
receipt of an application from property owners, when, in the opinion of the
Board of Commissioners, the general public interest demands such extension of
service.
(Prior Code, § 51.42) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.048 SPECIFICATIONS; OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Water mains or sanitary sewer mains extended under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the
approved plans, specifications and other requirements of the town. All
facilities installed under the provisions of this subchapter, whether within or
outside the corporate limits shall become the sole property of the town and
under its jurisdiction and control for any and all purposes whatsoever at the
time such facilities are connected to the town system. When required, the
property owner or owners shall grant to the town such utility easements as the
town may require. In addition, a deed to the town for water and/or sewer
facilities installed which are located outside the corporate limits, the cost
of which is born by the applicant, shall be executed prior to the time any
extensions provided for in this subchapter are connected to the town systems.
   (B)   The terms WATER MAINS and SEWER MAINS, SERVICE and/or FACILITIES shall
mean all appurtenances required to install an approved, workable system.
APPURTENANCES shall include, but shall not be limited to, meters, valves, valve
boxes, fittings, connections, fire hydrants, manholes, laterals, pump stations
and force mains. All extension shall be installed of materials as specified by
the Board of Commissioners and all appurtenances shall be placed as directed by
the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 51.43) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.049 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Water and sewer lines shall be installed by qualified utility
contractors, licensed by the state (except as hereinafter provided).
      (1)   The system will be installed as designed by the Board of
Commissioners’ engineer. Inspection of the lines will be made periodically and
all items not meeting the quality of work or material specifications of the
Board of Commissioners will be corrected.
      (2)   The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to allow the
applicant himself or herself, if properly licensed, to construct the proposed
extension according to the plans and specifications of the Board of
Commissioners; provided, however, that in said event the Board of Commissioners
will provide a full time qualified inspector for the duration of the
construction phase of said extension, the cost of which shall be paid by the
applicant and will not be refundable.
      (3)   The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to require such
assurances or deposits by the applicant as may be deemed necessary or advisable
to insure the Board of Commissioners that any proposed extension shall be
completed according to the plans and specifications for said extension.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners shall have full authority to inspect, test,
accept or reject all construction and to refuse to provide water or sewer
service until the construction is approved and accepted by the Board of
Commissioners.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners shall receive and be entitled to all
revenue that may be produced by said installation from the first date of
ownership, free and clear from any claim or lien of the applicant or anyone
claiming through him or her.
(Prior Code, § 51.44) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.050 ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may in its discretion, as a condition under
which water or sewer service or both will be extended, require the owner or
owners of a proposed subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the
proposed streets, sidewalk, curb and gutter therein at their own expense and in
accordance with any applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances of
the town then in force governing the acceptance of public streets for the town.
   (B)   This section will apply to subdivisions which are located either
within or outside the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 51.45) (Ord. passed - -)
Cross-reference:
   Street and sidewalk excavations and repairs, see
Chapter 91
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 51.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Board of Commissioners.
   B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million by weight.
   COLOR. The “true color” due to the substances in solution expressed in parts
per million.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Liquid waste from bath rooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and
home laundries.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquid wastes, other than domestic sewage, resulting from
processes or operations employed in industrial establishments.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association or corporation.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution. A STABILIZED pH will be considered as a pH which does
not change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subject to aeration. A
pH value indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   RECEIVING STREAM. The body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the
discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the waters
discharged from the sewage treatment plant.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and industrial
waste, except that of the type expressly prohibited by this subchapter, without
the admixture of surface water and storm water.
   SHALL is mandatory. MAY is permissive.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOWN. The town.
(Prior Code, § 51.60) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.066 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following waste
materials in any town sewer:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F;
      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million by weight of fat, oil or grease, exclusive of soap;
      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or other solid or viscous
substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 6.0 or
higher than 9.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a biochemical oxygen demand in excess
of 600 parts per million by weight;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 600 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids;
      (9)   Any waters or wastes having an objectionable color which is not
removable in the existing sewage treatment plant processes;
      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or
any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
create any hazard in the receiving stream at the sewage treatment plant;
      (11)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant;
      (12)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance; or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance and repair; or
   (B)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any person
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted
into the sanitary sewers by the town after approved pretreatment.
(Prior Code, § 51.61) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.067 INDUSTRIAL WASTE STRUCTURES REQUIRED.
   (A)   In order to equalize flows over a 24-hour period, each person
discharging a waste into the town’s sanitary sewers having a volume in excess
of 40,000 gallons in any one day shall construct and maintain at his or her own
expense a suitable storage tank. The tank shall have a capacity of at least 80%
of the normal volume of one 24-hour production period of waste and whose outlet
to the sewer is controlled by a water works-type rate controller, or other
approved devices, the setting of which shall be directed by the Approving
Authority.
   (B)   Any person discharging any amount of industrial wastes into town
sanitary sewer shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole,
downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works, to facilitate
observation, measurements and sampling of all industrial wastes from the
industry. The control manhole shall be constructed at a suitable and
satisfactory location and built in a manner approved by the Approving
Authority. Where a storage tank is not required, the control manhole shall be
equipped with a permanent type volume measuring device such as a nozzle, or
other suitable devices as may be approved by the Approving Authority. The
manhole shall be installed by the person discharging the wastes at his or her
expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe, accessible and
in proper condition at all times.
   (C)   Control manhole requirements may be waived by the approving authority
when a person discharges less than 40,000 gallons of industrial wastes on a
normal working day, providing:
      (1)   That such wastes meet all other requirements of this subchapter as
determined by the Approving Authority;
      (2)   That such person was operating at his or her present location
before the adoption of this subchapter (effective date, January 30, 1973);
      (3)   That all such wastes are discharged through a single standard sewer
manhole before entrance into the town’s sanitary sewer; and
      (4)   That said person agrees to pay a surcharge double that required
under state statutes and that the strength of the waste on which the surcharge
is made will be based on tests made on similar wastes discharged by other
industries of the same type, if such information is available; if not, by such
other methods as the Approving Authority may wish to employ. Whatever method is
used for finding the strength of the waste, the determination of the Approving
Authority shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
   (D)   Plans for the construction of said storage tank, control manhole and
controlling devices shall be approved by the Approving Authority prior to the
beginning of construction.
(Prior Code, § 51.62) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.068 PERMITS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge or who is now depositing
or discharging any industrial waste into the sanitary sewers shall make
application for the disposal of industrial waste to the Board of Commissioners.
The Board of Commissioners shall approve such applications only when evidence
is submitted by the applicant that the discharge into the sanitary sewer will
comply with all of the regulations of this subchapter.
   (B)   Should any person fail to secure a permit or fail to have his or her
application approved, the Public Works Director shall, upon 24 hours’ notice,
if such person is using town water, disconnect such person’s connection with
the town water system, and the same will only be reconnected at such owner’s
expense; and if such person does not use town water, such person, after 24
hours notice, shall have his or her connection with the town sewer system
severed, and such service will only be restored at such person’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 51.63) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.069 OUTSIDE CONNECTIONS.
   Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate
limits of the town and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of
discharging domestic sewage and/or industrial waste into the sanitary sewers of
the town may do so by complying with the requirements of this subchapter and by
paying an additional permit fee and a yearly sewer rental charge to be fixed by
the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 51.64) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.070 POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Approving Authority and other duly authorized employees of the
town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Authority is hereby granted to the Board of Commissioners to
temporarily exclude any industrial waste, whether pre-treated or not, from the
sanitary sewers whenever, in the opinion of the Board of Commissioners, such
action is necessary for the purpose of determining the effect of such wastes
upon the sewers, sewage treatment works or sewage treatment plants.
(Prior Code, § 51.65) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.071 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (A)   The volume of flow used in computing industrial waste surcharges shall
be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter
reading maintained by the Public Works Department. In the event that a person
discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system produces evidence to the
Approving Authority that more than 10% of the total annual volume of water used
for all purposes does not reach the town sanitary sewer, an estimated
percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing charges may be
agreed upon between the Approving Authority and the persons discharging
industrial wastes into said sewer.
   (B)   Where the person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary
sewers of the town procures any part or all of his or her water supply from
sources other than the Public Works Department, all or part of which is
discharged into the sanitary sewer, the person discharging said waste shall
install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type approved by
the Approving Authority for the purpose of determining the proper volume of
flow to be charged.
(Prior Code, § 51.66) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.072 DETERMINING OF CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTES.
   (A)   The industrial waste of each person discharging same into the town
sanitary sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of
character and concentration of said wastes shall be made quarterly, or as often
as may be deemed necessary by the Approving Authority or his authorized
assistants.
   (B)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of
the actual quality of the wastes. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of said wastes shall be those set forth in the most recent edition
of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage”, as published by
the American Public Health Association, dated 1971, a copy of which is on file
with the Town Clerk for inspection by any interested parties.
   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the industrial
wastes by the Approving Authority or his authorized assistants shall be binding
as a basis for charges.
   (D)   Total costs incident to the supervision, inspection, sampling and
analyzing of wastes shall be included in the surcharge made to persons
discharging wastes into the town sanitary sewers.
(Prior Code, § 51.67) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.073 SURCHARGE FOR TREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   Explanation of surcharges. All persons discharging industrial wastes
into the town sanitary sewer system shall be rendered a monthly bill as a
surcharge covering the entire costs to the town incurred by treating all wastes
having a B.O.D. in excess of 250 parts per million by weight. Said surcharge
shall be evoked as herein provided in addition to any sewer charge imposed
after the adoption of this subchapter (effective date, January 30, 1973). The
aforesaid surcharge shall include:
      (1)   All fixed charges and amortization costs of additional plant
capacity required for treating said industrial wastes; and
      (2)   A charge covering the cost incurred to the town in treating said
wastes in the municipal sewage treatment plants.
   (B)   Amount of surcharge. A surcharge per 1,000 pounds of biochemical
oxygen demand, from time to time to be determined by the Board of
Commissioners, shall be made to cover the fixed charges and amortization cost
of additional plant capacity as hereinbefore described (see division (A)(1)
above).
   (C)   Procedure. The surcharge covering the costs of the treatment (see
division (A)(2) above) of said industrial wastes shall be arrived at in the
following manner: the Board of Commissioners shall fix the rate to be charged
during the new fiscal year at the beginning of said fiscal year for the weight
of biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 250 parts per million which is
discharged into the town sanitary sewers. This rate shall be computed from the
actual costs per 1,000 pounds of biochemical oxygen demand removed from the
combined sewage and industrial wastes as experienced at the municipal treatment
plants during the preceding fiscal year.
   (D)   Billed. The combined surcharge, as set forth in divisions (B) and (C)
above, shall be billed and payable monthly on a separate bill rendered to the
proper persons by the Public Works Department.
      (1)   Said bills will be sent through the United States mail notifying
all persons of the amount and date due. Failure to receive notice is not an
excuse for nonpayment of bills.
      (2)   Persons not having paid their bill within ten days of the date of
billing will be delinquent. Notice shall be sent them through the United States
mail, and if after five days notice, given as above, the bills remain unpaid,
the water connection serving the premises will be severed and will not be
turned on again until said bill is paid.
      (3)   In case a person discharging wastes into the town sanitary sewer
system does not procure his or her water supply from the town and becomes
delinquent in his or her payment of the aforesaid surcharge, his or her
connection with the town sewer system will be severed and will only be
reconnected at his or her expense.
(Prior Code, § 51.68) (Ord. passed - -)
§ 51.074 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or materials
belonging to the town used for the purpose of making tests or examinations and
left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sewers.
(Prior Code, § 51.69) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter for which no other
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §
51.031 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, and shall be fined not more
than $500, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Each day that this section
is violated shall be a separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   (1)   Penalty.
         (a)   Violation of any provision of §
51.032 may subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the town
in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within 30 days after the assessment has become final by exhaustion of
the appeal process established by §
51.032, or by failure to appeal the assessment.
         (b)   The civil penalty for violation of any provision of §
51.032 shall not exceed $500 per day for each day of continuous violation, or a
cumulative or single civil penalty of $10,000. The civil penalty for willful
violation of any provision of §
51.032 shall not exceed $1,000 per day for each day of a continuous violation,
or a cumulative or single civil penalty of $20,000.
      (2)   Assessment. Any civil penalty shall be assessed by the Town
Manager, upon the recommendation of the person in responsible charge, and shall
be based upon the reasonable estimated cost of correcting the cited violation,
the magnitude of the potential risk posed to the public health, safety and
welfare by the violation, and the cost of the public safety or other emergency
response caused by the violation. The Town Manager shall serve written notice
of the civil penalty assessment to the offender and set out with reasonable
care the basis of the amount so assessed.
      (3)   Equitable relief. An appropriate equitable remedy, including a
mandatory or prohibitory injunction, issued from a court of competent
jurisdiction may endorse the provisions of §
51.032.
      (4)   Enforcement option. The penalties and enforcement provisions
established by this division may be applied in addition to or instead of the
penalties established by other sections of this code.
   (D)   The violation of §§
51.020 through
51.031 and §§
51.045 through
51.051 shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not
exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days as provided in G.S. §
14-4.
(Prior Code, § 51.99) (Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 9-30-2003; Ord. passed 10-
26-2004)
CHAPTER 52: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Declaration of water shortage
   
52.03   Stage I Voluntary Water Shortage Condition
   
52.04   Stage II Mandatory Water Shortage Condition
   
52.05   Stage III Mandatory Water Shortage Condition
   
52.06   Stage IV Mandatory Water Shortage Condition
   
52.07   Lifting of restrictions imposed
   
52.08   Enforcement
   
52.09   Discontinuance of service
   
52.10   Irrigation requirements which apply at all times
   
52.11   Effective date
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   Water conservation is deemed to be necessary when water demand by customers
connected to the town water system reaches the point where continued or
increased demand will equal or exceed the treatment and/or transmission
capacity of the system. When water demand results in the condition whereby
customers cannot be supplied with adequate water to protect their health,
safety or property, then the demand must be substantially curtailed to relieve
the water shortage.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.02 DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE.
   (A)   In the event it appears there is a sustained demand of 80% of the town
water system treatment and/or transmission capacity (average daily flow); or
Duke Power Company LLC, doing business as Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC, declares
a Stage 1 Low Inflow Condition pursuant to the Comprehensive Relicensing
Agreement for the Catawba-Wateree Hydro Project (FERC Project No. 2232) dated
December 22, 2006, to which the town’s water supplier, the county, is a party,
thus compelling certain voluntary water use restrictions by the county, then in
either such event the Director of the Town Public Works Department, hereinafter
referred to as the “Director”, may recommend to the Town Manager that voluntary
water conservation measures be implemented. The Town Manager, following
consultation with the Board of Commissioners, may declare a Stage I Voluntary
Water Shortage Condition requesting voluntary water conservation by consumers.
The Town Manager, following consultation with the Board of Commissioners, may,
with or without the recommendation of the Director, declare that a Stage II,
Stage III or Stage IV Mandatory Water Shortage Condition exists and require
mandatory conservation measures upon occurrence of any conditions precedent for
declaring such Condition, as hereinafter set forth. In declaring any Water
Shortage Condition pursuant to this chapter, the Town Manager may limit the
applicability of the requirements of this chapter to certain sections of the
town. For purposes of this chapter, the phrase “following consultation with the
Board of Commissioners” shall mean consultation during a regular or special
meeting of the Board of Commissioners when possible, but where delay would
endanger the public health, safety or welfare, as determined by the Town
Manager, such consultation may be made by the Town Manager with members of the
Board of Commissioners on an individual basis outside the confines of a formal
meeting. The Town Manager shall report the declaration of a Water Shortage
Condition to the Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting.
   (B)   The declaration of a Water Shortage Condition becomes effective
immediately upon issuance by the Town Manager. Upon declaration of any stage of
Water Shortage Condition, the Town Manager shall issue press releases to local
television, radio and/or print media to inform the public of the voluntary or
mandatory water use restrictions. Upon declaration of a Stage II, Stage III or
Stage IV Mandatory Water Shortage Condition, the Town Manager shall also cause
notice of such restrictions to be either inserted into customers’ water bills
or separately mailed to customers as soon as reasonably practicable.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.03 STAGE I VOLUNTARY WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event a Stage I Voluntary Water Shortage Condition is declared,
the following guidelines shall apply.
      (1)   An extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using public
media to inform the public of an impending or existing water shortage.
      (2)   Conservation measures will be encouraged and recommended.
   (B)   In the event a Stage I Voluntary Water Shortage Condition is declared,
the following guidelines shall apply, and the public shall be encouraged to
adhere to the following:
      (1)   Limit car washing to the minimum;
      (2)   Limit lawn and garden watering to that which is necessary for
plants to survive;
      (3)   Do not wash down outside areas such as sidewalks, patios, parking
lots, service bays or aprons and the like;
      (4)   Do not leave faucets running while shaving or rinsing dishes;
      (5)   Water shrubbery to the minimum required, reusing household water
when possible;
      (6)   Limit use of clothes washers and dish washers and when used,
operate fully loaded;
      (7)   Use of showers for bathing, rather than bathtub, and limit showers
to no more than four minutes;
      (8)   Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage;
      (9)   The use of disposable and biodegradable dishes is encouraged;
      (10)   The use of flow-restrictive and water-saving devices is
encouraged;
      (11)   Limit hours of operation of water-cooled air conditioners;
      (12)   All residents, businesses and institutions are requested to
temporarily delay new landscape work until the water shortage has ended; and
      (13)   Use only hoses with spring-activated nozzles when watering lawns
and gardens.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.04 STAGE II MANDATORY WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event the Town Manager issues a declaration of a Stage II
Mandatory Water Shortage Condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the town water
system in a manner inconsistent with the declaration until such time as the
declaration of a Stage II Mandatory Water Shortage Condition has been
rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring a Stage II Mandatory Water
Shortage Condition, consideration shall be given, as applicable, to water
shortage levels and available sources of supply, available usable storage on
hand, drawn-down rates, the projected supply capability, outlook for
precipitation, daily water use patterns and availability of water from other
sources.
   (B)   In the event a Stage I Voluntary Water Shortage Condition declaration
is ineffective in adequately reducing demand; maintenance of the system
(whether preventive or breakdown maintenance, or due to an event of force
majeure) requires a reduction in demand; mandatory restrictions are required to
comply with any permit for the system issued by applicable state or federal
authorities; sustained water demand exceeds 95% of the county water system
treatment and/or transmission capacity (average daily flow); or Duke Power
Company LLC, doing business as Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC, declares a Stage 2
Low Inflow Condition pursuant to the Comprehensive Relicensing Agreement for
the Catawba- Wateree Hydro Project (FERC Project No. 2232) dated December 22,
2006, to which the county is a party, thus compelling certain mandatory water
use restrictions by town, then upon occurrence of any such event the Town
Manager may issue a declaration that a Stage II Mandatory Water Shortage
Condition exists. Such declaration may prohibit any one or more of the types of
water uses regulated under a Stage I, Stage III or Stage IV Water Shortage
Condition, provided that the Town Manager , in his or her discretion and acting
in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, may
further regulate usage on the following bases: time of day; day of week;
customer type, including without limitation, residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional; and physical attribute, such as address. After
consultation with the Board of Commissioners, the Town Manager may also take
such other measures as deemed necessary to give effect to the intent of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.05 STAGE III MANDATORY WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event the Town Manager issues a declaration of a Stage III
Mandatory Water Shortage Condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the Town of Wingate
water system for any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the
declaration of a Stage III Mandatory Water Shortage Condition has been
rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring a Stage III Mandatory
Water Shortage Condition, consideration shall be given, as applicable, to water
shortage levels and available sources of supply, available usable storage on
hand, drawn-down rates, the projected supply capability, outlook for
precipitation, daily water use patterns and availability of water from other
sources.
   (B)   In the event a Stage II Mandatory Water Shortage Condition is in
effect and the system demand still exceeds system capacity; or Duke Power
Company LLC, doing business as Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC, declares a Stage 3
Low Inflow Condition pursuant to the Comprehensive Relicensing Agreement for
the Catawba-Wateree Hydro Project (FERC Project No. 2232) dated December
22,2006, to which the county is a party, thus compelling certain mandatory
water use restrictions by the county, then in either such event a Stage III
Mandatory Water Shortage Condition may be declared. In addition to any
voluntary and mandatory guidelines already in effect, it shall be unlawful to
use water supplied by the town water system in the following manner:
      (1)   To water lawns; provided that shrubbery, trees, flowers and
vegetable gardens may be watered by hand or by drip irrigation;
      (2)   To conduct residential vehicle washing;
      (3)   To wash public buildings, sidewalks and streets, except as required
for safety and/or to maintain regulatory compliance;
      (4)   To use water for dust control during construction;
      (5)   To conduct flushing or hydrant testing programs, except to maintain
water quality or other special circumstances approved by the Director in
advance;
      (6)   To fill new swimming pools; and
      (7)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias or other food
establishments, except upon request.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.06 STAGE IV MANDATORY WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event the Town Manager issues a declaration of a Stage IV
Mandatory Water Shortage Condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the town water
system for any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the declaration
of water shortage has been rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring
a water shortage condition, consideration shall be given, as applicable, to
water storage levels and available sources of supply, available usable storage
on hand, draw-down rates, the projected supply capability, outlook for
precipitation, daily water use patterns and availability of water from other
sources.
   (B)   In the event: a Stage III Mandatory Water Shortage Condition exists
and the system demand still exceeds system capacity; or Duke Power Company LLC,
doing business as Duke Energy Carolinas, LLC, declares a Stage 4 Low Inflow
Condition pursuant to the Comprehensive Relicensing Agreement for the Catawba-
Wateree Hydro Project (FERC Project No. 2232) dated December 22, 2006, to which
the county is a party, thus compelling certain mandatory water use restrictions
by the county, then in either such event a Stage IV Mandatory Water Shortage
Condition may be declared. In addition to the restrictions for Stage I, Stage
II and Stage III Water Shortage Conditions, the following restrictions shall
also apply:
      (1)   To induce water into any pool;
      (2)   Use water outside a structure for any use other than an emergency
involving a fire;
      (3)   Fire protection to be maintained by drafting of ponds, rivers and
the like, wherever possible;
      (4)   The use of throw-away utensils and plates is encouraged and
recommended at all eating establishments;
      (5)   To operate an evaporative air conditioner which recycles water
except during operating hours of business; and
      (6)   Use potable water for road construction practices, i.e., compaction
and washing.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.07 LIFTING OF RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED.
   During a water shortage:
   (A)   Water shortage conditions will expire when the Town Manager, after
consultation with the Board of Commissioners and, upon recommendation of the
Director, deems that the condition which caused the water shortage condition
has abated; and
   (B)   The expiration or cancellation of a water shortage declaration shall
be promptly and extensively publicized.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by
personnel of the Town Public Works Department, hereinafter referred to as
“WPW”, independent contractors engaged by WPW for such purpose, and such other
personnel as designated by the Town Manager.
   (B)   The use of water from the town water system by a customer in violation
of any mandatory water conservation control imposed pursuant to this chapter is
unlawful. For purposes of this chapter, the term CUSTOMER shall mean any person
or entity in whose name the town maintains an account for water use. Further,
the refusal or failure of a customer or other person acting on the customer’s
behalf to cease immediately a violation of a water conservation control, after
being directed to do so by a person authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, is unlawful. Each customer is responsible for any use of water
that passes through the service connection associated with the customer’s
account or otherwise passes through the customer’s private water system.
   (C)   Any customer who violates or permits the violation of any mandatory
water conservation control imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
civil penalties as follows:
      (1)   A warning for the first offense;
      (2)   A civil penalty in the amount of $1 for the second offense; and
      (3)   A civil penalty in the amount of $500 for the third and subsequent
offenses. Each day that a violation of a mandatory water conservation control
occurs shall be considered to be a separate and distinct offense.
   (D)   Violations shall be accumulated by customers so long as this chapter,
in any of its stages, is continuously in effect and until no stage of this
chapter has been in effect for a period of one calendar year. Violations of any
mandatory water conservation control of any stage shall accumulate with
violations of other stages. Should a customer move, or cease and renew service,
during the period described herein, the customer’s violations shall continue to
accumulate as if such move or cessation had not occurred.
   (E)   Each civil penalty assessed against a customer pursuant to this
chapter shall be added to the customer’s water bill and shall be paid in the
same manner as the payment of water bills. A customer’s partial payment of a
water bill shall be applied first to satisfaction of the civil penalties.
Failure to pay all or any portion of a water bill, including any civil penalty
assessed pursuant to this chapter, in a timely manner may result in the
termination of water service.
   (F)   The violation of any water conservation control or provision of this
chapter may be enforced by all remedies authorized by law for noncompliance
with town ordinances, including, without limitation, the assessment of a civil
penalty and action for injunction, order of abatement or other equitable
relief; provided, however, that no violation of any water conservation control
or provision of this chapter shall be a basis for imposing any criminal remedy.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.09 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   In addition to the payment of any civil penalty assessed pursuant to §
52.08, a customer shall be subject to termination or restriction of water
service following four or more violations of any water conservation control
imposed pursuant to this chapter. Water service will not be restored at such
service connection until the customer agrees to such terms as determined by the
Director to be reasonably necessary or advisable to ensure the customer’s
compliance with such water conservation controls as are then in effect or may
be imposed pursuant to this chapter and the payment of all the customer’s
obligations, including, without limitation, all outstanding charges for water
service, civil penalties and all other fees, amounts and penalties charged in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If a customer violates such a
term or condition, the customer shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to
$1,000 in addition to any other remedy authorized pursuant to this chapter and
termination of water service through such service connection for up to a
minimum period of 15 days. Service may be restored thereafter in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   A customer whose water service is terminated pursuant to this section
shall not be entitled to notice and an opportunity for a hearing in advance of
such termination. Although service of notice and an opportunity for hearing are
not conditions precedent to termination of service, WPW will endeavor to
provide such notice as soon as reasonably practicable after a decision is made
to terminate such service. A customer whose service is terminated pursuant to
this section or who receives notice of such a termination shall have five
calendar days after termination of service or receipt of notice of termination,
whichever is later, to appeal such termination to the Director, or his or her
designee, by delivering a written notice of appeal. A hearing shall be held on
such appeal within three business days of receipt of the notice of appeal, or
by such other date as approved by the Director, or his or her designee, and the
customer.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.10 IRRIGATION REQUIREMENTS WHICH APPLY AT ALL TIMES.
   The following shall apply at all times to the outdoor sprinkling of lawns,
shrubbery, trees, flowers, gardens and other outside irrigation systems. By
July 1, 2009, all irrigation systems equipped with a timer shall be equipped
with rain sensors as approved by WPW. Rain sensors shall be activated to
prevent the system from operating after one-fourth inch of rain has fallen.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
§ 52.11 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   This chapter originally became effective on August 12, 2002. It was
subsequently amended and restated effective on the following date: September
16, 2008.
   (B)   This second amendment and restatement of this chapter shall become
effective upon adoption by the Board of Commissioners on September 16, 2008
(the effective date). This chapter is restated in this manner solely to
facilitate review by the reader by obviating the need to integrate multiple
documents. Any declaration of a water shortage condition made prior to the
effective date and not rescinded shall remain in full force and effect. Though
amended, this chapter shall be deemed to be continuously in effect such that
enforcement of violations committed prior to the effective date shall continue
unaffected.
(Ord. passed 9-16-2008)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
73.   BICYCLES, COASTERS AND ROLLER SKATES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      76.   GOLF CART REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Required obedience to traffic regulations
   
70.03   Obedience to police
   
70.04   Authority of police in special cases
   
70.05   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.06   Application to push carts, bicycles or animals
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.21   No-turn signs; turning markers
   
70.22   No-parking zones; safety zone markers
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. A portion of any street located between two intersections adjacent to
each other.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory prescribed as such by ordinance of the
Department of Transportation.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.
Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. A person in actual physical control of a vehicle which is in motion
or which has the engine running.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curblines, or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two or more
highways which join one another at any angle whether or not one such highway
crosses the other.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall
mean Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time as may be in current use in this
town.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of the
governing body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of loading or unloading and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental agency or combination thereof of whatsoever form or character.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Town Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violation of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel.
   PUBLIC CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train for
transporting for fare.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory prescribed as such by ordinance of the
Department of Transportation.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area of space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is so plainly marked or indicated by
proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety
zone.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STOP. When required, STOP means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP or STOPPING. When prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines or right-of-way
lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open
to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular
traffic.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars and
other conveyances either single or together while using any street for purposes
of travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, provided that for the purpose
of this title, a bicycle shall be deemed a vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 70.01)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-4.01
§ 70.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required in this title.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction by a police officer.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
 § 70.04 AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN SPECIAL CASES.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 70.04)
§ 70.05 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county
or town. It shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the
provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by
state statute.
(Prior Code, § 70.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 APPLICATION TO PUSH CARTS, BICYCLES OR ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon
a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject
to the provisions of this title, which by their very nature can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 70.06)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the
traffic regulations of this town, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in §
70.06.
   (B)   No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being
placed to give notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 70.20) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.21 NO-TURN SIGNS; TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating that
no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of any such sign, and when authorized markers, buttons or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at said place, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.
(Prior Code, § 70.21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 NO-PARKING ZONES; SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed
indicating no-parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the regulations in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 70.22) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   If any person shall violate any provision of this Traffic Code where no
other penalty is provided, he or she shall be responsible for an infraction and
shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.
(Prior Code, § 70.99) (G.S. § 14-4(b))
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Driving through funeral processions
   
71.02   Limitations on backing
   
71.03   Speed limit
Special Stops Required
   
71.15   Emerging from alley or private driveway
   
71.16   Stop when traffic obstructed
Passengers’ Rights and Duties
   
71.30   Boarding or alighting from public conveyances or other vehicles
   
71.31   Unlawful riding
   
71.32   Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission
   
71.33   Persons riding must stay inside
   
71.34   Not more than three persons permitted in front seat
   
71.35   Trucks prohibited on certain streets
   
71.36   Through trucks
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols and ambulances when the same are responding
to calls.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection or
over a crosswalk, and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle,
unless such movement can be made in safety, and he or she shall have given
ample warning by hand, horn or other signal to those who may be behind said
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 SPEED LIMIT.
   A vehicle may be operated on any street of the town, designated elsewhere in
this chapter as a business section, at a rate of speed not exceeding 20 mph;
provided, however, that at no time shall the speed be greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.15 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk areas
extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway, he or she shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.16 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 71.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Stopping, standing and parking, see
Chapter 72
PASSENGERS’ RIGHTS AND DUTIES
§ 71.30 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM PUBLIC CONVEYANCES OR OTHER VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle
while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion.
(Prior Code, § 71.35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.31 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle or any portion
thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision
shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or
to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 71.36) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.32 ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.
(Prior Code, § 71.37) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.33 PERSONS RIDING MUST STAY INSIDE.
   No person when riding shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude
beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding, except to give
such signals as are by law required. No person shall hang on to any vehicle
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 71.38) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.34 NOT MORE THAN THREE PERSONS PERMITTED IN FRONT SEAT.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor
vehicle to permit more than three persons (including driver) to ride in the
front or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 71.39) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.35 TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may designate streets or portions of
streets where truck traffic is prohibited and shall erect “no trucks allowed”
signs on such streets or portions thereof.
   (B)   Such streets or portions thereof are designated in
Chapter 74, Schedule II, which is also on file in the office of the Town Clerk,
which is hereby made a part of this chapter.
   (C)   A TRUCK is defined as a truck vehicle having three or more axles;
also, a TRUCK is defined as a tractor-trailer truck vehicle.
   (D)   Any truck may operate on the prohibited streets designated in
Chapter 74, Schedule II if it is performing services for any property or
properties adjacent to the designated streets.
   (E)   Trucks owned, operated or performing under the direction of the town
shall also be exempt from regulation.
(Ord. passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.36 THROUGH TRUCKS.
   (A)   Through trucks shall be prohibited on those streets or portions of
streets designated from time to time by the Board of Commissioners, upon the
erection of signs on such streets or portions thereof.
   (B)   A schedule of such streets or portions thereof shall be set forth in
Chapter 74 and be on file in the office of the Town Clerk, which is hereby made
a part of this chapter.
   (C)   Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated
on any sign, markers or devices erected pursuant to this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   This section shall not be construed to apply when the driver of a
vehicle is otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer of the town or when
an exception is granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when
the driver of such vehicle while in motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren
or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is
equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle.
   (E)   Such exception is hereby granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle when operated under the circumstances set forth above.
   (F)   A TRUCK is defined as a truck vehicle having three or more axles;
also, a TRUCK is defined as a tractor-trailer truck vehicle.
   (G)   Any truck may operate on the prohibited streets designated on the
attached schedule if it is performing services for any property or properties
adjacent to the designated streets.
   (H)   Trucks owned, operated or performing under the direction of the town
shall also be exempt from regulation.
(Ord. passed 4-15-2008) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
Method of Parking
   
72.01   Parallel parking
   
72.02   Vehicles backed up to curb
   
72.03   Left side of curb not permitted in business district
   
72.04   Parking within lines
   
72.05   Lights on parked vehicles
   
72.06   Moving cars from parked positions
Parking Prohibited for Specified Purposes
   
72.20   Unlawful parking
   
72.21   Parking to advertise prohibited
Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited or Restricted in Specified Places
   
72.35   Vehicles not to park in streets; exceptions
   
72.36   Vehicles not to obstruct passing of other vehicles
   
72.37   Blocking of driveways
   
72.38   Parking too close to corners; blocking fire hydrants
   
72.39   Additional places where parking prohibited
   
72.40   Moving of vehicles into restricted areas
   
72.41   Parking of taxicabs within the same block
Enforcement Provision
   
72.55   Enforcement of traffic and parking regulations
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
Traffic rules generally, see
Chapter 71
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 72.01 PARALLEL PARKING.
   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter, and where the street is not
marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the
curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 VEHICLES BACKED UP TO CURB.
   (A)   In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to curb, except when
actually loading or unloading.
   (B)   If the vehicle is horse-drawn, the horse or horses shall stand
parallel to the curb and face the direction of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 LEFT SIDE OF CURB NOT PERMITTED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business
district, except that on one-way streets, vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PARKING WITHIN LINES.
   On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces
for cars, the same shall be parked between said lines.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   The displaying of lights upon a vehicle, when lawfully parked at night upon
a street of the town in accordance with this chapter, shall not be required
when there is sufficient light to reveal any person with a distance of 200 feet
upon such street.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 MOVING CARS FROM PARKED POSITIONS.
   Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are parked at
an angle with the curb, they shall back out on that angle unless they have
cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they are most
nearly headed in.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) Penalty, see §
72.99
PARKING PROHIBITED FOR SPECIFIED PURPOSES
§ 72.20 UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal
purposes of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when such storage
is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or other
vehicles; or
   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been
disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one
vehicle to another.
(Prior Code, § 72.15) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.21 PARKING TO ADVERTISE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stand or park on any street any vehicle for the primary
purpose of advertising.
(Prior Code, § 72.16) Penalty, see §
72.99
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
§ 72.35 VEHICLES NOT TO PARK IN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as
prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach
of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other procession which is
given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the lowering
of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some
other vehicle or pedestrian or by some emergency; and in any case covered by
these exceptions said vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway,
pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection if such can be
avoided.
(Prior Code, § 72.30) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.36 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSING OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall stand, be placed or left parked at anytime, during daylight
hours or night hours or overnight, on any town street or street right-of-way.
Vehicle shall include automobiles, pickup trucks, tractor-trailer trucks,
tractor or trailer and any other motor vehicle. This provision shall not apply
where such vehicle is parked in a designated parking space indicated by
pavement markings and/or signage not restricting hours of parking, except that
tractor-trailer trucks or tractor or trailer alone, shall not be included in
this exception. The purpose of this section is that the best interest, health
and welfare of the residents of the town can only be maintained for their free
passage from and access to their residences and property, as well as for the
free and unrestricted access of and by emergency vehicles, i.e., fire trucks,
ambulances and law enforcement vehicles, and that the town’s streets and
rights-of-way, as well as any footway, pedestrian aisle, sidewalk, safety zone,
crossing or street intersections shall be free from obstruction of view and
safe and free passage.
(Prior Code, § 72.31) (Ord. passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.37 BLOCKING OF DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRIVEWAY. Any private drive, residential or otherwise, or public drive
serving any business, governmental purpose or otherwise, or public drive
serving any property, the purpose of which is to provide access to and from any
street as defined below.
      STREET. Any street right-of-way, road right-of-way or highway right-of-
way within the corporate limits of the town that is considered a part of the
state or the county or town system of roads or streets.
   (B)   (1)   The entrance to any driveway leading to and from and providing
access to and from any street shall not be obstructed or partially obstructed
or blocked by any vehicle parked within the street so as to prohibit free and
ready and immediate access in and out of such driveway. The point of
intersection by any such driveway with any such street, for the entire width of
the driveway at the point of intersection, and including such area within the
street as is required for entry and exit to and from the driveway is hereby
deemed a no parking and tow-away zone and is deemed illegal.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is that the best interest, health and
welfare of the residents of the town be maintained for their free passage from
and access to their residences and properties, as well as for the free and
unrestricted access of and by emergency vehicles, i.e., fire trucks, ambulances
and law enforcement vehicles.
      (3)   This division (B) shall not be construed to apply when the driver
of a vehicle is otherwise directed by a police officer, or when an exception is
granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle as from time to time
defined by state law. See G.S. § 20-156, which is incorporated herein by
reference.
   (C)   Any resident or property owner within the town who makes request for
enforcement of this section and who notifies the Town Clerk, Chief of Police or
other police officer or other town official that the driveway of his or her
property is obstructed or blocked by another vehicle as hereinabove defined,
shall thereby invoke the purpose and intent of this chapter, and it shall be
the duty of the Chief of Police or other peace officers of the town to
immediately investigate the request and violation complained of, and if such
violation is found to be still existing at that time, to tow or have towed such
illegally parked vehicle to the Town Hall or other designated place at the sole
cost and expense of the owner or operator thereof, such vehicle not to be
released to the operator or owner until such expense is paid in full, plus any
storage charges.
   (D)   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that such vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this section, provided that the proof of
ownership of any vehicle found parked in violation of this section shall be
prima facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 72.32) (Ord. passed 9-4-1990) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.38 PARKING TOO CLOSE TO CORNERS; BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No parking is allowed in 24 feet of any corner or in front of any fire
hydrant.
(Prior Code, § 72.33) (Ord. passed 11-1-1965) Penalty, see §
72.99 
§ 72.39 ADDITIONAL PLACES WHERE PARKING PROHIBITED
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic-control device in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   On a crosswalk;
   (C)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
   (D)   Along side or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (E)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass
structure;
   (F)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium or any public building; or
   (G)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(Prior Code, § 72.34) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.40 MOVING OF VEHICLES INTO RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited
area or sufficiently away from the curb to make such distance unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 72.35) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.41 PARKING OF TAXICABS WITHIN THE SAME BLOCK.
   Not more than two taxicabs owned by the same company shall be parked in one
block at the same time, except such taxicabs as may be parked in established
taxi stands.
(Prior Code, § 72.36) Penalty, see §
72.99
ENFORCEMENT PROVISION
§ 72.55 ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated
on any sign, marker, curbing or device for control or regulation of parking or
traffic flow, erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, when so placed, designated or erected, shall be guilty of an
infraction. This section shall not be construed to apply when the driver of a
vehicle is otherwise directed by a police officer or when an exception is
granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle as from time to time
defined by the laws of the state, as defined in G.S. § 20-156, as amended.
   (B)   If any vehicle shall be found illegally parked or parked overtime, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other peace officers of the town to
attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof, if the owner
or operator is absent, or to deliver to the owner or operator, if he or she is
present, a notice to the effect that the vehicle has been illegally parked or
parked overtime as the case may be. Such notice shall state the amount of the
fine for such illegally parked vehicle, as well as the date, time and location
of the vehicle at the time the notice is placed, left or delivered. The notice
shall also state the vehicle license plate number and shall contain the issuing
officer’s signature.
   (C)   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that such vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this section, provided that the proof of
ownership of any vehicle found parked in violation of this section shall be
prima facie evidence that the owner was then operating and parking such
vehicle.
   (D)   This section shall be deemed not to be in conflict with the provisions
of §
72.37 that deal with the concern of emergencies and the blocking of driveways.
   (E)   For purposes of enforcement of this section, security guards,
officials and police officers employed by Wingate College shall have authority
to issue notice for the purposes of and in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall apply to all streets, roads,
highways and other locations and areas within the town designated now, and from
time to time in the future, as parking or no-parking zones and areas by the
town or by any other governmental unit or agency thereof with the town’s
approval.
   (G)   All areas and locations where parking is limited or prohibited or
regulated shall be shown on a map or maps as from time to time amended by the
Board of Commissioners and maintained in the Town Hall.
   (H)   Certain intersections marked as no-parking and tow-away zones, as well
as other areas marked and designated as tow-away zones, including areas within
the immediate vicinity of a water hydrant or plug shall be enforced in
accordance with the procedure set forth in §
72.37, except that any police officer of the town has the authority to initiate
and complete such tow-away without request of another person, and it shall be
such officer’s duty to do so.
(Prior Code, § 72.45) (Ord. passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, violations of the
provisions of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty as
authorized by G.S. § 160A-175(c) upon the issuance of a citation for said
violation hereinafter provided. Violations shall not be punishable as a
misdemeanor or infraction, except for the parking violations punishable under
G.S. Chapter 20.
   (B)   Upon issuance of a citation provided herein the owner or operator, if
different from the owner, of the motor vehicle in violation shall pay a civil
penalty in the amount of $50, within 15 calendar days, a late fee of $10 will
be assessed for each citation not paid within the time required.
   (C)   If the civil penalty (parking ticket) is not paid as provided in
division (B) above a notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the
operator, if known, or the registered owner of the vehicle if the operator is
unknown, enclosing a copy of the citation and stating that unless the civil
penalty and late fee is paid within five calendar days after mailing of notice
the town may institute a civil action in the nature of a debt to collect same.
   (D)   If the notice prescribed in division (C) above is mailed to the
registered owner of the vehicle in violation it shall contain a further
statement that if the registered owner of the vehicle in violation or his or
her spouse or duly authorized agent did not commit the violation then he or she
must come to the Police Department within the five-day period provided in
division (C) above and sign an affidavit to the effect and upon signing said
affidavit further proceedings for the collection of said civil penalty and late
fee against said registered owner shall cease. If said registered owner shall
fail to sign said affidavit within the time prescribed herein it shall be prima
facie evidence in any court in the state that the registered owner of said
vehicle in violation was the person, form or corporation committing the
violation.
(Prior Code, § 72.99) (Ord. passed 9-4-1990; Ord. passed 9-17-1990; Ord. passed
2-19-2013)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES, COASTERS AND ROLLER SKATES
Section
   
73.01   Bicycle on sidewalks prohibited
   
73.02   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
73.03   Riding on handlebars prohibited
   
73.04   Riding without hands prohibited
   
73.05   Use of coaster, roller skates and similar devices restricted
§ 73.01 BICYCLE ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the
town. Applicable to business district only.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates
or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself or herself to any
public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 RIDING ON HANDLEBARS PROHIBITED.
   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry
any person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall
any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 RIDING WITHOUT HANDS PROHIBITED
   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having
his or her hands upon the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 USE OF COASTER, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway unless it is while crossing
a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets set aside as play
streets.
(Prior Code, § 73.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Trucks prohibited
      
III.   Through trucks
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive at a speed greater than 35 mph on the
following described portion of a state highway system street:
 
Street                      Location                      Ord. No. Date Passed
Monroe Street (US 74)       From the western corporate    -        9-1-1964
                            limits to Camden Street
North Camden Street (SR     From Wilson Street (SR 1002)
1767)                       to the northern corporate     -        9-1-1964
                            limit
South Main Street (SR 1758) From Monroe Street (US 74) to -        9-1-1964
                            the southern corporate limit
 
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to drive at a speed greater than 45 mph on the
following described portion of a state highway street system:
 
Street                    Location                        Ord. No. Date Passed
Williams Street (SR 1760) From Bivens Street (SR 1762) to -        9-1-1964
                          North Main Street (SR 1758)
 
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to drive at a speed greater than 25 mph on the
following described portion of a state highway street system:
 
Street                        Location                     Ord. No. Date Passed
                              From US 74 northward to a
Bivens Street (SR 1762)       point 0.02 miles north of SR -        10-2-1995
                              1761 (Maye Street)
East Wilson Street            From North Main Street to    -        2-16-2021
                              before the bridge
                              From US 74 northward to a
North Camden Street (SR 1767) point 0.31 mile north of SR  -        3-7-2006
                              1002 (Wilson Street)
                              From US 74 northward to a
North Main Street (SR 1758)   point 0.20 mile north of SR  -        3-7-2006
                              1760 (Old Williams Road)
                              From SR 1758 (North Main
Wilson Street (SR 1002)       Street) eastward to a point  -        3-7-2006
                              0.28 mile east of SR 1767
 
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to drive at a speed greater than 20 mph on the
following described portion of a town street:
 
Street/Subdivision    Location                         Ord. No. Date Passed
Glencroft Subdivision Glencroft Drive, in its entirety -        10-19-2010
Glencroft Subdivision Liles Way, in its entirety       -        11-11-2010
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 74, Sch. I) (Ord. passed 3-7-2006) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. TRUCKS PROHIBITED.
   Trucks are prohibited on the following described portion of a town system
street:
 
Street                Location                            Ord. No. Date Passed
Maye Street (SR 1761) From Bivens Street (SR 1762) to the -        4-15-2008
                      western corporate limit
 
(Ord. passed 4-15-2008)
SCHEDULE III. THROUGH TRUCKS.
   No through trucks are permitted at the following locations:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                        Location                   Ord. No. Date Passed
Ann Perry Street                                        -        4-15-2008
Big Dipper Court                                        -        4-15-2008
Booker Street                                           -        4-15-2008
Burris Street                                           -        4-15-2008
South Camden Street                                     -        4-15-2008
South Camden Street Extension                           -        4-15-2008
Carmen Street                                           -        4-15-2008
Cedar Street                                            -        4-15-2008
Chaney Street                                           -        4-15-2008
Church Street                                           -        4-15-2008
Circle Drive                                            -        4-15-2008
College Street                                          -        4-15-2008
Colonial Circle                                         -        4-15-2008
Creekview Lane                                          -        4-15-2008
Diane Street                                            -        4-15-2008
Douglas Circle                                          -        4-15-2008
East Elm Street                                         -        4-15-2008
West Elm Street                                         -        4-15-2008
Evans Street                                            -        4-15-2008
Faculty Drive                                           -        4-15-2008
Forget Me Not Lane                                      -        4-15-2008
Gerding Drive                                           -        4-15-2008
Glencroft Drive                                         -        4-15-2008
Gwyn Street                                             -        4-15-2008
Haskins Drive                                           -        4-15-2008
Hinson Street                                           -        4-15-2008
Independence Drive                                      -        4-15-2008
Jeffery Circle                                          -        4-15-2008
Jerome Street                                           -        4-15-2008
Joel Street                                             -        4-15-2008
Larkspur Lane                                           -        4-15-2008
Lefsey Drive                                            -        4-15-2008
Liles Way                                               -        4-15-2008
Lowery Drive                                            -        4-15-2008
Marianna Circle                                         -        4-15-2008
Marsh Street                                            -        4-15-2008
Oak Street                                              -        4-15-2008
Oak Leaf Lane                                           -        4-15-2008
Pearl Circle                                            -        4-15-2008
Polaris Drive                                           -        4-15-2008
Shannon Circle                                          -        4-15-2008
Smith Street                                            -        4-15-2008
North Stewart Street                                    -        4-15-2008
South Stewart Street                                    -        4-15-2008
Todd Circle                                             -        4-15-2008
Washington Street                                       -        4-15-2008
                              From North Main Street (SR
West Wilson Street            1758) to Bivens Street (SR -        4-15-2008
                              1762)
 
(Ord. passed 4-15-2008)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking prohibited at all times
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   Where signs are placed, erected or installed, giving notice thereof, or the
curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such signs, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so marked.
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                     Location                        Ord. No. Date Passed
Ann Perry Street                                          -        2-23-1973
Bivens Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Booker Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Burris Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Cannon Boulevard                                          -        2-23-1973
                           With the exception of the south
Cedar Street               side from the intersection of   -        2-19-2013
                           Main to Church
Cemetery Street                                           -        2-23-1973
Chaney Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Church Street                                             -        2-23-1973
College Street                                            -        2-23-1973
Colonial Circle                                           -        2-23-1973
Dianne Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Douglass Circle                                           -        2-23-1973
East Elm Street                                           -        2-23-1973
East Wilson Street                                        -        2-23-1973
Faculty Drive                                             -        2-23-1973
Gwyn Street                                               -        2-23-1973
Hinson Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Jeffery Circle                                            -        2-23-1973
Jerome Street                                             -        2-23-1973
Joel Street                                               -        2-23-1973
Love Street                                               -        2-23-1973
Main Street                In its entirety                 -        2-19-2013
May Street                                                -        2-23-1973
North Camden Street        In its entirety                 -        2-19-2013
North Main Street                                         -        2-23-1973
Pearl Circle                                              -        2-23-1973
Smith Street                                              -        2-23-1973
Stewart Street                                            -        2-23-1973
St. Todd Circle                                           -        2-23-1973
South Camden Street                                       -        2-23-1973
South Main Street                                         -        2-23-1973
Washington Street                                         -        2-23-1973
West Elms Street                                          -        2-23-1973
West Wilson Street                                        -        2-23-1973
Williams Road                                             -        2-23-1973
Wilson Street (south side) From Camden Street to the east  -        11-1-1965
                           side of Cafeteria Lot
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Sch. I) Penalty, see §
72.99
CHAPTER 76: GOLF CART REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Authority and purpose
   
76.02   Scope
   
76.03   Liability
   
76.04   Definitions
   
76.05   Operation on public streets
   
76.06   Registration and permit
   
76.07   Safety equipment
   
76.08   Fee
   
76.09   Permit decal
 
   76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   As authorized by G.S. § 160A-300.6, the purpose of this chapter is to
promote the health, safety and welfare of persons operating golf carts within
the town, to protect the safety of their passengers, to protect the safety of
operators of other vehicles including cyclists, and to protect the safety of
pedestrians who use the public streets and roads of the town while encouraging
a walkable community. Businesses, institutions and government entities located
within the corporate limits of the town are authorized to operate golf carts
under this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.02 SCOPE.
   This chapter provides for registration of golf carts, as defined in § 76.04
by the town. Registration of low-speed vehicles, as defined herein, is not
within the scope of local governments to regulate because they are required to
be registered (see G.S. § 20-50), inspected (see G.S. § 20-138.2) and insured
(see G.S. § 20-309) by the state of North Carolina. Registration of utility
vehicles, as defined herein, is not within the scope of local governments to
regulate because they are not included within G.S. § 160A-300.6.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.03 LIABILITY.
   Adoption of this chapter is not to be relied upon as a determination that
operation of golf carts on roads is safe or advisable if done in accordance
with this chapter. All persons who operate or ride upon carts on roads do so at
their own risk and must observe and attend to their own safety, their
passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The town has no
liability for permitting golf carts to be operated on roads under the
authorization granted in G.S. § 160A-300.6. The golf cart operator is
responsible for liability and must procure insurance as described in § 76.04
below.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of
exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour (see G.S. § 20-4.01 (12b)).
   LOW-SPEED VEHICLE. A category of "passenger vehicle" in the North Carolina
Motor Vehicles statute that is a four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed
is greater than 20 miles per hour but less than 25 miles per hour. Low-speed
vehicles are often referred to as "street legal." They must meet federal safety
equipment regulations (see 49 CFR 561.500) and are required in North Carolina
to be registered (see G.S. § 20-50), inspected (see G.S. § 20-138.2) and
insured (see G.S. § 20-309) (see G.S. § 20-4.01(27)h).
   UTILITY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is designed for off-road use and used
for general maintenance, security, agricultural, or horticultural purposes.
UTILITY VEHICLE does not include an all-terrain vehicle or golf cart, as
defined by statute, or a riding lawn mower (see G.S. § 20-4.01(48c)).
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.05 OPERATION ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   The following provisions apply to operation of golf carts on public
streets:
      (1)   They may be operated only on roads with speed limits of 35 miles
per hour or less (see G.S. § 160A-300.6).
      (2)   They may cross roads with a speed limit greater than 35 miles per
hour.
      (3)   Under no circumstances, shall golf carts operate at a speed greater
than 20 miles per hour.
      (4)   The number of people in a golf cart shall not exceed the maximum
specified by the manufacturer.
      (5)   The operator shall drive a golf cart on the right edge of the road
and shall yield to other vehicles and pedestrians.
      (6)   Golf carts shall not be operated on a sidewalk.
      (7)   Golf carts shall operate during daylight hours only unless they
comply with lighting equipment requirements of § 76.07 above.
   (B)   The following provisions apply to operators of golf carts on public
streets.
      (1)   The operator shall be 16 years old as provided in G.S. § 160A-
300.6.
      (2)   The operator shall have a valid driver's license as provided in
G.S. § 20-7.
      (3)   The operator shall adhere to state and local laws and ordinances
and traffic rules, including those prohibiting alcohol in vehicles and on
public streets.
      (4)   The operator must use hand signals unless a mechanical turn signal
indicator is installed on the golf cart.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.06 REGISTRATION AND PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicants for a town golf cart permit shall submit a completed
application to the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   (B)   Along with the application, the operator shall submit:
      (1)   Proof of liability insurance coverage for North Carolina motor
vehicles as defined and described in G.S. § 20-279.21.
      (2)   A signed waiver of liability releasing the town from liability that
may arise as a result of operation of a golf cart inside county/state/town.
These documents must be in the golf cart at all times while in operation on
public roads.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.07 SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Required for all golf carts. In order to grant a permit, the town
shall require that a golf cart have all basic equipment supplied by the
manufacturer, including the serial number, operable brakes, a rear-view mirror,
rubber tires that are in good condition and also a "slow moving vehicle"
triangle no less than 12 inches high and wide.
   (B)   Required for night operation. If the permit is granted for operation
at night, the golf cart shall be equipped with:
      (1)   Yellow or orange flashing light visible from top of cart.
      (2)   Two operating headlights.
      (3)   Two operating tail lights.
      (4)   Reflectors on front and sides.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.08 FEE.
   Every applicant for a golf cart permit shall pay a fee established by the
Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.09 PERMIT DECAL.
   The town shall provide a town registration decal which the operator shall
affix to the left rear bumper.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of the registration and safety provision of this chapter
shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $50.
   (B)   Any violation of the golf cart operation provision of this chapter
shall be an infraction, and the violator shall be required to pay a penalty of
$50.
(Ord. passed - -)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   CEMETERIES
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   MASS GATHERINGS
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
96.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Interference with the Animal Warden
   
90.03   Keeping of certain animals within town prohibited
   
90.04   Animals on sidewalks
   
90.05   Driving through streets
   
90.06   Dangerous animals, owning or keeping prohibited
   
90.07   Dogs or animals used for sentry or guard duty
   
90.08   Teasing or molesting
   
90.09   Law enforcement dogs excluded
   
90.10   Fowl regulations
Dog Regulations
   
90.20   Restraint
   
90.21   Collar, vaccination tag and the like
   
90.22   Keeping and penning; sanitary quarters required
   
90.23   Animals creating nuisance
   
90.24   Owner liable for damages caused by dog
   
90.25   Disposition of fierce, dangerous or vicious dogs
Cat Regulations
   
90.40   Collar, vaccination tag and the like
Slaughtering of Animals
   
90.55   Definitions
   
90.56   Slaughtering of containment animals or livestock
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Dogs, see G.S. §§ 67-1 et seq.
   Municipal regulation of domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186
   Protection of animals, see G.S. §§ 19A-1 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises, including, but not limited to, the County
Animal Shelter, designated for the purpose of impounding and caring for any
animal found running at large in violation of this subchapter.
   ANIMAL WARDEN. The person employed by the town to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
   AT LARGE. As applied to an animal, means off the property of its owner and
not under the control of a competent person.
   OWNER. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors an animal.
   UNDER RESTRAINT.
      (1)   Controlled by a leash;
      (2)   At “heel” beside a competent person and obedient to that person’s
commands;
      (3)   On or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street and
unable to bite persons outside the vehicle; or
      (4)   Within the property limits of its owners.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.02 INTERFERENCE WITH THE ANIMAL WARDEN.
   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal warden or any of
his or her agents in performing any of his or her duties, or seek to release
any animal from custody, except as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS WITHIN TOWN PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person described in
the second sentence of this section, to keep or maintain overnight any cow,
cattle, sheep, hog or goat within the corporate limits of the town; and it
shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any live fowl for any
period of time within the corporate limits of the town, except while
transporting the same through the corporate limits of the town and the same are
securely confined.
   (B)   The keeping or maintaining of any of the named animals by a public
educational institution for educational purposes located within the corporate
limits of the town is exempt from this section.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful to ride or drive any horse, cow or other animal on any
of the sidewalks, or to hitch any horse, cow or other animal in such a manner
that it obstructs a sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 DRIVING THROUGH STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to drive any animal through the streets of the town,
unless such animal is bridled or haltered.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 DANGEROUS ANIMALS, OWNING OR KEEPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANIMAL. Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, excluding humans.
      DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal whose owner or keeper knows, or reasonably
should know, has a propensity to attack a person by biting or in any manner
causing injury or the reasonable likelihood of injury; or, one which has a
propensity to habitually or repeatedly attack livestock or other domestic
animals; however, these provisions shall not apply to any animal which bites,
attacks or attempts to attack any person or animal unlawfully present upon the
premises, or which is provoked to attack.
      OWN. The status of holding a license for or legal title to an animal, or
feeding, having charge of, harboring, sheltering or taking care of any animal
for three or more consecutive days.
      WILD ANIMAL. Any animal which can normally be found in a wild state;
those feral, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animals which generally do not
live in or about the habitation of humans, including but not limited to lions,
tigers, leopards, wildcats, bears, deer, snakes and the like.
   (B)   Owning, keeping and the like, prohibited; right of appeal.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or in any
way maintain a wild or dangerous animal within the corporate limits of the
town. After a determination by the Animal Warden, or his or her designated
agent, that a particular animal is wild or dangerous, the owner or keeper of
such animal shall have it humanely destroyed, or shall otherwise remove it from
within the corporate limits of the town.
      (2)   Any person who owns or keeps an animal which has been declared wild
or dangerous shall have the right to appeal this decision to the Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners, or its representative, shall conduct
an informal hearing to determine whether the animal is wild or vicious. If the
animal is judged not to be wild or dangerous, it shall be returned to the
owner.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 DOGS OR ANIMALS USED FOR SENTRY OR GUARD DUTY.
   (A)   Any person owning, maintaining or harboring a dog or other animal for
sentry or guard purposes must register said dog or animal with the animal
warden.
   (B)   A sign warning that there is a guard or sentry dog or animal on the
premises shall be displayed.
   (C)   The owner shall post a plainly visible sign upon the secure enclosure
warning that a dangerous dog or animal is on the premises.
   (D)   Said sign shall not exceed one foot by two feet or two square feet in
area.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 TEASING OR MOLESTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, bait or in any way molest any
animal.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 LAW ENFORCEMENT DOGS EXCLUDED.
   Any dog used by a law enforcement agency in the investigation of crimes or
as otherwise necessary in the enforcement of the law is excluded from
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006)
§ 90.10 FOWL REGULATIONS.
   The town allows the keeping of chickens as an accessory use in conjunction
with detached, single-family residential uses in the RA-40, RA-20, R-40, and R-
20. Such use shall only occur in accordance with the following:
   (A)   The maximum number of female chickens (hens) allowed is five per lot.
No roosters are permitted.
   (B)   Eggs, chicks, adult chickens, and processed chickens shall not be
sold. Chicken manure and compost using chicken manure shall not be sold or
otherwise distributed.
   (C)   A chicken coop and pen shall be provided, and such coops and
enclosures may not include residential structures or garages.
   (D)   Chicken coops, pens, and tractors (whether stationary or moveable)
shall only be located in rear yards (behind the line formed by the back wall of
the residence), shall comply with a minimum setback of 15 feet from side and
rear property lines, shall be located closer to the owner's primary structure
than any neighbor's primary structure.
   (E)   The chicken coop and/or pen shall be properly designed and constructed
to provide adequate security from rodents, wild birds, and predators;
sufficient ventilation; and suitable shelter for the hens.
   (F)   The property owner shall ensure that chickens shall have adequate
access to feed, clean water, and bedding at all times. The chicken coop,
chicken pen, and surrounding area shall be cleaned of hen droppings, uneaten
feed, feathers and other waste, and shall be kept in a neat and sanitary
condition at all times to preclude odors and aesthetic nuisances. Chicken feed
shall be stored in a secure container.
   (G)   Chicken manure shall be bagged and disposed of with household waste or
composted on- site. All stored manure shall be completely contained in a
waterproof container. Any compost using chicken manure shall be produced in an
enclosed backyard composter and such activity shall comply with this code.
   (H)   (1)   On-site slaughter shall be prohibited in accordance with this
code.
      (2)   Dead chickens. If a chicken dies from causes other than slaughter,
it shall be promptly placed into a plastic bag, which shall be closed securely
and disposed of with household waste.
(Ord. passed - -)
DOG REGULATIONS
§ 90.20 RESTRAINT.
   The owner of a dog shall keep it under restraint (as defined in §
90.01) at all times and shall not permit it to be at large. Members of the
Police Department are empowered to issue citations to any person if there is
reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated any provision of this
section.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Dogs, see G.S. §§ 67-1 et seq.
§ 90.21 COLLAR, VACCINATION TAG AND THE LIKE.
   The owner of any dog kept within the town shall provide each such dog with a
collar, to which shall be affixed a tag or tags denoting the name and address
of the owner, and the fact that such dog has been vaccinated for rabies as
provided in G.S. § 130A-190.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 KEEPING AND PENNING; SANITARY QUARTERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any household to own, to keep custody of or
to take care of more than three dogs, five months or older, who are frequently
outside on the premises, unless the person has a special permit issued by the
animal warden.
   (B)   (1)   If a person has four or more dogs frequently outside on the
premises, then the animal warden must make the following five findings in order
to issue a special permit:
         (a)   Noise from the dogs will not interfere with an abutting
occupant’s use and peaceful enjoyment of the property;
         (b)   Any odor or unsanitary conditions caused by the dogs will not
interfere with an abutting occupant’s use and peaceful enjoyment of the
property;
         (c)   Three or more dog runs or other dog-related structures or any
combination thereof shall not be permitted if the structures can be seen from
an abutting occupant’s property in a residentially zoned district;
         (d)   There is no evidence that the dogs pose any health problem or
disease exposure for abutting occupants; and
         (e)   The dogs do not interfere in some other similar manner with the
peaceful use and enjoyment of abutting property.
      (2)   If the animal warden denies a person a special permit, then the
animal warden must state the reasons for the denial in writing.
   (C)   A permit shall remain valid as long as the person is in compliance
with the terms and conditions, if any, of the permit. If any of the
circumstances change, such as, but not limited to, more animals, new structures
or other such similar change that might reasonably violate the five standards
set for the above, then the permit shall automatically terminate and be null
and void. The person must secure a new permit, or the person shall be in
violation of this section. The animal warden shall have the authority to revoke
the permit at any time if there is a violation of the standards stated in
division (B) above, for a violation of any term or condition of the permit if
there has been any misrepresentation, or for any other similar reason. The
animal warden shall state in writing the basis of the revocation. Any person
who wishes to appeal such a revocation shall have ten days from the date of
receipt of the revocation to appeal the revocation to the Town Manager.
   (D)   All penning facilities less than 150 square feet per dog specifically
dedicated to dog keeping must be located to the rear of the principal structure
and shall not be maintained closer than ten feet from any property line.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to tether or chain any animal in such a fashion
as to allow the animal to be closer than ten feet to any property line. Dogs
kept by chaining or tethering must be kept to the rear of the principal
structure.
   (F)   The requirements in division (A) above shall not apply to animals kept
in an animal shelter, veterinarian’s facility, commercially licensed kennel or
other commercially licensed holding facility.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to
maintain such animal in quarters that are not sanitary or humane.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.23 ANIMALS CREATING NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain
an animal in such a manner so as to constitute a nuisance.
   (B)   The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when an animal disturbs
the rights of, threatens the safety of, or damages a member of the general
public; or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of private or public
property. By way of example and not of limitation, the following acts or
actions by an owner or possessor of an animal are hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and are therefore unlawful:
      (1)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly disturbs,
interferes with or annoys human beings;
      (2)   Maintaining an animal that tips over garbage pails or damages
gardens, flowers or vegetables;
      (3)   Failing to confine in a building, or secure enclosure, a female dog
while in estrus;
      (4)   Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl or yowl in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or to make other noise in such a
manner so as to result in a serious annoyance or interference with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises;
      (5)   Maintaining an animal that chases, snaps at, attacks or otherwise
molests pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle passengers or farm stock or
domestic animals;
      (6)   Maintaining an animal that habitually or continuously loiters on
public places or on the property of another;
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to leave its feces on
public streets, sidewalks, town parks, other town property or the property of
another without the permission of the owner of the property; and
      (8)   Maintaining an animal that is diseased or dangerous to the health
of the public unless under the care of a licensed veterinarian.
   (C)   Upon receipt by a police officer or animal control officer of a
second, substantiated complaint that any person is maintaining a nuisance
animal as defined in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(8) above, the officer shall
investigate and if the officer’s written findings indicate that the animal
complained of is a nuisance animal, the owner shall be cited as violating this
chapter and will be penalized according to §
90.40.
   (D)   The owner of a nuisance animal may appeal the order of abatement and
the matter shall be heard by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see 90.99
§ 90.24 OWNER LIABLE FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY DOG.
   A dog owner who allows his or her dog to run at large in any public place in
the town or on any private property without the permission of the owner or
occupant of said private property shall be liable in damages to any person
injured by such dog and to any person suffering loss to his or her real or
personal property, including animals, caused by such dog.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.25 DISPOSITION OF FIERCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   If any dog, fierce, dangerous or vicious, or having vicious propensities is
found running at large in any public place in the town, or on any private
property without the permission of the owner or occupant of said private
property, and such dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded by a county
animal control officer, such dog may be slain by any law enforcement official
or animal control officer of the town or the county or the state.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
CAT REGULATIONS
§ 90.40 COLLAR, VACCINATION TAG AND THE LIKE.
   The owner of any cat kept within the town shall provide each such cat with a
collar, to which shall be affixed a tag or tags denoting the name and address
of the owner, and the fact that such cat has been vaccinated for rabies as
provided in G.S. § 130A-190.
(Ord. passed 6-27-2006) Penalty, see §
90.99
SLAUGHTERING OF ANIMALS
§ 90.55 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONA FIDE FARM. Any tract (or tracts of land under common ownership or
control) on which a party is actively engaged in a substantial way in the
commercial production or growing of crops, plants, livestock, poultry or
aquaculture operations. BONA FIDE FARM shall include horse riding and boarding
facilities.
   CONTAINMENT ANIMALS. Animals that are usually enclosed in houses or open
pens with a high concentration of animals. Such animals may be, but are not
limited to, swine, chickens, rabbits, quail, turkeys, geese, ducks, guinea,
fowl, pigeons or pheasants.
   LIVESTOCK. Includes, but shall not be limited to, equine animals, bovine
animals, sheep, goats and other grazing animals that are enclosed in a fenced
pasture, or in some instances enclosed in a pen or house or shed utilized for
enclosing such livestock, or in some cases, tied to a leash.
   SLAUGHTER. The act of killing or butchering an animal as defined in this
subchapter, for the purpose of marketing or for personal consumption or for no
reason other than for the act of killing.
(Ord. passed 10-26-2004)
§ 90.56 SLAUGHTERING OF CONTAINMENT ANIMALS OR LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter any containment
animals or livestock within the corporate limits, or on and to property and
rights-of-way belonging to the town and located outside the corporate limits
(G.S. § 160A-176, as now or in the future amended), except in connection with
the operation of a bona fide farm or a properly permitted slaughtering and
dressing facility.
   (B)   Slaughtering in connection with a bona fide farm operation shall not
take place closer than 100 feet from an adjoining property owner’s property
line.
(Ord. passed 10-26-2004) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Members of the Police Department are empowered to issue
citations to any person if there is reasonable cause to believe that the person
has violated any provision of §
90.06. A civil penalty of $100 may be levied against any such person. Each wild
or vicious animal and each day’s continuing violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation, subject to further penalties. A second, or
subsequent to the second, violation of §
90.06 occurring within one year shall cause a civil penalty of $250 to be
levied against any such person.
      (2)   Violation of §
90.06 shall also constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine
not to exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, as provided by
G.S. § 14-4.
      (3)   Alternatively, the town may apply to the appropriate court for an
injunction and order of abatement requiring a violator to correct any unlawful
condition relating to §§
90.06 and
90.99 existing on his or her property, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§
90.01 through
90.09 or
90.20 through
90.25 or §
90.40 for which no other penalty is provided shall pay a civil penalty in
accordance with the following schedule:
         (a)   First offense: written warning, no fine;
         (b)   Second offense: $50 fine;
         (c)   Third offense: $100 fine; and
         (d)   Such civil penalty shall be paid within 30 days of the issuance
of the citation. If this penalty is not paid within 30 days, the town may
institute a civil action to recover such penalty.
      (2)   In addition, enforcement of the chapter may be by injunction,
restraining order or abatement in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided
in G.S. § 160A-175(d) and (e).
   (D)   A civil penalty of $100 may be levied against any such person
violating §
90.20. Each unrestrained animal and each day’s continuing violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to further penalties. A
second, or subsequent to the second, violation of this section occurring within
one year shall cause a civil penalty of $250 to be levied against any such
person.
   (E)   Sections
90.55 and
90.56 shall be enforced pursuant to §
10.99 of the town code, provided, however, that the maximum fine for violation
of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   First offense: $100;
      (2)   Second offense: $200; and
      (3)   Third offense: $500.
(Ord. passed 10-26-2004; Ord. passed 6-27-2006)
CHAPTER 91: CEMETERIES
Section
   
91.01   General regulations
   
91.02   Deed for lot
   
91.03   Superintendent
   
91.04   Cemetery use
   
91.05   Plantings
   
91.06   Family monument
   
91.07   Trees; shrubbery
   
91.08   Structures
   
91.09   Transfer of lots
   
91.10   Conduct
   
91.11   Vehicles
   
91.12   Cleanliness
§ 91.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   All lots within the Wingate Cemetery and within any extension of said
cemetery at any time hereafter made, whether owned by the town or by any other
person or persons, shall be subject to and regulated and controlled by the
provisions of this chapter. In all deeds of conveyance by the town to any
person or persons for any lot, the following provisions shall be included
therein as a covenant running with the land: “This conveyance is made subject
to an ordinance adopting rules and regulations for the control of Wingate
Cemetery and providing penalties in relation thereto duly of record up to the
minute of the proceedings of the Board of Commissioners, and the grantee
herein, his or her heirs and assigns, agree that upon the breach of any of its
provisions, the title to said property shall revert to the town.”
(Prior Code, § 92.01)
§ 91.02 DEED FOR LOT.
   All persons desiring to purchase a lot in the Wingate Cemetery shall apply
to the Town Clerk, who, upon payment of the fixed price for each lot, shall
cause a deed or other instrument of receipt therefor to be given the purchaser.
(Prior Code, § 92.02)
§ 91.03 SUPERINTENDENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners to appoint some suitable
person as Superintendent of Wingate Cemetery, who shall serve as such at the
will of said Board. The Superintendent shall have such powers and duties as
shall be conferred upon him or her by this section, and/or any ordinance,
resolution or order of said Board at any time hereafter adopted or made. The
Superintendent shall have charge of the upkeep, protection and preservation of
the cemetery; he or she shall supervise the digging of all graves, the
interment and disinterment of bodies, and the erection of monuments and
markers; he or she shall supervise the planting of any and all shrubbery, trees
and flowers, and make provision for the entrance and exit of persons and
vehicles to and from said cemetery; provided, however, that the Superintendent
shall not contract any debt or expend any money without first having obtained
the consent and approval of the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 92.03)
§ 91.04 CEMETERY USE.
   No person shall be interred or disinterred in Wingate Cemetery without
having first obtained lawful authority and permission. All graves shall be at
least four feet in depth, and all graves shall be dug under the supervision of
the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 92.04)
§ 91.05 PLANTINGS.
   No person shall plant or set any tree, shrub, flower, grass or other plant
of any kind in said cemetery except with the approval of and under the
supervision of the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 92.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.06 FAMILY MONUMENT.
   Only one central or family monument shall be allowed on a family lot.
Markers shall be laid flush with the ground and shall not exceed two feet in
length and one foot in width, and shall be placed at the end of the grave
farthest from the monument. No coping, curb, fencing, edging, grave mounds,
borders or curb of any kind shall be allowed on any burial lot.
(Prior Code, § 92.06)
§ 91.07 TREES; SHRUBBERY.
   (A)   The pruning or cutting of all trees and shrubbery is hereby prohibited
unless done under the immediate supervision of the Superintendent.
   (B)   All grading, landscaping and improvements of every kind shall be made
or done by the town only.
(Prior Code, § 92.07)
§ 91.08 STRUCTURES.
   No mausoleum, tomb, building or other structure of any kind shall be erected
on any lot within said cemetery, or within any extension of said cemetery;
provided, however, that mausoleums and tombs may be constructed on lots which
may be designated on the plat and plan of said lots which may be designated on
the plat and plan of said cemetery from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners as lots to be used exclusively for mausoleums and tombs. Should
any mausoleum, monument or tomb at any time become unsafe, unsightly or in need
of repair or resetting, the Superintendent shall so notify the owner of said
lot or any person having an interest in said lot, and shall request such person
to make the needed repairs under his or her supervision, and if such person
shall fail to make such repairs within 30 days thereafter, the Board of
Commissioners may order such repairs to be made or remove the same from said
lot as said Board may elect.
(Prior Code, § 92.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.09 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   No person who shall purchase any lot in said cemetery from the town shall
thereafter convey or alien the same to any other person, except upon the
written permission of the Board of Commissioners, nor in any event for a
greater consideration than that paid for the same lot by the grantor.
(Prior Code, § 92.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.10 CONDUCT.
   No person shall disturb the quiet, repose and good order of the cemetery,
nor shall any person deface, remove, disturb, injure or destroy any tree, plant
or shrub therein, except in the manner herein provided; trespassing within said
cemetery is hereby prohibited, and no person shall commit any immoral act
therein under penalty of the law herein prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 92.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.11 VEHICLES.
   Vehicles shall be driven only upon the roadways within said cemetery, and at
a rate of speed not in excess of 15 mph. No vehicles shall enter said cemetery
except for the purpose of attending funerals, visiting graves or other lawful
mission.
(Prior Code, § 92.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.12 CLEANLINESS.
   No person shall deposit any rubbish, filth, waste or other unclean or
unsightly substance in said cemetery, and all materials carried within said
cemetery and not used in the erection of monuments, markers or other lawful
structures authorized herein shall be promptly removed therefrom by the owner
of the lot upon which such monument, marker or structure shall be located.
(Prior Code, § 92.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fire Prevention
   
92.01   Fire Code adopted
   
92.02   Burning of trash within fire limits prohibited
   
92.03   Permit required for bonfire
   
92.04   Lots kept free from fire hazards
   
92.05   Certain fires to be guarded by watchmen
Fire Equipment Regulations
   
92.20   Riding on trucks restricted
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 92.01 FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   The town hereby adopts the State Fire Code by reference, and all sections of
the State Fire Code shall be treated as if set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 93.01)
Statutory reference:
   State Building Code, see G.S. § 143-138
§ 92.02 BURNING OF TRASH WITHIN FIRE LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn or cause to be burned any trash, refuse, shavings,
paper, leaves, litter or other material of any kind outside any house, on or in
any street, sidewalk, alley, lot or yard within the fire limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 93.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR BONFIRE.
   (A)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, or shall knowingly
furnish the material for any such fire, or authorize any such fire to be
kindled or maintained on or in any street, avenue, road, lane or public ground
or upon any private lot within the limits of the town, unless a written permit
to do so shall have first been secured from the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the burning of
trash and rubbish on private lots of residences without a permit.
(Prior Code, § 93.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 LOTS KEPT FREE FROM FIRE HAZARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer rubbish, refuse or
articles of combustible or inflammable nature to accumulate or remain on any
lot or premises.
(Prior Code, § 93.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 CERTAIN FIRES TO BE GUARDED BY WATCHMEN.
   (A)   All persons, firms or corporations who shall burn any tar kiln or pit
of charcoal, or set fire to or burn any brush, grass or other material, whereby
any property may be endangered or destroyed, shall keep and maintain a careful
and competent watchman in charge of such kiln, pit, brush or other material
while burning.
   (B)   Fire escaping from such kiln, pit, brush or other material while
burning shall be prima facie evidence of neglect of this section.
(Prior Code, § 93.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see
Chapter 33
FIRE EQUIPMENT REGULATIONS
§ 92.20 RIDING ON TRUCKS RESTRICTED.
   No person other than a bona fide member of the Fire Department shall mount
any fire engine, wagon or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on
its way to or from a fire, or at any other time, unless by permission of the
driver or officer in command of such engine, wagon or other apparatus.
(Prior Code, § 93.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: MASS GATHERINGS
Section
   
93.01   Intent and purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Permit required; revocation of permit
   
93.04   Application for permit
   
93.05   Provisional permit; performance bond; liability insurance
   
93.06   Issuance of permit; revocation; forfeiture of bond; cancellation
   
93.07   Rules and regulations of the County Board of Health
   
93.08   Injunctions or abatement orders
§ 93.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection of
property and the public health, public welfare and public safety of those
persons in attendance at mass gatherings in the county and of those persons who
reside near or are located in proximity to the sites of mass gatherings or are
directly affected thereby.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. Union County.
   COUNTY HEALTH DIRECTOR. The County Health Director or a representative
designated by him or her.
   MASS GATHERING. The congregation or assembly in which admission is charged
or other contributions are solicited, accepted or received, all in reasonable
contemplation of profit, of more than 200 people in an open space or open air
for a continuous period of at least six hours.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation or legal entity which holds, sponsors,
organizes, conducts or promotes a mass gathering.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
§ 93.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall organize, sponsor or hold any mass gathering in the
county unless a permit has been issued to such person by the County Health
Director under the provisions of this chapter. A permit shall be required for
each mass gathering and is not transferable to other persons.
     
   (B)   A permit may be revoked by the County Health Director at any time if
he or she finds that the mass gathering is being or has been maintained or
operated in violation of this chapter or that prior to the mass gathering, the
planning or preparation for the mass gathering is not in compliance with this
chapter.
      (1)   A permit may be revoked upon the request of the permittee or upon
abandonment of this operation.
      (2)   A permit will otherwise expire upon satisfactory completion of the
post-gathering clean-up following the close of the mass gathering.
(Prior Code, § 95.03) (Ord. passed 10-1-74) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for a permit for a mass gathering shall be made to the
County Health Director on a form and in a manner prescribed by him or her by
the person who will organize, sponsor or hold the mass gathering. The
application shall be filed with the County Health Director at least 45 days
prior to the commencement of the mass gathering. A fee of $10 to be paid to the
county shall accompany the application.
   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Identification, name, address and telephone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   Identification, names, addresses and telephone numbers of any other
person(s) responsible for organizing, sponsoring or holding the mass gathering;
      (3)   The location, purpose and schedule of events of the proposed mass
gathering;
      (4)   The estimated maximum number of persons reasonably expected to be
in attendance at any one time;
      (5)   The date or dates and the hours during which the mass gathering is
to be conducted; and
      (6)   A statement as to the total time period involved.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by an outline map of the area to
be used, to approximate scale, showing the following:
      (1)   The location of all proposed and existing privies or toilets;
      (2)   Lavatory and bathing facilities;
      (3)   All water supply sources, including lakes, ponds, streams, wells,
storage tanks and the like;
      (4)   All electrical service outlets existing and proposed;
      (5)   All areas of assemblage;
      (6)   All camping areas;
      (7)   All food service areas;
      (8)   All garbage and refuse storage and disposal areas;
      (9)   All entrances and exits to public highways;
      (10)   Emergency ingress and egress roads; and
      (11)   Emergency medical facilities.
   (D)   The application shall be accompanied by such additional plans, reports
and information required by the County Health Director as he or she shall deem
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 95.04) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
§ 93.05 PROVISIONAL PERMIT; PERFORMANCE BOND; LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   Within ten days after the receipt of the application, the County
Health Director shall review the application and inspect the proposed site for
the mass gathering. If it reasonably appears that the requirements of this
chapter can be met by the applicant, a provisional permit shall be issued.
   (B)   If the County Health Director shall deem it necessary to protect the
health, welfare and safety of those persons in attendance at mass gatherings or
other persons who may be affected by mass gatherings, and to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, he or she may require the permittee within five
days after issuance of the provisional permit to file with the County Health
Director a performance bond or other surety to be executed to the county in the
amount of $5,000 for up to 10,000 persons, and $1,000 additional amount for
each additional 5,000 persons or fraction thereof reasonably estimated to
attend the mass gathering. The bond shall be conditioned upon full compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions and conditions of any
permit issued by the County Health Director pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and shall be forfeitable upon noncompliance with this chapter or the
provisions of any permit issued by the County Health Director, and a showing by
the County Health Director of any injury, damage or other loss to the county
caused by noncompliance with this chapter and any permit issued by the County
Health Director. The permittee shall, in addition, file satisfactory evidence
of public liability and property damage insurance in an amount determined by
the County Health Director to be reasonable (but not to exceed $1,000,000 in
amount) in relation to the risks and hazards involved in the proposed mass
gathering. The County Health Director shall require such insurance to be in
force from the time the permit is issued until such time as all the
participants at the mass gathering have left the premises and premises have
been secured.
(Prior Code, § 95.05) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
§ 93.06 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; REVOCATION; FORFEITURE OF BOND; CANCELLATION.
   (A)   If, upon inspection by the County Health Director 15 days prior to the
starting date of the mass gathering or earlier upon request of the permittee,
the required facilities are found to be in place, or satisfactory arrangements
are found to have been made for required facilities and services, and other
applicable provisions of this chapter are found to have been met, the County
Health Director shall issue a permit for the mass gathering. If, upon such
inspection, the facilities, arrangements or other provisions are not
satisfactory, the provisional permit shall be revoked and no permit issued.
   (B)   Upon revocation of either the provisional permit or the permit, the
permittee shall immediately announce cancellation of the mass gathering in as
effective a manner as is reasonably possible, including, but not limited to,
the use of whatever methods were used for advertising or promoting the mass
gathering.
   (C)   If the provisional permit or the permit is revoked prior to or during
the mass gathering, the County Health Director may order the permittee to
install such facilities and make such arrangements as may be necessary to
accommodate those persons who may nevertheless attend or be present at the mass
gathering despite its cancellation and to restore the site to a safe and
sanitary condition. In the event the permittee fails to comply with the order
of the County Health Director, the County Health Director may immediately
proceed to install such facilities and make such other arrangements and
provisions for clean-up as may be minimally required in the interest of public
health and safety, utilizing such local funds and resources as may be available
to him or her. Prior to or within 60 days after such action, the County Health
Director may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to order forfeiture of
the permittee’s performance bond or surety for violation of this section. The
Court may order that the proceeds shall be applied to the extent necessary to
reimburse the county for expenditures made pursuant to the action taken by the
County Health Director upon the permittee’s failure to comply with his or her
order. Any excess proceeds shall be returned to the issuer of the bond or to
the surety after deducting court costs.
(Prior Code, § 95.06) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
§ 93.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   The County Board of Health is authorized and directed to develop and
submit to County Council for approval rules and regulations to carry out the
provisions of this chapter and to establish standards and requirements so that
facilities and services shall be provided as necessary to protect the health,
welfare and safety of those attending the mass gathering and of other persons
who may be affected by mass gatherings.
   (B)   These rules and regulations shall, upon approval by the Council of the
county, have the force and effect as if they were part of this chapter. They
shall include, but not be limited to, the establishment of standards as
follows:
      (1)   General requirements relating to minimum size of activity area,
distance of activity area from dwellings, distance from public water supplies
and watersheds, camping areas and an adequate command post for use by personnel
of health, law enforcement and other governmental agencies;
         (2)   Adequate ingress and egress roads, parking facilities and
entrances and exits to public highways;
      (3)   Plan for limiting attendance and crowd control, dust control and
rapid emergency evacuation;
      (4)   Medical care, including facilities, services and personnel;
      (5)   Sanitary water supply, source and distribution; toilet facilities;
sewage disposal; solid waste collection and disposal; food dispensing; insect
and rodent control; and post-gathering clean-up; and
      (6)   Noise level at perimeter; lighting and electrical services and
signs.
(Prior Code, § 95.07) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
§ 93.08 INJUNCTIONS OR ABATEMENT ORDERS.
The county may apply for and secure injunctions or abatement orders from courts
of competent jurisdiction to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 95.08) (Ord. passed 10-1-1974)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
94.01   Title
   
94.02   Police power
   
94.03   Definitions
   
94.04   Posting signs, posters and notices
   
94.05   Times for use
   
94.06   Injury to park property unlawful
   
94.07   Animals prohibited
   
94.08   Firearms, explosives and rocks
   
94.09   Teasing, annoying or injuring animals prohibited
   
94.10   Certain vocations prohibited
   
94.11   Riding vehicles and animals
   
94.12   Camping areas
   
94.13   Practicing and playing games
   
94.14   Depositing refuse and litter
   
94.15   Testing vehicles prohibited
   
94.16   Permit for organized sporting activities and/or assemblies required
   
94.17   Races prohibited
   
94.18   Building fires
   
94.19   Intoxicating liquors and drugs prohibited
   
94.20   Adoption of rules and regulations by Director
   
94.21   Aiding and abetting violations
   
94.22   Unlawful to operate motor vehicle or vehicle on walking trails
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Park Code of Conduct for the Town of
Wingate”.
(Ord. passed - -2004)
§ 94.02 POLICE POWER.
   This chapter is hereby declared to be an exercise of the police power of the
town for the public peace, health, safety and welfare and its provisions are to
be liberally construed.
(Ord. passed - -2004)
§ 94.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Wherever
consistent with the context of this chapter, words in the present, past or
future tenses shall be construed to be interchangeable with each other, and
words in the singular number shall be construed to include the plural.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of parks and recreation areas of the town as
designated by the Board of Commissioners or Town Manager. In the absence of a
DIRECTOR that is named by the Town Council, the Town Manager shall serve as the
DIRECTOR.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle,
including electric, gas and self-propelled scooters and go-carts.
   ORGANIZED SPORTING ACTIVITY. Any sporting activity where any one of the
following occur:
      (1)   Participants are arranged into teams;
      (2)   Umpires and/or referees are used to judge the play;
      (3)   A score is kept to determine the winning team; or
      (4)   Participants are practicing a particular sport as a team.
   PARK. All town parks, public squares, public drives, parkways, access roads,
boulevards and play and recreation grounds under the management and control of
the town.
   RECREATION. Activities that are diversionary in character and aid in
promoting entertainment, pleasure, relaxation, instruction and other physical,
mental and cultural development and leisure time experiences.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. Any guide dog, signal dog or other animal individually
trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability.
(Ord. passed - -2004)
§ 94.04 POSTING SIGNS, POSTERS AND NOTICES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, without prior written permission of the
Director, to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign, wire, rod or cord to any
tree, shrub, railing, fence, post or structure within any park; provided, that
the Director may permit the erection of temporary directional signs or
decorations on occasions of public celebrations and picnics.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, without prior written permission of the
Director, to use, place or erect any signboard, sign, billboard, bulletin
board, post, pole or device of any kind for advertising in any park, or to
place or erect in any park a permanent or temporary structure of any kind;
provided, that before granting such permit, the Director shall establish
general rules and regulations pertaining hereto, including provisions
pertaining to removal, protection of the town park and its employees,
protection of the interests of the general public and of persons using said
park.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 TIMES FOR USE.
   Town parks and recreation areas shall be open for public use during the
hours and days as from time to time posted by the Director.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 INJURY TO PARK PROPERTY UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or deface any
structure, or any part of any structure, or any fixture therein, or attached
thereto, any playground equipment, or any monument, statue, vase, fountain,
wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, shrub, tree, fern, plant, flower,
lighting system or sprinkling system, or any other property lawfully located
within the park.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to allow or permit any animal in any park or
recreation area or grounds, except for service animals.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.08 FIREARMS, EXPLOSIVES AND ROCKS.
   It is unlawful to shoot, fire or explode any firearms, fireworks,
firecrackers, torpedo or explosives of any kind or to carry any firearm or to
shoot or fire any air gun, bow and arrows, BB gun, pellet gun or use any
slingshot or other propelling device wherein the applied human energy force is
artificially aided, directed or added to any park or throw any rocks or other
objects, except in such designated recreational areas as may by the town be
developed and provided for such activities. Where no such areas are provided,
it shall be unlawful to have any of the above named objects in one’s possession
while inside a town park or recreation area. FIREARMS shall include handguns,
rifles and shotguns.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.09 TEASING, ANNOYING OR INJURING ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person in any park, in any manner to tease, annoy,
disturb, molest, catch, injure or kill or to throw any stone or missile of any
kind at or strike with any stick or weapon, any animal, bird or fowl.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.10 CERTAIN VOCATIONS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to take up collections, or to act as or ply the vocation of a
solicitor, agent, peddler, fakir, mendicant, beggar, strolling musician, organ
grinder, exhorter, barker, showman or bootblack; or without first obtaining a
written permit from the Director thereto to operate or use any metal detectors
or loudspeaker in any park.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.11 RIDING VEHICLES AND ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive any vehicle or animal over or
through any park, except along and upon the park drive parkways or park
boulevards, or at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit or in excess of
15 mph where no speed limit is so posted or to stand or park any vehicle in any
park, except in areas designated for such purpose by the Director and so posted
by signs, or to stand or park any vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. of the following day, except in such areas as may be designated for
such purpose by the Director and so posted by signs.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.12 CAMPING AREAS.
   It is unlawful for any person or group of persons to “camp out” in any park,
except at places set aside for such purposes by the Director and so designated
by signs.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.13 PRACTICING AND PLAYING GAMES.
   It is unlawful for any person to practice or play golf, baseball, softball,
soccer, cricket, lacrosse, polo, archery, hockey, tennis, badminton or other
games of like character or to hurl or propel any missile, except at places set
apart and developed for such purposes by the town, and so designated by the
Director.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.14 DEPOSITING REFUSE AND LITTER.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw any refuse, litter, broken glass,
crockery, nails, shrubbery, trimmings, junk or advertising matter in any park
or to deposit any waste or abandoned material therein except in designated
receptacles.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.15 TESTING VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle for the purpose of
testing it, or ascertaining its fitness for service, along or upon any park
drive, parkway, park boulevard, road, street, including access streets or
roads, or any bicycle paths.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.16 PERMIT FOR ORGANIZED SPORTING ACTIVITIES AND/OR ASSEMBLIES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to hold, sponsor or participate in any
organized sporting activity and/or assembly without first giving to the
Director, notice thereof and obtaining therefrom, a written permit to do so.
Such notice shall be given at least 72 hours prior to the date established for
such organized sporting activity and/or assembly.
   (B)   The Director is hereby ordered to establish forthwith such rules and
regulations pertaining to the issuance of organized sporting activity and/or
assembly permits as shall permit the fullest peaceful utilization of the parks
by all the general public (including such persons attending such organized
sporting activities and/or assemblies and such other persons utilizing the
park, but not in attendance at such organized sporting activity and/or
assembly) as shall be reasonably possible and consistent with the health,
safety and general welfare. In this connection, and in addition to the conduct
requirements of this chapter, such rules and regulations may require a deposit
for cleanup undertakings and protection of the park and recreation facilities,
the furnishing of waste and sanitary conveniences, and effective plans for
traffic and crowd control and management.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.17 RACES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person in any park to engage in conduct or hold any
trials or competitions for speed, endurance or hill climbing involving any
vehicle, bicycle, motorcycle, motor bike, scooter, animal and the like, except
at specified places and times designated for such activities by the Director
upon his or her determination that:
   (A)   Adequate provision has been made to insure that the health and safety
of participants in and spectators of any such activities will not be subject to
undue hazard;
   (B)   Such activities will be conducted in such a manner as to minimize
potential damage to public or private property;
   (C)   Such activities will not constitute a public nuisance; and
   (D)   Such activities will not unduly interfere with the use of park
facilities by the general public.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.18 BUILDING FIRES.
   It is unlawful for any person to build any fire in any park except in such
areas as may be designated by the Director and such designation is clearly
defined by signs posted in such areas.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.19 INTOXICATING LIQUORS AND DRUGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners finds as a fact that possession and
consumption of intoxicating liquors as herein defined on property used for
parks and recreation purposes is detrimental to the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens and residents of the town, and due to the unsanitary conditions
and adverse effect upon the youth of the town created thereby, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess or consume any intoxicating liquor on any premises either owned or
occupied by the Town as a park or recreation area. For the purposes of this
division (A), the phrase INTOXICATING LIQUOR shall be construed to include
alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, vodka, beer, ale, port and wine, and any
spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented beverages, liquid and compounds, whether
medicated, proprietary, patented or not, and by whatever name called,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume, which are fit for use for
beverage purposes.
      (B)   For purposes of this section of the ordinance, BEER shall have the
same meaning as the term MALT BEVERAGE, as defined by G.S. Chapter 18B, and
WINE shall have the same meaning as the term UNFORTIFIED WINE, as defined by
G.S. Chapter 18B. OPEN CONTAINER is defined as a container that has a broken
seal or a container other than the manufacturer’s unopened original container.
   (C)   Any person having a container within one’s immediate reach or control,
such as at a bench, picnic table, blanket or motor vehicle where that person is
sitting, within a town park or recreation area or on a road or street used as
an access road to such park or recreation area, may be considered to be in
possession of the container for the purposes of this section.
   (D)   Possession for sale or distribution or use or consumption of narcotics
or drugs made illegal by the laws of the state shall be prohibited in any town
park or recreation area or access road or street providing access to and from
said park or area.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.20 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS BY DIRECTOR.
   The Director shall have the power to promulgate and adopt reasonable rules
and regulations pertaining to the operation, management and use of the parks,
and shall post the same in conspicuous places in the parks. Such rules and
regulations shall include a procedure for granting blanket permits encompassing
any particulars of this chapter to locally and nationally recognized
organizations or associations. Such rules and regulations may include the
establishment of hours during which any park or portion thereof as designated
by signs located within the designated portion, shall be closed to the general
public; such closures may be for reasons of public safety, welfare and
convenience, or for reasons of park maintenance. It is unlawful for any person
to violate or fail to comply with any park rule or regulation duly adopted and
posted by the Department.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.21 AIDING AND ABETTING VIOLATIONS.
   Any person participating in a violation of any provision of this chapter,
whether directly committing the act or omitting to do the thing constituting
the offense, or who aids or abets the same, and whether present or absent, and
anyone who directly or indirectly counsels, encourages, hires, commands,
induces or otherwise procures another to commit such offense, shall be
proceeded against and prosecuted as such.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.22 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE ON WALKING TRAILS.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate any motor vehicle, bicycles
without training wheels, skateboards or rollerblades on, upon or across any
walking path, sidewalk or area designated exclusively for pedestrian use.
Bicycles with training wheels may be used on paved walking trails if the rider
is supervised by a parent or guardian and the bicycle is operated in a manner
so as not to endanger other users of the walking trail.
(Ord. passed - -2004) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of §
94.04 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined $50.
   (B)   Any person that violates §
94.06 shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of §
94.07 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined $50.
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of §
94.09 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined $500.
   (E)   Whoever violates any provision of §
94.13 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined $25.
   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of §
94.16 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined $50.
   (G)   Whoever violates any provision of §
94.22 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, and shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   Motor vehicle: $500;
      (2)   Go-cart: $250;
      (3)   Motorized scooter: $100; and
      (4)   Skateboard, rollerblades or bicycle without training wheels: $25.
   (H)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not provided shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be
fined $250.
(Ord. passed - -2004)
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
   
95.01   Enforcement of regulations
   
95.02   Unlawful to hinder Health Officer
   
95.03   Right to enter
   
95.04   Property to be kept clean
   
95.05   Human waste
   
95.06   Stagnant water
   
95.07   Sale of food; eating establishments
   
95.08   Debris from new construction
Cross-reference:
   Health regulations in mass gatherings, see
Chapter 93
§ 95.01 ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.
   The enforcement of this chapter shall be under the supervision of the County
Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 94.01)
§ 95.02 UNLAWFUL TO HINDER HEALTH OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the Health
Officer or any of his or her assistants in the lawful discharge of their
duties.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.03 RIGHT TO ENTER.
   The Health Officer or any of his or her assistants shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any premises for the purpose of making the
inspections or investigations as required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 94.03)
§ 95.04 PROPERTY TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   Every person owning or occupying any premises in the corporate limits
shall keep the premises free from noxious weeds, trash and all other forms of
animal or vegetable refuse which may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health or which may constitute a public nuisance. No owner or occupant of any
premises shall bury therein any animal or vegetable matter which upon decaying
may become dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or may constitute a
nuisance.
   (B)   If any person shall violate the provisions of division (A) above, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or the Sanitary Inspector or his or
her associate to give notice to the owner or person in possession of such
premises that within 15 days or sooner from the date of such notice all weeds,
trash and other offensive animal or vegetable matter be removed from said lot.
Should any owner or occupant fail to comply with such notice, the said Chief of
Police or Sanitary Inspector shall proceed to have said offensive matter
removed, and such owner or occupant shall be responsible to the town for the
cost thereof.
   (C)   Every owner or person in possession of a vacant lot within the
corporate limits shall cut down within four inches of the ground all weeds,
grass or other noxious growth from said lot at least twice each year: the first
not later than June 15, and the second not later than August 15 of each and
every year. If said weeds or other noxious growth are not cut in compliance
with this chapter, the Chief of Police or Sanitary Inspector shall proceed to
have said weeds or other noxious growth cut, and the owner or person in
possession of such lot shall be responsible to the town for the cost thereof;
provided, however, that this division (C) shall not apply to land or vacant
lots used by an owner for genuine agricultural purposes for production of food
or fodder for domestic animals, including, but not limited to, the growing of
hay, except that after harvest of such crops the property must be in compliance
with this section. During the growing season for any such crop or crops the
owner shall be exempt from any provision of the town’s code relating to
nuisance regulation, now or in the future existing. The owner of any such
properties shall be responsible for compliance with this section, whether
production of any such crop is by such owner or by a permittee or lessee.
(Prior Code, § 94.04) (Ord. passed 3-21-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 HUMAN WASTE.
   No person shall urinate or deposit any human waste of any kind on any
street, lot or premises, except in approved sanitary facilities.
(Prior Code, § 94.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 STAGNANT WATER.
   No person or occupant of any property shall allow stagnant water to
accumulate or remain in cellars or anywhere on his or her property.
(Prior Code, § 94.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.07 SALE OF FOOD; EATING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All persons, firms or corporations selling food of any kind or serving
prepared meals shall comply with all requirements pertaining thereto of the
State Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 94.07)
§ 95.08 DEBRIS FROM NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   All refuse, lumber and debris remaining both as a result of the repair of
any old buildings or the erection and completion of any new buildings shall be
removed by the property owner within ten days from the completion of the
aforesaid work.
(Prior Code, § 94.08) Penalty, see §
10.99 
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning the Housing Code, see
Chapter 150
CHAPTER 96: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
Unreasonably Loud, Disturbing Sound Levels; Noise Regulations
   
96.01   Unlawful acts
   
96.02   Activities unlawful
   
96.03   Permit
Abandoned Vehicles
   
96.15   Definitions
   
96.16   Administration and enforcement procedures
   
96.17   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
96.18   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
96.19   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized
   
96.20   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles; pre-towing
notice requirements
   
96.21   Exceptions to prior notice requirements
   
96.22   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
96.23   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
96.24   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
96.25   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
   
96.26   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
96.27   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
96.28   Exceptions
   
96.29   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicles
 
   
96.99   Penalty
UNREASONABLY LOUD, DISTURBING SOUND LEVELS; NOISE REGULATIONS
§ 96.01 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create or assist
in creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels in the town, taking
into consideration volume, duration, frequency and other characteristics of the
sound.
(Ord. passed 1-13-1992)
§ 96.02 ACTIVITIES UNLAWFUL.
   The following activities, among others, are hereby declared to be
unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels, but said enumeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   The playing of any musical instrument or electronic sound
amplification equipment in such manner or with such volume, particularly during
hours (but not limited thereto) between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that a
reasonably prudent person would recognize as likely to unreasonably disturb
persons in the vicinity;
   (B)   The keeping of any animal or bird which makes frequent or long
continued sounds, such that a reasonably prudent person would recognize as
likely to unreasonably disturb persons in the vicinity;
   (C)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or in such manner as to create unreasonably loud, disturbing sounds;
   (D)   The operating of any garage or service station or other business
establishment in any residential area so as to cause unreasonably loud,
disturbing sounds to be emitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
any day;
   (E)   The creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels adjacent to
any school, educational facility or church during normal operating hours, which
a reasonably prudent person would recognize as likely to unreasonably interfere
with the working of such institutions, provided conspicuous signs are displayed
indicating that such area is a school, educational facility or church area;
   (F)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair
of any building in a residential or business district other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only under the direction
of an appropriate town official; and
   (G)   The use of any electronic sound amplification equipment for
advertising or solicitation purposes, except with an appropriate permit.
(Ord. passed 1-13-1992)
§ 96.03 PERMIT.
   (A)   Persons wishing to engage in activities regulated by this subchapter
may do so when a specific permit is approved by the Board of Commissioners or
its designee, the Town Clerk. Applications shall be submitted on forms supplied
by the town. The permit shall not be unreasonably withheld, and may contain
appropriate conditions, including maximum decibel levels, designed to minimize
the disruptive impact. Permits for such activities significantly for religious
or political purposes shall be granted, subject only to reasonable time, place
and manner restrictions. Permits issued under this section may specify that the
permission granted will continue for a stated period or until revoked after
actual notice. Persons shall not be held in violation of this subchapter when
acting in conformity with permit conditions, but any permit may be revoked if
it is determined that the authorized activity has resulted in generation of
unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels.
   (B)   In case an application is denied, a permit is approved with conditions
unacceptable to the applicant, or a permit is revoked, the applicant or permit
holder shall be entitled to a prompt, informal hearing with the Board of
Commissioners, upon submission of a written request. Any person aggrieved by a
matter regulated by this subchapter may submit to the Board of Commissioners
written comments, including requests for appropriate relief.
(Ord. passed 1-13-1992)
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 96.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an
abandoned motor vehicle is one that:
      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days;
      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours; or
      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The Code Enforcement Officer or designee, designated
to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2, the
term JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE means a vehicle that does not display a current
license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self- propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance and unlawful,
including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor of mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from
the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; and/or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the Code Enforcement Officer or designee.
(Prior Code, § 90.01) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.16 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Police Department and the Town Clerk shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public
streets and highways within the town, and on property owned by the town.
   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for administering
the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles
located on private property.
   (D)   The town may, on an annual basis, or on a per event basis, contract
with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and
dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in
compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal
authority or powers of officers of the Town Police Department in enforcing
other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Prior Code, § 90.02) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.17 ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the
term is defined in §
96.15.
   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(Prior Code, § 90.03) (Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.18 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation the Code Enforcement Officer may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as
defined in §
96.15, and order the vehicle removed.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) (Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.19 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle or for the owner, lessee or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer may order the removal
of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this chapter after finding in writing
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens
imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a
balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding
gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area
appearance. The following among other relevant factors may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic developments opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community;
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents; and
      (6)   Promotion of a college community that provides an enticement to
young people and their parents to look upon the town as clean and “well-
groomed”.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) (Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.20 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES; PRE- TOWING
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
96.21, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be
towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
mail. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show
the name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names
and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or
some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the
vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date (no sooner than seven
days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will
be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the
notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal
possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given if
the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned,
a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic
benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be
made to the Board of Commissioners in writing, heard at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board of Commissioners and further proceedings to
remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Prior Code, § 90.06) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.21 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare.
   (B)   Such findings shall in all cases be entered by the authorizing
official in the appropriate daily records.
   (C)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice
include:
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public
streets and highways, the Board of Commissioners hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code or any
other ordinance of the town prohibiting or restricting parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in loading zones;
         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
under code sections.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than the streets and
highways and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to
pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private
property.
(Prior Code, § 90.07) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.22 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by
the tow truck operator or towing business contracted to perform such services
for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official
shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, such
notice to include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5)
above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known address,
unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her
agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed,
and such vehicle has not valid registration or registration plates, the
authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the
vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of
the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions
(A)(1) through (A)(5) above.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.23 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
   (A)   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled
to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for
removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the
County Magistrate designated by the Chief District Court Judge to receive such
hearing requests.
   (B)   The Magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of this
request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 90.09) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.24 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   At any time in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges or by posting a bond for double the
amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle.
   (B)   Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the owner or person entitled
to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or engage in further
violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.10) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.25 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in
accordance with G.S. Chapter 44A, Article I.
(Prior Code, § 90.11) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.26 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written request
of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a
nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by
the Code Enforcement Office or designee.
   (B)   The town may require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify
the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the
removal, storage or sale thereof.
(Prior Code, § 90.12) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.27 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.13) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.28 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle that is:
   (A)   Located in a bona fide “automobile graveyard” or “junkyard”, as
defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. §
136-141 et seq.;
   (B)   In an enclosed building;
   (C)   On the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful
place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the town.
(Prior Code, § 90.14) (Ord. passed - - )
§ 96.29 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 90.15) (Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
96.01 through
96.03 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by
a fine not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not to exceed 30 days. Each day such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 1-13-1992)
CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Throwing or burning of trash on street prohibited
   
97.02   Tree trimmings
   
97.03   Snow and ice removal
   
97.04   Playing ball on sidewalks
   
97.05   Damage to bridges and culverts
Obstructions
   
97.20   Assembly on sidewalk
   
97.21   Display of goods prohibited
   
97.22   Placing objects on streets and sidewalks
   
97.23   Construction near sidewalk
   
97.24   Sheds and awnings
Excavations and Repair
   
97.35   Permit to dig in streets
   
97.36   Sidewalk construction
   
97.37   Street repair
   
97.38   Excavations; leaving unprotected
   
97.39   Streets not to be damaged
   
97.40   Damage to lights; signs
Cross-reference:
   Mass gatherings, see
Chapter 93
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 THROWING OR BURNING OF TRASH ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   No paper, straw, lemon peel, banana peel, watermelon rind or any trash of
any kind shall be thrown or swept upon any sidewalk or street of the town, nor
shall any trash, refuse or rubbish be burned thereon.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.02 TREE TRIMMINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any tree
trimmings or shrubbery on any street or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.03 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   Every occupant of a store building in front of which the sidewalk is paved
with stone, brick, asphalt or cement shall remove snow, ice or other
obstruction from such sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as the
weather permits.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.04 PLAYING BALL ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall play ball or bat or catch any ball on any of the streets of
town.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.05 DAMAGE TO BRIDGES AND CULVERTS.
   No person shall injure or misplace any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch
and drain or other property belonging to or used by the town, or shall place
any obstruction in any culvert, ditch or drain to prevent the free flow of
water on or over the streets of the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 97.20 ASSEMBLY ON SIDEWALK.
   All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so as
to obstruct any sidewalk or street and all persons so collecting and standing
shall disperse and move upon the demand of any police officer.
(Prior Code, § 91.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.21 DISPLAY OF GOODS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place for display or sale any goods, wares or merchandise of
any kind upon any of the sidewalks of the town, which shall extend out on the
sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 91.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.22 PLACING OBJECTS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No brick, stone, wood or other substances obstructing the free passage
of persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of the
alleyways, streets or other routes of the town, nor shall any person place on
or in any of the streets, sidewalks or alley ways of the town any boxes,
crates, casks or barrels of any description or any other obstruction of any
kind.
   (B)   Any person erecting a building may with permission place building
materials for immediate use on the streets in such a way as to not interfere
with the usual traffic.
(Prior Code, § 91.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.23 CONSTRUCTION NEAR SIDEWALK.
   Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close
proximity to the sidewalk, a passageway shall be constructed so as to leave the
sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage.
(Prior Code, § 91.23)
§ 97.24 SHEDS AND AWNINGS.
   (A)   No person shall erect or repair over any sidewalk or street any wooden
shed or awning or any wooden shed for the support of any awning or erect upon
any street or sidewalk any post for the support of any awning. If any person
shall violate this section, then each day that the above forbidden structure
shall remain after notice shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   This shall not be construed to prevent the erection over the sidewalk
of cloth or metal awnings supported upon metallic frames firmly suspended from
the building, and at least seven feet above the level of the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 91.24) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATIONS AND REPAIR
§ 97.35 PERMIT TO DIG IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dig any hole,
ditch or excavation of any kind whatsoever on any street in the town without
first securing a permit therefor in writing from the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 91.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.36 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   No sidewalk shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation of any
brick, wood or other material without a written permit from the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.36) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.37 STREET REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation who shall open or
dig a ditch, trench or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of the town
to put the said street, public alley or sidewalk in as good condition in all
respects as it was before, and every person, firm or corporation violating or
failing to observe the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 91.37) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.38 EXCAVATIONS; LEAVING UNPROTECTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation making any
excavation for any purpose whatsoever in any of the streets or sidewalks to
fail to securely cover such excavations with plank or place ropes around the
same three feet from the ground or shall fail to place a sufficient number of
red lights around such excavation before dark and to keep such light burning
all night when such excavation shall be open.
(Prior Code, § 91.38) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.39 STREETS NOT TO BE DAMAGED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag, run or
cause to be dragged or ran any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or
tool upon any asphalt, batholithic, warrenite or other permanently paved street
of the town which shall be liable, in any way to injure or cut the surface
thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same
manner.
(Prior Code, § 91.39) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.40 DAMAGE TO LIGHTS; SIGNS.
   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove or paint upon or deface any
sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal or bulletin board or other
municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks, except employees of the town
in performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 91.40) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX
      
111.   ADVERTISING
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
113.   AMUSEMENTS
      
114.   TAXICABS
CHAPTER 110: PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAX
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
Licensing
   
110.15   License tax upon certain trades and business operations
   
110.16   Unlawful to conduct business without a license
   
110.17   License tax shall be for 12 months
   
110.18   License required for every separate business
   
110.19   License required for every place of business
   
110.20   License must be displayed at the place of business licensed
   
110.21   No abatement of license tax
   
110.22   Schedule of annual privileges licenses
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or
distributor.
   BUSINESS. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling
of any kind, subject, by the provision of this chapter, to a license tax.
   ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. Engaged in the business as an owner or operator.
   FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30 the
next following year.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation.
   QUARTER. Any three consecutive months.
(Prior Code, § 110.01)
LICENSING
§ 110.15 LICENSE TAX UPON CERTAIN TRADES AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS.
   In addition to the tax on the property, as otherwise provided for, and under
the power and authority conferred in the laws of the state, there shall be
levied and collected annually or more frequently, where provided for, a
privilege license tax on trades, professions, business operations, exhibitions,
circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed as set out on the following
sections and schedule. All licenses shall be a personal privilege and shall not
be transferable. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
Board of Commissioners from imposing from time to time, as they may see fit,
such license taxes as are not specifically herein defined, or from increasing
or decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or from the prohibiting or
regulating the business or acts licensed, and all licenses are granted subject
to any applicable provisions of this code and any existing ordinances or those
hereafter enacted.
(Prior Code, § 110.10)
§ 110.16 UNLAWFUL TO CONDUCT BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent to engage in or
carry on a business in the town, for which there is required a license, without
first having paid the license tax and obtained the license. For the purpose of
this section the opening of a place of business or offering to sell, followed
by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in furtherance of the
business shall be construed to be engaging in or carrying on such business.
Each day that such person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on such
business as aforesaid shall be construed to be a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 110.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.17 LICENSE TAX SHALL BE FOR 12 MONTHS.
   All taxes provided for and fixed in the following sections and schedule
shall be for 12 months, unless otherwise specified, and shall so remain for 12
months beginning July 1, and ending June 30, provided that where the license is
issued after January 1, then the licensee shall be required to pay one half the
tax prescribed, except where otherwise specifically provided for.
(Prior Code, § 110.12)
§ 110.18 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY SEPARATE BUSINESS.
   The payment of any particular tax imposed by this chapter shall not relieve
the person paying the same from the payment of any other tax imposed by this
chapter for any other business he or she may carry on, unless so provided by
the section imposing such tax, it being the intent of this chapter that license
taxes prescribed by the provisions of this chapter applicable to any business
shall be cumulative, except where specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 110.13)
§ 110.19 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is only valid
for the business conducted at the place and by the licensed person named
therein. Every person doing business in more than one factory, mill, warehouse
or store, stall or stand, or other place of business shall secure a separate
license for each such place of business, unless such places of business are
contiguous to each other, communicate directly with an opening into each other
and are operated as a unit. If the business is moved or if the licensee sells
to another, then a new license is necessary, unless a special permit to
continue business under the original license is obtained from the Board of
Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 110.14)
§ 110.20 LICENSE MUST BE DISPLAYED AT THE PLACE OF BUSINESS LICENSED.
   Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of
the licensee named in the license, or, if the licensee has no fixed place of
business, such licensee must keep the same wherever such business is being
operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the proper town official.
(Prior Code, § 110.15)
§ 110.21 NO ABATEMENT OF LICENSE TAX.
   No license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any part thereof be
made in any case where the licensee discontinues his or her business before the
end of the period for which such license was issued.
(Prior Code, § 110.16)
§ 110.22 SCHEDULE OF ANNUAL PRIVILEGES LICENSES.
   See current schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 110.17)
CHAPTER 111: ADVERTISING
Section
   
111.01   Posting bills; other advertising
§ 111.01 POSTING BILLS; OTHER ADVERTISING.
   No person shall stick, paint, brand, stamp, write or put upon any house,
fence, wall, pavement, post or upon any property owned by any person, firm or
corporation, or owned by the town any printed, written, painted or other
advertisement, bill, notice, sign or poster without first having obtained the
written permission of the owner of such property and having received a permit
from the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
112.01   Town license required for sales; taxes
   
112.02   Sale of alcohol
§ 112.01 TOWN LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SALES; TAXES.
   Any person holding a retail ABC permit for an establishment located within
the town to sell off- premises malt beverage and/or off-premises unfortified
wine shall obtain from the town a town license for that activity. The annual
tax for off-premises malt beverage shall be $5 and the annual tax for off-
premises unfortified wine shall be $10. The taxes listed herein are for the
first license issued to a person. The tax for each additional license of the
same type issued to that person for the same year is 110% of the base license
tax, that increase to apply progressively for each additional tax.
(G.S. § 105-113.77) (Prior Code, § 112.01) (Ord. passed 2-19-1990)
§ 112.02 SALE OF ALCOHOL.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87 any establishment located
in the corporate limits of the town and holding an ABC permit issued pursuant
to G.S. § 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit
beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. passed 12-17-2018)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
113.01   Purpose; powers and duties of Board of Commissioners
   
113.02   Definition
   
113.03   Regulation of places of amusement
§ 113.01 PURPOSE; POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The regulation of places of amusement and entertainment is done in the
interest of public morals and health, safety and comfort of the citizens of the
town. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners exercises its power under G.S. §
160A-181 to regulate, restrict or prohibit, as hereinafter set forth, the
operation of pool and billiard halls, dance halls, carnivals, circuses or any
itinerant show or exhibition of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 113.01) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976)
§ 113.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PLACES OF AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT. These shall include, but are not
limited to, coffee houses, cocktail lounges, night clubs, beer halls and
similar establishments, dance halls, pool and billiard halls, and other
activities or establishments hereinbefore mentioned.
(Prior Code, § 113.02) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976)
§ 113.03 REGULATION OF PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any other
entity to operate a place of amusement and entertainment within the town limits
or jurisdictional limits of the town, without having first applied for and
secured from the Board of Commissioners a license.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners shall have power and it will be its duty to
grant or refuse to grant licenses under this chapter.
   (C)   Every person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to operate a
place of amusement and entertainment within the corporate limits or
jurisdictional limits of the town shall file a written request with the Town
Clerk, which request shall be in form of an application stating the nature of
the amusement and entertainment, beginning date of operation, place and hours
of operation, and any other information.
(Prior Code, § 113.03) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: TAXICABS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Unlawful to operate without a license
   
114.03   Application required
   
114.04   Issuance of certificate
   
114.05   Duration of certificate
   
114.06   No person to hold more than one certificate
   
114.07   Determination of convenience and necessity
   
114.08   Hearing; notices
   
114.09   Burden of proof
   
114.10   Failure to begin operations
   
114.11   Transfer
   
114.12   Revocation of certificate
   
114.13   Substitution of vehicles
   
114.14   Display of title permit; fare schedule; photograph required
   
114.15   Approval of rates
   
114.16   Limitation on number of taxicabs operating in the town
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSONS. Includes both singular and plural, and shall also mean and include
persons, individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and associations.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers, operated upon
any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers
indiscriminately for hire between such points along streets or highways as may
be directed by the passenger or passengers so being transported, and shall not
include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as defined in G.S. § 62-3(17).
(Prior Code, § 114.01)
§ 114.02 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon and over the
streets of the town without first having applied for and secured from the Board
of Commissioners a certificate of convenience and necessity as hereinafter set
forth.
(Prior Code, § 114.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the
town shall file on forms supplied by the Town Clerk an application for
certificate of convenience and necessity.
(Prior Code, § 114.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   The Board of Commissioners shall have power and it will be its duty to order
certain certificates issued or refuse to issue certain certificates or to issue
certificates for partial exercise of the rights granted only such certificate
such terms and conditions as in its judgement the public convenience (Prior
Code, § 114.04) and necessity may require.
§ 114.05 DURATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   A certificate shall constitute a franchise from the town for the operation
of taxicabs within the town subject to the provisions of this chapter for one
year, unless a shorter period of time is specified in the certificate.
Applications for renewal shall be filed annually and hearing conducted as
herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 114.05)
§ 114.06 NO PERSON TO HOLD MORE THAN ONE CERTIFICATE.
   The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to issue only one such
certificate to any one person, and the person holding such certificate shall be
required to operate the taxicab himself or herself and shall have no power or
authority by virtue of his or her certificate to delegate the operation of such
taxicab to any other person, except that if such other person is an employee of
such certificate holder, which employee is licensed to operate a taxicab under
the law of the state, then such employee is authorized to operate said taxicab
within the town limits providing that all other sections of this chapter are
complied with, including regulations relating to identification of the employee
as driver with his or her photograph being attached to the vehicle as herein
stated. Such employee must in fact be an employee of the certificate holder,
and not an assignee or otherwise, or contractor for hire.
(Prior Code, § 114.06) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976)
§ 114.07 DETERMINATION OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   (A)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require
the franchising of such taxicab or taxicabs, the Board of Commissioners shall,
among other things, take into consideration the following factors:
      (1)   Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require such
proposed or additional taxicab service within the town;
      (2)   The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of
the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory;
      (3)   The number and condition of equipment;
      (4)   The schedule of the proposed rates to be charged, if required by
said Board of Commissioners;
      (5)   The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for increased
service, if any, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public,
both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or not adequate
provision has been made for off-street parking of said taxicabs;
      (6)   The experience of the applicant in the taxicab business; and
      (7)   Such other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable.
   (B)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a
certificate of convenience and necessity, the Board of Commissioners or a
committee thereof shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts,
and if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the Chief
of Police or any other officer or employee of the town.
(Prior Code, § 114.07)
§ 114.08 HEARING; NOTICES.
   Each application for a certificate of convenience and necessity shall be
scheduled for a hearing not later than 30 days after the same is filed, and the
applicant shall be notified by the Town Clerk by mail to the business address
set forth in the application of the date and time of such hearing, such
notification to be sent at least ten days before the date set for the hearing.
The Town Clerk shall also, within the same time, notify all persons who at the
time hold certificates of convenience and necessity for the operation of
taxicabs within the municipality of the date and time for such hearing and the
name of the applicant. In addition, the Board of Commissioners shall have the
power to have published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation at
least ten days before the hearing, a notice setting forth the name of the
applicant and the date and time of hearing. The cost of such publication will
be paid by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 114.08)
§ 114.09 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence
of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicab or
taxicabs specified in his or her application, and all other facts required for
the granting of a certificate.
(Prior Code, § 114.09)
§ 114.10 FAILURE TO BEGIN OPERATIONS.
   If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and said applicant shall fail,
in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin operations
within 60 days after the date of said certificate, then said certificate shall
become null and void, and no refund of any amount paid by the applicant will be
made by the town.
(Prior Code, § 114.10)
§ 114.11 TRANSFER.
   A certificate is not transferable without the consent and approval of the
Board of Commissioners. Applications for a permit to transfer shall be filed in
with the same manner as an application for a certificate of convenience and
necessity. The proceedings upon such application for a transfer shall be the
same as those prescribed for the issuance of a certificate, except that the
question of public convenience and necessity need not be proved. No certificate
will be issued to any applicant unless such applicant be the holder in due
course and for value of the title to such taxicab and the holder of such
certificate only shall be permitted to operate such taxicab, and such applicant
shall not be allowed to engage the services of any person to operate his
taxicab for him or her or in his or her stead at any time.
(Prior Code, § 114.11)
§ 114.12 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may at any time after a public hearing
revoke any certificate issued by authority of this chapter for any one or more
of the following causes:
      (1)   Failure to operate the taxicab specified in the certificate in such
manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently;
      (2)   Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair;
      (3)   Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by law;
      (4)   Failure to pay to the town taxes or license fees of $15 imposed
upon such taxicabs;
      (5)   Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic
and safety regulations of the town or state laws relating to alcoholic
beverages or prostitution;
      (6)   Failure to report accidents; or
      (7)   Willful failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or any
other applicable ordinances of the town or state laws relating to the operation
of taxicabs.
   (B)   No certificate shall be revoked until the owner has had at least five
days’ notice by personal service or registered mail of the charges against him,
and of the time and place of hearing. If, after the hearing, it is found that
the owner is guilty of one or more of the offenses listed herein, to condition
a revocation upon completion upon compliance of its order within any time fixed
by it.
(Prior Code, § 114.12)
§ 114.13 SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLES.
   The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by proper endorsement
thereon by the Town Clerk, substitute another vehicle or other vehicles for the
vehicle or vehicles for which certificate was granted. In such instance, the
liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to such substitute
vehicle or vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 114.13)
§ 114.14 DISPLAY OF TITLE PERMIT; FARE SCHEDULE; PHOTOGRAPH REQUIRED.
   Each operator and driver of a taxicab must display prominently in each
taxicab, so as to be visible to the passengers, the town taxi permit, the
schedule of fares, and a photograph of the driver.
(Prior Code, § 114.14) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.15 APPROVAL OF RATES.
   The town shall approve the rates that may be charged by taxicab operators.
(Prior Code, § 114.15) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976)
§ 114.16 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF TAXICABS OPERATING IN THE TOWN.
   (A)   The town may limit the number of taxicabs operating in the town
limits, and such limitation shall be set out in any certificate issued by the
Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The holder of the taxicab franchise shall report at least quarterly to
the Board of Commissioners the average number of taxis actually in operation
during the preceding quarter. The Board of Commissioners can amend a taxi
franchise to reduce the number of authorized vehicles by the average number not
in actual operation during the preceding quarter, and may transfer the unused
allotment to another franchised operator, if one exists, and that such
allotment shall not be subject to G.S. § 160A-76. Allotments of taxis among
franchised operators may be transferred only by the Board of Commissioners, and
it shall be unlawful for any franchised operator to sell, assign or otherwise
transfer allotments under a taxi franchise. This provision presupposes that
there is more than one taxicab operating within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 114.16) (Ord. passed 2-4-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC
      
131.   WEAPONS; FIREARMS
      
132.   YOUTH PROTECTION
CHAPTER 130: ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC
Section
   
130.01   Drinking in public
§ 130.01 DRINKING IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall consume, serve or drink wine, beer, whiskey or alcoholic
beverages of any kind on the public streets, boulevards, alleys or in public
buildings.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131: WEAPONS; FIREARMS
Section
   
131.01   Weapons prohibited on town property
   
131.02   Discharge of firearms, pellet guns and the like prohibited
§ 131.01 WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON TOWN PROPERTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, all persons are prohibited
from possessing weapons as defined in G.S. § 14-269 upon any building or
property owned, occupied or controlled by the town.
   (B)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following persons:
      (1)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of the United
States when in discharge of their official duties as such and acting under
orders requiring them to carry weapons;
      (2)   Civil officers of the United States while in discharge of their
official duties;
      (3)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and national guard when called
into actual service;
      (4)   Sworn law enforcement officers;
      (5)   Animal control officers when in discharge of their duties as such
and acting under governmental or regulation authorizing them to carry weapons;
or
      (6)   When the person has a handgun in a closed compartment or container
within the person’s locked vehicle, and the vehicle is in a parking area as set
forth by G.S. Chapter 114. A person may unlock the vehicle to enter or exit the
vehicle, provided the handgun remains in the closed compartment at all times
and the vehicle is locked immediately following the entrance or exit.
   (C)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted at each entrance to the property
set forth in division (A) above stating: “POSSESSION OF WEAPONS OR CARRYING A
CONCEALED HANDGUN IS PROHIBITED”.
(Ord. passed 10-2-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, PELLET GUNS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Firearms; exceptions. No person shall discharge any firearm, within or
into the corporate limits of the town, except as permitted as follows:
      (1)   It shall not be a violation to discharge a firearm while engaged in
lawful defense of persons or property or pursuant to lawful directions of law-
enforcement officers.
      (2)   It shall not be a violation to discharge a firearm while engaged in
otherwise lawful hunting or target shooting, provided that the person is not
within 750 feet of any dwelling, school, church, any occupied building, a
public or private park and any type of public gathering place; and provided
further that there is no person, vehicle, domestic animal, livestock, building
or public street or highway within the field of fire.
      (3)   It shall not be a violation for a law enforcement officer of any
governmental agency or body charged with the duties of protecting life or
property or enforcing the laws and regulations while engaged in the performance
of their official duty to discharge a firearm.
   (B)   Pellet guns and the like. No person shall discharge a pellet gun, BB
gun, or any other mechanism or device designed or used to project a missile by
compressed air or mechanical action with less than deadly force, within 500
feet of any dwelling, school, church, any occupied building, a public or
private park and any type of public gathering place; and provided further that
there is no person, vehicle, domestic animal, livestock, building or public
street or highway within the field of fire.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DWELLING. A dwelling is a structure regularly used by a person or persons
for sleeping.
      FIELD OF FIRE. The area included within a semicircle described by a 90
degree arc to either side of the line of fire, and having a radius equal to the
range of the firearm, unless the line of fire is so totally obstructed as to
prevent the bullet or shot from carrying to its normal range.
      FIREARM. A firearm is a weapon that propels shot, shell or bullets by the
action of an explosive within it.
      REGULARLY USED. Use that occurs in ordinary practice or in the ordinary
course of events.
   (D)   Penalty. If any person shall violate this section he or she shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined $100 or
imprisoned for not more than 20 days, or both.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate or prohibit the discharge of firearms, see G.S. §
160A-189
   Authority to regulate pellet guns and similar devices, see G.S. § 160A-190
CHAPTER 132: YOUTH PROTECTION
Section
   
132.01   Purpose
   
132.02   Definitions
   
132.03   Time limits
   
132.04   Exceptions
   
132.05   Responsibility of adults
   
132.06   Responsibility of business establishments
   
132.07   Enforcement
   
132.08   Aiding or abetting by adult, guardian or parent
   
132.09   Refusal of custodian to take custody of a minor
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish a response for the
need to protect minors from being placed into dangerous or vulnerable
situations in the town.
   (B)   Unsupervised minors are particularly vulnerable to being induced to
participate in drug abuse and other criminal activities during the nighttime.
   (C)   Minors often lack the ability to make informed, mature decisions when
faced with the temptation to engage in criminal activities. Also, it is
important that parents be encouraged to take an active role in the proper
upbringing of their children. Furthermore, there is a need to protect
businesses and other persons from vandalism committed by minors.
   (D)   This section will assist parents in the difficult task of child
rearing and the town in regulating those activities which are detrimental to
the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to the peace and dignity of
the town.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTODIAN. A parent, guardian, stepparent, foster parent, house parent or
other person legally responsible for the care and custody of a minor as defined
by this section.
   MINOR. Any person who has not reached his or her sixteenth birthday and is
not married, emancipated or a member of the armed services of the United
States.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place which is generally open to and used by the public,
whether it be publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to,
streets, highways, public vehicular areas, places of business and amusement,
parks and other common areas open to the public.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 132.03 TIME LIMITS.
   It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any public place as
defined in this section within the town or on any property or right-of-way
belonging to the town located outside the corporation limits of the town
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The restrictions provided by §
132.03 shall not apply to any minor who is:
   (A)   Accompanied by his or her custodian as defined in §
132.02;
   (B)   Accompanied by a responsible person over 18 years of age who has the
written permission of the minor’s custodian to have the minor under his or her
supervision;
   (C)   Traveling in connection with his or her employment, religious activity
or attendance at a function or activity sponsored by the town or other
governmental unit, school or other generally recognized civic or community
organization;
   (D)   Temporarily within the town or on town property while engaged in an
interstate or similar point-to-point intrastate travel;
   (E)   Attempting to obtain assistance in a medical or other emergency;
   (F)   Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States
constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
   (G)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 132.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF ADULTS.
   It is unlawful for any custodian to allow or permit any minor to be in or
upon or remain in or upon a public place within the town or on any property or
right-of-way belonging to the town and located outside the corporate limits of
the town within the curfew hours set by §
132.03, except as provided in §
132.04.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a place of
business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon or remain
in or upon the premises of such place of business or amusement within the child
restraint hours set by §
132.03, except as provided in §
132.04.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   When a minor is found to be in violation of this chapter, a police
officer will complete an Incident Report using the reference - Child Safety
Ordinance. The officer immediately will take the juvenile to the residence of
his or her custodian. If the juvenile is found to be a first offender, a
written warning will be issued to the custodian and an indication will be noted
on the miscellaneous incident report that such a warning has been issued. The
report shall include the name of the juvenile and the custodian, the time, date
and location of the offense. The incident report will be turned into the Police
Department with the officer’s daily paperwork. The report will be entered into
the computer system in the same manner as all other miscellaneous incident
reports.
   (B)   If the juvenile is found to be a repeat offender, he or she will be
taken to the residence of his or her custodian and the custodian may be issued
an ordinance violation charging him or her with a violation of this chapter.
The officer may use his or her discretion in whether to issue a citation or
written warning on this second offense, depending on the apparent commitment of
the custodian to prevent any further violation, time between the first and
second offense, or other mitigating factors determined to be present by the
investigating officer. Officer discretion may also be used by the investigating
officer to determine whether repeat offenders should be treated as a delinquent
juvenile. An incident report will be completed as outlined in division (A)
above.
   (C)   If the juvenile is found to be in violation of this chapter three or
more times, the same procedures for reporting and transporting the juvenile as
outlined in division (B) above will be followed, except the custodian must be
issued a criminal citation for a violation of this chapter. An incident report
will be completed as outlined in division (A) above.
   (D)   In cases where the investigating officer determines a criminal
citation should be issued according to this chapter, the officer shall verify
the existence of past offenses and should reference the OCA number on the new
miscellaneous incident report completed for the offense in which the citation
is being issued. If possible, the officer will attach a copy of the
miscellaneous incident report for the previous offenses.
   (E)   A list will be made available of all juveniles who have been recorded
as being in violation of this chapter.
   (F)   If the minor is 12 years of age or younger, regardless of the number
of past offenses, a report will be made and a copy forwarded to the County
Department of Social Services. This report should be completed after the
procedures outlined in divisions (A), (B) and (C) above have been followed.
   (G)   The names of juveniles shall not be released or made public.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.08 AIDING OR ABETTING BY ADULT, GUARDIAN OR PARENT.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person over 18 years of age
to aid or abet a minor in violation of §
132.03.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.09 REFUSAL OF CUSTODIAN TO TAKE CUSTODY OF A MINOR.
   (A)   If the custodian of a minor found to be in violation of this chapter
refuses to take custody of such minor, the officer having custody of the minor
shall contact the County Department of Social Services and release the minor to
that agency, pending further investigation by the Police Department and the
Department of Social Services.
   (B)   The custodian may be issued a criminal citation charging him or her
with a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   This chapter may be enforced by any or both of the following ways as
provided by law.
   (A)   Anyone violating this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor
and shall be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 20 days.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to issuance of
a citation in the amount of $50 for each such citation. A citation remaining
unpaid to the town after 15 days from the date of issuance shall subject the
violator to a civil penalty that may be recovered by the town in a civil
action. A violation, which is a continuing violation, shall subject the
violator to a separate citation for each day that the violation continues.
(Ord. 2008-05, passed 3-18-2008)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   HOUSING CODE
      
151.   NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE CODE
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 150: HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Findings; purpose
   
150.02   Definitions
   
150.03   Minimum standards for dwellings and dwelling units
   
150.04   Sanitary facilities
   
150.05   Food preparation and refuse disposal
   
150.06   Space and security
   
150.07   Thermal environment
   
150.08   Illumination and electricity
   
150.09   Structure and materials
   
150.10   Interior air quality
   
150.11   Water supply
   
150.12   Lead based paint
   
150.13   Access
   
150.14   Extermination
   
150.15   Congregate housing
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.30   Inspector; duties
   
150.31   Powers of Inspector
   
150.32   Appointment of Inspector
   
150.33   Criteria necessary as guide to Inspector
   
150.34   Inspections; duty of owners and occupants
   
150.35   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing
   
150.36   Findings of fact; order
   
150.37   Methods of service of complaints and order
   
150.38   Compliance/noncompliance with order
   
150.39   Removal or demolishing dwelling; sale of materials; crediting proceeds
   
150.40   Appeals
   
150.41   Abandoned structures and closing of vacated dwellings
   
150.42   Costs; lien on premises
   
150.43   Other remedies against violation
   
150.44   Alternative remedies
   
150.45   Violations
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 FINDINGS; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to state law, it is hereby found and declared that there
exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due to
other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, and dangerous
and detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the town.
   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the town as authorized by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 6, it is the
purpose of this chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the
initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as
expressly authorized by state law.
(Prior Code, § 150.01) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Generally. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BASEMENT. A portion of a building which is located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.
      CONGREGATE HOUSING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
      DETERIORATED. A dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Inspector.
      DILAPIDATED. A dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Inspector.
      DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used,
and includes any appurtenances and out-houses belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include any manufactured home or
mobile home temporarily located on the real estate and which is used or
intended to be used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose; provided, that it
does not include temporary housing as defined herein.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, subject to division (B)
below.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the Inspector.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      GOVERNING BODY. The Board of Commissioners of Wingate, North Carolina.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.
      INSPECTOR. The Town Building Inspector appointed as such to administer
this chapter and shall include any agent of the Inspector who is authorized by
the Inspector.
      MANUFACTURED HOME or MOBILE HOME. A structure as defined in G.S. § 143-
145(7) now and as from time to time amended.
      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
      OWNER. The holder of title in fee simple or any lesser interest in title,
who alone, or jointly, or severally with others:
         (a)   Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
         (b)   Shall have charge care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual OWNER shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he or she were the OWNER.
      PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations and corporations who
have interests of record in a dwelling and who are in possession thereof.
      PLUMBING. Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage
disposal units (mechanical sink grinder), waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basin, drains, vents and any other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
      PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any officer who is in charge of any department or
branch of the government of the town or the state relating to health, fire,
building regulations or other activities concerning dwellings in the town.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage
and ashes, and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
      SUBSTANDARD DWELLING or SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURE. A dwelling, dwelling unit,
multiple dwelling, apartment house or any other space used or intended to be
used as a habitable living apace in any building or structure which does not
meet the basic minimum requirements of this chapter for such use.
      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under control of the
owner or operator.
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
      TOWN. The Town of Wingate, Union County, North Carolina.
      UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Conditions exist in a dwelling which violate
or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or
more of the requirements established by this chapter.
   (B)   Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words “dwelling”, “dwelling
unit”, “premises”, “rooming house” or “rooming unit” are used in this chapter,
they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part
thereof.”
(Prior Code, § 150.02) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.03 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held out for
use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standards of
fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of this chapter. No
person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use
as human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with
all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.03) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 SANITARY FACILITIES.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall include its own sanitary facilities which are
in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for
personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste.
   (B)   A flush toilet in a separate, private room, a fixed basin with hot and
cold running water and a shower or tub with hot and cold running water shall be
present in the dwelling unit, all in proper operating condition. These
facilities shall utilize an approved public or private disposal system as
approved from time to time by the County Health Department and the town.
(Prior Code, § 150.04) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.05 FOOD PREPARATION AND REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse,
including facilities for temporary storage where necessary.
   (B)   The unit shall contain the following equipment in proper operating
condition: cooking stove or range and a refrigerator of appropriate size for
the unit, supplied by either the owner or the family, and a kitchen sink with
hot and cold running water. The sink shall drain into an approved public or
private system. Adequate space for the storage, preparation and serving of food
shall be provided. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the
sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary
storage where necessary (for example, garbage cans).
   (C)   All plumbing fixtures and appliances shall meet the standards of the
State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in
good working order.
   (D)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in
a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in
accordance with the State Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, § 150.05) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.06 SPACE AND SECURITY.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall afford the family adequate space and security.
   (B)   A living room, kitchen area and bathroom shall be present, and the
dwelling unit shall contain at least one sleeping or living/sleeping room of
appropriate size for each two persons. Exterior doors and windows accessible
from outside the unit shall be lockable.
(Prior Code, § 150.06) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.07 THERMAL ENVIRONMENT.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall have and be capable of maintaining a thermal
environment healthy for the |human body.
   (B)   The dwelling unit shall contain safe heating and/or cooling facilities
which are in proper operating condition and can provide adequate heat and/or
cooling to each room in the dwelling unit appropriate for the climate to assure
a healthy living environment. Unvented room heaters which burn gas, oil or
kerosene are unacceptable.
(Prior Code, § 150.07) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.08 ILLUMINATION AND ELECTRICITY.
   (A)   Each room shall have adequate natural or artificial illumination to
permit normal indoor activities and to support the health and safety of
occupants. Sufficient electrical sources shall be provided to permit use of
essential electrical appliances while assuring safety from fire.
   (B)   Living and sleeping rooms shall include at least one window. A ceiling
or wall type light fixture shall be present and working in the bathroom and
kitchen area. At least two electric outlets, one of which may be an overhead
light, shall be present and operable in the living area, kitchen area and each
bedroom area.
   (C)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in
a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in
accordance with the State Electrical Code.
(Prior Code, § 150.08) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.09 STRUCTURE AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall be structurally sound so as not to pose any
threat to the health and safety of the occupants and so as to protect the
occupants from the environment.
   (B)   Ceilings, walls and floors shall not have any serious defects such as
severe bulging or leaning, large holes, loose surface materials, severe
buckling or noticeable movement under walking stress, missing parts or other
serious damage. The roof structure shall be firm and the roof shall be weather
tight. The exterior wall structure and exterior wall surface shall not have any
serious defects such as serious leaning, buckling, sagging, cracks or holes,
loose siding or other serious damage. The condition and equipment of interior
and exterior stairways, halls, porches, walkways and the like shall be such as
not to present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators shall be maintained
in safe and operating condition. In the case of a mobile home, the home shall
be securely anchored by a tiedown device which distributes and transfers the
loads imposed by the unit to appropriate ground anchors so as to resist wind
overturning and sliding.
(Prior Code, § 150.09) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.10 INTERIOR AIR QUALITY.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall be freed of pollutants in the air at levels
which threaten the health of the occupants.
   (B)   The dwelling unit shall be free from dangerous levels of air pollution
from carbon monoxide, sewer gas, fuel gas, dust and other harmful air
pollutants. Air circulation shall be adequate throughout the unit. Bathroom
areas shall have at least one openable window or other adequate exhaust
ventilation.
(Prior Code, § 150.10) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.11 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   The water supply shall be free from contamination.
   (B)   The unit shall be served by an approved public or private sanitary
water supply.
(Prior Code, § 150.11) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.12 LEAD BASED PAINT.
   No lead based paint shall be used. This provision shall be in compliance
with the United States Lead Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act, 42 U.S.C. §
4801.
(Prior Code, § 150.12) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.13 ACCESS.
   (A)   The dwelling unit shall be usable and capable of being maintained
without unauthorized use of other private properties.
   (B)   The building shall provide an alternate means of egress in case of
fire, such as fire stairs or egress through windows.
(Prior Code, § 150.13) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.14 EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   The unit and its equipment shall be in sanitary condition.
   (B)   The unit and its equipment shall be free of vermin and rodent
infestation.
(Prior Code, § 150.14) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.15 CONGREGATE HOUSING.
   (A)   The foregoing standards shall apply except for §
150.05, food preparation and refuse disposal.
   (B)   Additionally, the following standards shall apply.
      (1)   The unit shall contain a refrigerator of appropriate size.
      (2)   The central dining facility and kitchen facility, if any, shall
contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve food in a
sanitary manner, and there shall be adequate facilities and services for the
sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary
storage where necessary (for example, garbage cans).
(Prior Code, § 150.15) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.30 INSPECTOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to exercise the duties and powers herein
prescribed.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Inspector to:
      (1)   Investigate the dwelling conditions and to inspect dwellings and
dwelling units located in the town in order to determine which dwellings and
dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of carrying
out the objectives of this chapter with respect to such dwellings and dwelling
units;
      (2)   Take such action, together with other appropriate departments and
agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of
housing which is deteriorated;
      (3)   Keep a record of the results of inspections made under this chapter
and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of
fitness herein prescribed; and
      (4)   Perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 150.30) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.31 POWERS OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   The Inspector’s powers include the following, in addition to others
herein granted:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the town in order to
determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation;
      (2)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections; provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter; and
      (5)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the
chapter to other officers and other agents.
(Prior Code, § 150.31) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.32 APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The town shall appoint an individual to serve in the capacity of
Inspector and to carry out the duties enumerated under this chapter, and to
have such powers as are herein set out in § 150.31, including those specified
by state law, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   The Inspector shall serve until he or she is removed or replaced by
the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 150.32) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.33 CRITERIA NECESSARY AS GUIDE TO INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Inspector may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation if he or she finds that conditions exist in the dwelling that render
it dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of
the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the
town.
   (B)   Defective conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities;
      (2)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities;
      (3)   Dilapidation;
      (4)   Disrepair;
      (5)   Structural defects; and
      (6)   Uncleanliness.
(Prior Code, § 150.33) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.34 INSPECTIONS; DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units, congregate housing and premises.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit or congregate
housing, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Inspector free access
to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
   (C)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner
thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling
or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.34) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.35 PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION; NOTICE; HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the town charging that any dwelling is unfit
for human habitation or whenever it appears to the Inspector on his or her own
motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the Inspector shall, if
his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a
notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector or his or her
designated agent at a place within the county in which the property is located
fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint.
   (B)   The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
   (C)   The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.35) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.36 FINDINGS OF FACT; ORDER.
   (A)   If, after notice and hearing, the Inspector determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall
state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of that determination
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order.
   (B) The order shall be as follows:
      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling
(“reasonable” cost shall be determined according to the definition of
“deteriorated” under § 150.02), the order shall require the owner, within the
time specified, to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it
fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a human
habitation; or
      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling
(“reasonable” cost shall be determined according to the definition of
“dilapidated” under §
150.02), the order shall require the owner, within the time specified in the
order, to remove or demolish such dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 150.36) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.37 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDER.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon the
owner(s) or the parties in interest in such dwelling either personally or by
registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are
unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, and
the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be made by
publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least once
no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by
the complaint or order.
   (C)   No person without written consent of the Inspector shall remove or
permit the removal of any complaint, notice or order posted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.37) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.38 COMPLIANCE/NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.
   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or to vacate and close the dwelling, the Inspector may cause the dwelling to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed.
   (B)   The Inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
dwelling so closed a placard with the following words:
“This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this
building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful.”
   (C)   Occupation of a building posted in accordance with division (B),
above, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (D)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, the Inspector may cause such dwelling to be removed or demolished.
   (E)   The duties of the Inspector set forth in this section shall not be
exercised until the Board of Commissioners of the town shall have by ordinance
ordered the Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this chapter with
respect to the particular property or properties which the Inspector shall have
found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall
be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable
opportunity to bring it into conformity with the Housing Code. This chapter
shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in the county, and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
   (F)   A reasonable time opportunity to bring a dwelling into conformity with
the Housing Code shall be deemed to be 120 days from date that the Inspector
notifies the owner in writing, for example, the date of the postmark.
(Prior Code, § 150.38) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.39 REMOVAL OR DEMOLISHING DWELLING; SALE OF MATERIALS; CREDITING
PROCEEDS.
   If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Inspector, he or she shall
sell the materials of the dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of the sale
against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall
be deposited in the Superior Court of the county, such remaining funds to be
secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the
court.
(Prior Code, § 150.39) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.40 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a decision
rendered by the Board of Commissioners shall have the right, within 30 days
after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the
superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the Inspector pending a
final disposition of the cause, as provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 150.40) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.41 ABANDONED STRUCTURES AND CLOSING OF VACATED DWELLINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may provide for the repair, closing or
demolition of any abandoned structure which the Board of Commissioners finds to
be a health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or
rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a
threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities. Such repair, closing or demolition of such
structure shall be pursuant to the same provisions and procedures as are
prescribed in this chapter and in other codes adopted by the town as are
prescribed herein for the repair, closing or demolition of dwellings found to
be unfit for human habitation.
   (B)   Dwellings ordered vacated by the Inspector or Board of Commissioners
shall have all outer doors firmly locked and basement, cellar, and first story
windows barred or boarded to prevent entry, and shall not again be used for
human habitation until written approval is secured from the Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 150.41) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.42 COSTS; LIEN ON PREMISES.
   (A)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector, including
court costs and attorney fees and any other costs associated with a proceeding
hereunder, shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was
incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected
as a lien for special assessment provided by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10 as
now exists or as hereafter amended or changed or replaced or rewritten.
   (B)   If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Inspector, he or she
shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures
or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the
proceeds of the sale against the costs as hereinabove set out and any balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Inspector, which
proceeds representing any balance shall be secured in a manner directed by the
court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of the court.
(Prior Code, § 150.42) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.43 OTHER REMEDIES AGAINST VIOLATION.
   If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted,
maintained or used in violation of this chapter or any valid order or decision
of the Inspector or Board of Commissioners made pursuant to this chapter (or
any part thereof) or under any code adopted under authority of state law, the
Inspector or Board of Commissioners may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the
occupancy of the dwelling, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or
about the premises of the dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 150.43) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.44 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
chapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4, and the enforcement
of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.
(Prior Code, § 150.44) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
§ 150.45 VIOLATIONS
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same, or to vacate and
close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector duly made
and served as herein provided within the time specified in such order, and each
day that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with such order
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to any section of this
chapter, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in such order for its repair, alterations or improvement or its
vacation and closing, and each day that such occupancy continues after such
prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 150.98) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 150.99) (Ord. passed 10-1-1984)
CHAPTER 151: NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE CODE
Section
   
151.01   Title; references
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Scope
   
151.04   Conflict with other provisions
   
151.05   Application of building codes
   
151.06   Unsafe nonresidential structures
   
151.07   Designation of Enforcement Officer
   
151.08   General powers of Enforcement Officer
   
151.09   Complaint and hearing and notice of lis pendens
   
151.10   Order
   
151.11   Service of complaints or orders
   
151.12   Failure to comply with order; adoption of ordinance
   
151.13   Limitation on orders and ordinances
   
151.14   Vacated and closed nonresidential structures
   
151.15   Recordation of ordinances
   
151.16   Lien for costs
   
151.17   Alternative remedies
   
151.18   Ejectment
   
151.19   Appeals
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 TITLE; REFERENCES.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
“Nonresidential Structure Code”.
   (B)   Throughout this chapter, references to STRUCTURE shall include
building, singular or plural.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. Any person, firm or corporation who has the charge, care or control
of any structure as agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner
or is responsible for the management, maintenance, operation, renting, leasing
or sale of any property, or who makes application for or seeks a permit or
certificate on behalf of the owner of any property or who in any other way
represents the owner of the property in any particular case under this chapter.
   BASIC STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS. The parts of a structure that provide the
principal strength, stability, integrity, shape and safety of the structure,
including, but not limited to, plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers,
stairs, subflooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window
frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry and
all other essential components.
   BUILDING. Any structure, place or other construction, or part thereof, built
for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property
of any kind.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Town Building Inspector appointed as such to
administer this chapter and shall include any agent of the Inspector who is
authorized by the Inspector.
   DETERIORATED. A structure that is unsafe for use and can be repaired,
altered or improved to comply with all the minimum standards established by
this chapter, at a cost not to exceed 50% of its value, as determined by
finding of the Inspector.
   DILAPIDATED. A structure that is unsafe for use and cannot be repaired,
altered or improved to comply with the minimum standards required of this
chapter, at a cost to repair, alter or improve that exceeds 50% of the current
value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Housing Inspector, Hearing Officer or other person
charged with the enforcement of this chapter and who may also be referred to as
“public officer”.
   HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARD. The structure has not been properly maintained to
meet the requirements of this chapter so that the health or safety of its
occupants or others is jeopardized.
   NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. Any structure occupied or intended to be occupied,
in whole or in part, for a use other than a dwelling, home, residing place,
living space or sleeping space for one or more people, either permanently or
transiently.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a structure is used or intended to be used.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who is a tenant or has actual possession of a
structure.
   OWNER. The holder of title in fee simple or any lesser interest in title,
who alone or jointly, or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have title to any structure with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or
      (2)   Shall have charged care or control of any structure, as owner or
agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person representing the actual
owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he
were the owner.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations and corporations who have
interests of record in a structure and any who are in possession thereof.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon and
any appurtenances thereto and improvements thereon.
   SAFE. A condition which is not likely to do harm to people or property.
   STRUCTURALLY SOUND. Substantially free from flaw, defect, decay or
deterioration to the extent that the structure, any basic structural element or
structural member is capable of adequately or safely accomplishing the purpose
for which it was intended or designed.
   STRUCTURE. Anything, or any part thereof, constructed, erected or placed
with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed
location on the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, mobile
structures, billboards, freestanding signs and fences, except a currently
operable licensed vehicle.
   UNSAFE. A condition that is dangerous to the public health, safety and
welfare and/or a condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to people or
property if not corrected or stopped.
   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE. Any structure designed for the storage of goods
or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes, which has not been
used for that purpose for at least one year and has not been converted to
another use.
   VACATE AND CLOSE. Properly board and secure a structure from intrusion or
entry by trespassers or other people except as necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter.
   VALUE, CURRENT. The assessed tax value of a structure determined by the
County Tax Department or the fair market value as determined by a qualified
real estate appraiser with proper credentials to determine fair market value.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.03 SCOPE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted by state law, it is the intent of
this chapter to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of nonresidential
structures as a public necessity caused by conditions that are dangerous to the
public health, safety and welfare. This chapter is remedial and shall secure
the public health, safety and welfare through structurally sound and safe
nonresidential structures which are now in existence or which may be built
within the town.
   (B)   This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued use of all nonresidential structures and does not replace or modify
requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, demolition,
removal, alteration or use of the structure, equipment or facilities contained
therein.
   (C)   Every nonresidential structure and the premises on which it is
situated shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not the
structure was constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of
this chapter, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been
issued for the use or occupancy of the structure or for the installment or
repair of equipment or facilities.
   (D)   The powers conferred by this chapter are in addition to and
supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.04 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, structure, fire, safety or health provisions of
this code, other ordinances and regulations of the town, the provisions which
establish the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion
and protection of public health and safety shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.05 APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODES.
   The State Building Code and the State Rehabilitation Code, as amended from
time to time and any new editions adopted by the State Building Code Council,
including general construction, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and
ventilation shall govern all repairs, alterations and/or additions to any
existing nonresidential structure. Any unidentified violations under the State
Building Code or Rehabilitation Code shall be certified by the Structure
Inspector to the Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.06 UNSAFE NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   All nonresidential structures shall be free of all conditions that are
dangerous and injurious to the public health, safety and welfare of occupants
or others. Without limitation of the foregoing requirement, the basic
structural elements of all nonresidential structures shall be structurally
sound and the existence of any of the following conditions shall be deemed to
be dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare for which a public
necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of the structure and
must be corrected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Access. Access is not provided to all rooms within a structure such
that reasonable exit is available if necessitated by circumstances; or all
entrances and exits do not meet the standards set forth in the State Building
Code; or safe, continuous and unobstructed exit is not provided from the
interior of the structure to the exterior at street or grade level; or
platforms and steps are not provided, where appropriate, to serve exits or are
not maintained in a safe condition.
   (B)   Attachments, extensions, signs and the like. Loose wood, loose or
broken plastic or other dangerous objects or similar hazardous conditions; or
loose and insufficiently anchored overhanging objects or attachments that are
not safe to use, not kept in sound condition and in good repair, or which
constitute a danger of falling on pedestrians or property, or objects and
elements protruding from structure walls or roofs which are unsafe or that are
not properly secured or which can create a hazard such as abandoned electrical
boxes and conduits, wires, sign brackets and other brackets and similar
objects; or canopies, metal awnings, standpipes, exhaust ducts, air
conditioners and similar overhanging extensions that are not maintained so as
to be free of missing, defective, rotting or deteriorated foundations,
supports, other members and basic structural elements; or improperly attached
gutters or downspouts that are located so as to cause a hazard to pedestrians
or property; or gutters and downspouts, if installed, that do not properly
collect, conduct and discharge the water from the roof and away from the
structure; or advertising signs attached or freestanding awnings, marquees and
their supporting members or basic structural elements and other similar
attachments that cause a safety hazard to the occupants or others.
   (C)   Boarding. All openings originally designed as windows, doors, loading
docks or other means of egress or ingress which have been temporarily closed by
boarding or another manner that are not secure and might allow unauthorized
admittance; or boarding that is not trim fit, sealed to prevent water
intrusion, and painted or stained to properly conform with the other exterior
portions of the structure; or boarding that is not maintained in a state that
secures the structure from any unauthorized admittance of people, animals or
birds.
   (D)   Building Code. Possible violations of the State Building Code and the
State Rehabilitation Code, as amended from time to time and any new editions
adopted by the State Structure Code Council, including general construction,
electrical, plumbing, mechanical and ventilation.
   (E)   Chimneys. Chimneys, flues and vent attachments thereto which are not
structurally sound; or chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing
equipment which are in use that do not provide sufficient draft to develop the
rated output of the connected equipment, or are not structurally sound and
safe, durable, smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gasses; or deterioration of external chimneys that causes leaning, sagging,
splitting, listing or buckling.
   (F)   Decay. Rotting, holes and other forms of decay.
   (G)   Doors, exterior and windows. Broken or missing exterior doors or
windows; or exterior doors or windows containing broken or cracked glass that
could be in danger of falling or shattering; or exterior doors or windows with
missing glass or their frames that are not weather-tight; or doors that are not
tight-fitting with frames of proper size and design or not free from rotten
wood; or windows without sashes of proper size and design, or not free from
rotten wood, broken joints or broken or loose mullions; or which have holes
that might permit animals or birds to enter the structure; or defective
protection or lack of weather protection for exterior doors or windows
including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other protective
covering.
   (H)   Doors, interior. Doors are not provided at all doorways leading to
bathrooms.
   (I)   Electrical, heating, plumbing. Lack of proper electrical, heating or
plumbing facilities which is unsafe or constitutes a health or safety hazard.
   (J)   Exterior surfaces. Exterior surfaces or finishes that are not weather-
tight, water-tight and painted or sealed with sufficient frequency to protect
the underlying surface from deterioration; or are not maintained in such
material or treated in such a manner as to prevent deterioration or crumbling;
or are not repaired or replaced with like or similar material according to its
original use; or have holes, cracks or rotted boards which permit outside air
or water to penetrate rooms or animals or birds to enter; or exterior surfaces
that have been painted which are not maintained generally free of peeling and
flaking or that may cause unsafe conditions due to a lack of maintenance; or
deterioration or crumbling of exterior stone, brick, plasters or mortars.
(Where 50% or more of the aggregate of any painted surface shall have peeling
or flaking or previous paint worn away, the entire surface shall be repainted
in order to prevent further deterioration.) Where a wall of a structure has
become exposed as a result of demolition of adjacent structures, such wall does
not have all doors, windows, vents or other similar openings closed with
material of the type comprising the wall; or the exposed wall is not painted,
stucco finished or bricked with like materials and sufficiently weatherproofed
to prevent deterioration of the wall.
   (K)   Feature, exterior. Deterioration of any exterior feature, including,
but not limited to, cornices, entablatures, wall facings and architectural
details, so as to create or permit the creation of any hazardous or unsafe
conditions; or that are deteriorated and causes delamination, instability, loss
of shape and form or crumbling; or exterior features that are not structurally
sound; or that contain rotten or weakened portions requiring repair and/or
replacement.
   (L)   Fire and the like. Such damage by fire, wind or other causes so as to
render the structure unsafe; or defects significantly increasing the hazards of
fire, accident or other calamities; or inadequate facilities for egress in case
of fire or panic.
   (M)   Floors. Floors that are not kept structurally sound or which have
improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded, or which have insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; or deterioration of
flooring, floor supports, horizontal members or basic structural elements that
causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling; or floors or flooring
that are not maintained in a safe manner and have no defects; or which might
admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the structure;
or are not maintained by renewal, repair, waterproofing or other suitable
means; or which have holes that might permit animals or birds to enter the
structure.
   (N)   Foundation. Foundation walls, piers or other basic structural elements
which are not maintained in a safe manner; or are not capable of supporting the
load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon; or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; or which are
deteriorated, decayed or damaged to the extent that causes leaning, sagging,
splitting, listing or buckling; or the structure’s strength and soundness are
questionable.
   (O)   Porches, stairs and the like. Exterior porches, landings, balconies,
stairways, stairs or fire escapes which are not structurally sound or free of
defects so as to be safe to use; or are incapable of supporting the load that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon; or that do not have banisters or
railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling.
   (P)   Premises. Structures including their premises that have insufficiently
protected holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions and other such
dangerous impediments on and around walks, driveways, parking lots, alleyways
and other areas which are accessible to and generally used by people on or
around the premises; or heaving, subsidence or cracking of sidewalks, steps or
pathways.
   (Q)   Roofs. Roofs that are not kept structurally sound; or with improperly
distributed loads, which are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used; or that are not supported properly or
that have rafters that are rotted, broken, sagging or have improperly supported
ends; or that are deteriorated or have horizontal members or other basic
structural elements that cause leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or
buckling; or that are not maintained in a safe manner; or are not maintained by
renewal, repair, waterproofing or other suitable means; or with loose shingles
that may fall on people or property; or that have defects which might admit
rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the structure; or
which have holes that might permit animals or birds to enter the structure.
   (R)   Unsanitary and the like. Structures with unsanitary conditions,
dilapidation, decay or disrepair which is unsafe or dangerous to the health and
safety of the occupants or others; or structures including their premises that
have accumulations of garbage, trash or rubbish, which creates health and
sanitation problems; or the collection of unreasonable or excessive amounts of
garbage or rubbish in or near the structure which may attract rodents and
insects or become breeding places for rodents and insects; or garbage and solid
waste that is not placed in approved containers or stored in a safe and
sanitary manner in the structure or on the premises.
   (S)   Ventilation and the like. Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating
or sanitary facilities so as to be unsafe or to endanger the health, safety or
general welfare of the occupants or others.
   (T)   Walls, exterior. Exterior walls or vertical supports that are not
structurally sound, or not maintained in sound condition and good repair and
free from defects and damages, or are not capable of bearing imposed loads
safely; deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical support that causes
leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling; or structural or load bearing
walls that are bowed or out of plumb and not structurally sound; or exterior
walls that are not substantially weather-tight and water- tight or not
impervious to the adverse effects of weather.
   (U)   Walls, interior. Interior walls, vertical studs, partitions,
supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or other basic structural elements
or members that list, lean or buckle or are rotted, deteriorated or damaged to
such an extent as to render the structure unsafe; or that have holes or cracks
which might admit animals or birds; or structural or load bearing walls that
are bowed or out of plumb and not structurally sound.
   (V)   Combination. Any combination of conditions which in the judgment of
the public officer renders any structure unsafe or dangerous or injurious to
the health, safety or general welfare of the owners, occupants or others.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.07 DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Enforcement Officer is hereby designated as the public officer to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and to exercise the powers and duties
set forth herein.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.08 GENERAL POWERS OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   The Enforcement Officer shall have such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out, enforce and effectuate the purposes and provisions of
this chapter, including, and without limiting, the generality of the foregoing
and in addition to others herein granted, the following powers.
   (A)   Investigations.
      (1)   To undertake an investigation of nonresidential structures in the
town to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance with
the minimum requirements of this chapter so that the safety or health of the
occupants or others are not jeopardized; and
      (2)   To undertake a preliminary investigation whenever it appears that
any nonresidential structure has not been properly maintained so that the
safety or health of its occupants or others are jeopardized for failure of the
property to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises and nonresidential
structures at all reasonable times when necessary for the purpose of making
examinations and investigations pursuant to a duly issued administrative
inspection warrant in accordance with G.S. § 15-27.2 or with the permission of
the owner, the owner’s agent, a tenant or other person legally in possession of
the premises; provided, that such entries shall be made in such a manner so as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession and
shall otherwise be in accordance with the provisions of applicable law.
   (C)   Hearings and the like. To conduct hearings, administer oaths and
affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence, make findings of
fact and issue orders as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Periodic inspections. To conduct quarterly periodic examinations and
inspections of nonresidential structures to determine compliance with the
requirements of this chapter following the hearing and a determination that a
structure is unsafe and a health or safety hazard and an order issued that it
be repaired, altered or improved, vacated and closed, removed and/or
demolished.
   (E)   Delegation of functions. To delegate any of these powers and functions
and others under this chapter to such officers and agent as he or she may
designate.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.09 COMPLAINT AND HEARING AND NOTICE OF LIS PENDENS.
   (A)   Complaint and hearing. If the preliminary investigation of a
nonresidential structure discloses evidence of conditions set forth in §
151.06, the Enforcement Officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner and parties in interest in the structure a complaint. The complaint shall
state the charges and contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the
Enforcement Officer at a place within the county scheduled not less than ten
days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner
and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the
place and time fixed in the complaint; and that rules of evidence prevailing in
courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the
Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Notice of lis pendens. Upon mailing or otherwise serving the complaint
and notice of hearing pursuant to division (A) above, and within a reasonable
time thereafter, the Enforcement Officer shall file with the office of the
Clerk of Superior Court for the county a notice of lis pendens in the manner
and form provided for in G.S. § 1-116. Such notice shall be served on the
owners and parties in interest in the nonresidential structure in the same
manner as the complaint and notice of hearing. Upon a finding by the
Enforcement Officer, after a hearing pursuant to division (A) above, that the
structure is not in violation of this chapter, or upon certification after
inspection that the structure has been repaired or demolished in accordance
with an order issued pursuant to §
151.10, the Enforcement Officer shall cause the notice of lis pendens filed
pursuant to this section to be cancelled of record.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.10 ORDER.
   (A)   If, after notice and a hearing, as provided for in this chapter, the
Enforcement Officer determines that the nonresidential structure is a health
and/or safety hazard and has not been properly maintained so that the health or
safety of its occupants or others is jeopardized because of conditions of the
structure and premises set forth in §
151.06, the Enforcement Officer shall state in writing findings of fact to
support the determination and shall cause an order to be served upon the owner.
   (B)   The order may require the owner to take remedial action, within a
reasonable time specified, as follows:
      (1)   An order may require the owner to repair, alter or improve the
nonresidential structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum
requirements of this chapter or to vacate and close the nonresidential
structure for any use; and
      (2)   An order may require the owner to remove or demolish the
nonresidential structure if the cost of repair, alteration or improvement of
the structure would exceed 50% of its then current value.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.11 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS OR ORDERS.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Enforcement Officer under this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or
certified mail, and in conjunction therewith may also be served by regular
mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is
refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten
days after the mailing. The person mailing the complaint or order by regular
mail shall certify that fact and the date thereof and such certificate shall be
conclusive in the absence of fraud. If regular mail is used, a notice of the
pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected.
   (B)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Enforcement Officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the Enforcement Officer makes an affidavit to that
effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such owners or other
persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in
the town at least once no later than the time that personal service would be
required under the provisions of this section. When service is made by
publication, a copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
   (C)   Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or
have served upon him or her any complaint, notice or order herein provided for
shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner
or party in interest or any other person.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.12 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER; ADOPTION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential structure to
fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same or to vacate and
close or to remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Enforcement Officer
duly made and served in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within
the time specified in such order, and each day that any such failure, neglect
or refusal to comply with such order continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential structure,
with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §
151.10 to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed
in such order for its repair, alteration, improvement or its vacation and
closing, and each day that such occupancy continues after such prescribed time
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (C)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or to vacate and close the nonresidential structure, the Board of Commissioners
may adopt an ordinance ordering the Enforcement Officer to proceed to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter with respect to the particular structure
that the Enforcement Officer found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of
its occupants or others. Following adoption of an ordinance, the Enforcement
Officer may cause the structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be
vacated and closed. The Enforcement Officer may cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any such structure so closed a placard with the following words:
“This structure is unfit for any use; the use or occupation of this structure
for any purpose is prohibited and unlawful”. Any person who occupies or
knowingly allows the occupancy of a structure so posted shall be guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor.
   (D)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
nonresidential structure, the Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance
ordering the Enforcement Officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this
chapter with respect to the particular structure that the Enforcement Officer
found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of its occupants or others. No
ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of the structure until the
owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity
with the minimum requirements established in this chapter by removing the
conditions set forth in §
151.06. A reasonable time to bring the structure into conformity with the
Nonresidential Structure Code shall be deemed to be 120 days from the date the
Inspector notifies the owner in writing. Following adoption of an ordinance,
the Enforcement Officer may cause the structure to be removed or demolished.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.13 LIMITATION ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Historic landmark or district. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, if the nonresidential structure is designated as a local
landmark, listed in the National Register of Historic Places or is designated a
historical property by the Board of Commissioners of the town and the Board
determines, after a public hearing, that the structure is of individual
significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the district, and
the structure has not been condemned as unsafe, the order of the Enforcement
Officer issued pursuant to §
151.10 may only require that the structure be vacated and closed until it is
brought into compliance with the minimum requirements established in this
chapter by removing the conditions set forth in §
151.06.
   (B)   Vacant manufacturing facility or vacant industrial warehouse.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the order of the
Enforcement Officer issued pursuant to §
151.10 may not require repairs, alteration or improvement to be made to vacant
manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse facilities to preserve
the original use. The order may require such structure to be vacated and
closed, but repairs may be required only when necessary to maintain structural
integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard that cannot be remedied by
ordering the structure closed for any use.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.14 VACATED AND CLOSED NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES; ORDINANCE.
   (A)   If the Board of Commissioners has adopted an ordinance or the
Enforcement Officer has issued an order requiring the nonresidential structure
to be repaired or vacated and closed and the structure has been vacated and
closed for a period of two years pursuant to the ordinance or order, the board
may make findings that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to
repair, alter or improve such structure and that the continuation of the
structure in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health,
safety and welfare of the town in that it would continue to deteriorate, would
create a fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants,
would attract persons intent on criminal activities or would cause or
contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area. Upon
such findings, the Board may, after the expiration of the two-year period enact
an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the
following:
      (1)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential structure to bring it into
compliance with the minimum requirements by removing the conditions set forth
in §
151.06 is less than or equal to 50% of its then current value, the ordinance
shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the structure
within 90 days; or
      (2)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential structure to bring it into
compliance with the minimum requirements by removing the conditions set forth
in §
151.06 exceed 50% of its then current value, the ordinance shall require the
owner to demolish and remove the structure within 90 days.
   (B)   In the case of vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial
warehouse facilities, the structure must have been vacated and closed pursuant
to an order or ordinance for a period of five years before the Board of
Commissioners may take action under this section.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.15 RECORDATION OF ORDINANCES.
   An ordinance adopted by Board of Commissioners pursuant to §§
151.12 and
151.13(B) shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds and shall be
indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. If
the owner fails to comply with the ordinance, the Enforcement Officer shall
effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.16 LIEN FOR COSTS.
   (A)   The amount of the cost of any repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition caused to be made or done by the
Enforcement Officer pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien against the real
property upon which such costs were incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have
the same priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as the lien for
special assessment in G.S. 160A, Art. 10. Such costs is also a lien on any
other real property of the owner located within the town limits except for the
owner’s personal residence. The additional lien provided in this subsection is
inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment.
   (B)   If the nonresidential structure is demolished and removed by the
Enforcement Officer, the Enforcement Officer shall offer for sale the
recoverable materials of the structure and any personal property, fixtures or
appurtenances found in or attached to the structure and shall credit the
proceeds of the sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or demolition and
any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the
Enforcement Officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such
court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of such court in a special proceeding brought
before the Clerk of Superior Court for said purpose.
   (C)   Repairs, alterations, improvements or vacating and closing or removals
or demolitions may be made under the supervision of the Enforcement Officer, or
he or she may let the same to contract on competitive bids or by private
contract if no bids are received.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.17 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor shall enforcement of one
remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of the other remedies provided
in this chapter or in other chapters or articles of the town code or any other
laws.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.18 EJECTMENT.
   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a nonresidential
structure, the Enforcement Officer may cause a civil action to be filed in the
name of the town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate shall be in the
nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming
as parties-defendant any person occupying the structure. The Clerk of Superior
Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a
magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the
issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly
served, and if at the hearing the Enforcement Officer produces a certified copy
of an ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to §
151.12 authorizing the Enforcement Officer to proceed to vacate the occupied
structure, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the nonresidential
structure and premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment
ordering that the structure and premises be vacated shall be enforced in the
same manner as the judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as
provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as
provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential
structure who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary
ejectment proceeding pursuant to this section unless such occupant was served
with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment
proceeding that the Board has ordered the Enforcement Officer to proceed to
exercise his or her duties under §
151.12 to vacate and close or remove and demolish the structure.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.19 APPEALS.
   Any person who is aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a
decision rendered by the Board of Commissioners shall have the right, within 30
days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to petition the
superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the Inspector pending a
final disposition of the cause. A person aggrieved by a decision or order of
the public officer shall have the remedies provided by state law.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 7-20-2010)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Objectives
   
152.05   Definitions
   
152.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
152.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
152.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
152.09   Compliance
   
152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.11   Interpretation
   
152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
152.25   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
152.26   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
152.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.28   Corrective procedures
   
152.29   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.40   General standards
   
152.41   Specific standards
   
152.42   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
152.43   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established
floodways or nonencroachment areas
   
152.44   Floodways and nonencroachment areas
   
152.45   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO)
Legal Status Provisions
   
152.60   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention chapter
   
152.61   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has in G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21, Part 6;
G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Parts 3, 5 and 8 and G.S. Chapter 160A, Article
8, delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
Therefore, the Board of Commissioners does ordain as follows.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood-prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood-prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and bridges)
that are located in flood-prone areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common URBAN ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a “special flood hazard area”, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state or other source using FEMA
approved engineering methodologies. This ELEVATION, when combined with the
“freeboard”, establishes the “regulatory flood protection elevation”.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including ground waters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas have been defined as “Zone A”.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).
      (1)   An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards,
corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk
zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (2)   The FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY report includes flood insurance rate maps
(FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power. This term describes federal,
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the FREEBOARD
establishes the “regulatory flood protection elevation”.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.
      (1)   A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it
is located in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or
ship repair.
      (2)   The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or
service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. § 130A, Article 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”; or
         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a “Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program”.
      (2)   Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the State Department of Cultural
Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in
1980, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 470 et seq.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such an
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in
1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM
are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NONENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the “start of
construction” occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the “start of
construction” occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The “base flood elevation” plus the
“freeboard”. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE. In special flood hazard
areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with State and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including, but not limited to,
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.  Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill or any
other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
152.07.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial
improvement”. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in §§
152.25 through
152.29 and §§
152.40 through
152.45 is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable,
of the town and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose governing
body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM), for the county, dated October 16, 2008, which are adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date:
      (1)   Panel 5455J, dated October 16, 2008;
      (2)   Panel 5464J, dated October 16, 2008;
      (3)   Panel 5465J, dated October 16, 2008; and
      (4)   Panel 5475J, dated October 16, 2008.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
152.07.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.25 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator, hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain
Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.26 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION. PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
152.07, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
152.07;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or nonencroachment area(s) as
determined in §
152.07;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
152.07,
152.27 or
152.42;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be flood-proofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or flood-proofed;
      (3)   If flood-proofing, a flood-proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65)
with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited
to, installation, exercise and maintenance of flood-proofing measures;
      (4)   A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
152.41(D)(3) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE
and A1-30.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
152.41(F) and (G) are met; and
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit;
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
152.07;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or nonencroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable;
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30;
and
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable), (i.e.,
parking, building access and limited storage only).
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates:
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit;
         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the
reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment of
the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven-
day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project;
and
         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Flood-proofing certificate: if nonresidential flood-proofing is
used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a flood-
proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational
plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual
start of any new construction.
         (a)   It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the flood-proofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea
level.
         (b)   Flood-proofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same.
         (c)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data,
the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval.
         (d)   Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
         (e)   Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design
shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/
occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30 and
the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an
engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of §
152.41(C)(2).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer’s
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions: the following structures, if located
within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/flood-proofing
certification requirements specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
152.41(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
152.41(G); and
         (c) Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
152.41(H).
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.27 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime Control
and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA);
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and nonencroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
152.44 are met;
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
152.26(C);
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been flood-
proofed, in accordance with the provisions of §
152.26(C);
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
152.26(C);
   (I)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.26(C) and §
152.41(B);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways or nonencroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter;
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with §
152.07, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or nonencroachment area data available from a
federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to §
152.42(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
nonencroachment area data has been provided in accordance with §
152.07, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any floodway data or
nonencroachment area data available from a federal, state or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the base flood elevation, advise the property owner of the option to apply for
a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the letter of
map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file;
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974,
being 5 U.S.C. §§ 552a et seq., as amended;
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
152.28;
   (T)   Review, provide input and make recommendations for variance requests;
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with §
152.07 of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including letters of
map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs; and
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR).
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.28 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring
the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.29 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners (Appeal Board) as established by the town,
hereinafter referred to as the “Appeal Board”, shall hear and decide requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
152.05, provided provisions of §
152.29(I)(2), (I)(3) and (I)(5) have been satisfied, and such facilities are
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; and/or
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
152.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25
per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the state upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
nonencroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or flood-proofed
to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the State Department of
Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least
30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These include, but are
not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water
heaters and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, nonencroachment
area or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, nonencroachment area or
stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction or replacement
meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
152.29(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or flood-proofed to at least the
regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the
provisions of §
152.26(C).
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation shall apply.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
152.07 or §
152.42, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
152.40, are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05. Structures located in A, AE, AO and A1-30 Zones may be flood-proofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are water-tight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the flood-proofing elevation
shall be in accordance with §
152.45(B). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in §
152.26(C), along with the operational and maintenance plans.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes, adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is
above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of §
152.41.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of flood waters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow flood waters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of flood waters
in both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure; and/or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages and the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
      (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood
waters;
      (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
152.40(A);
      (6)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.40(D); and
      (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of §
152.41(D)(3).
   (I)   Other. An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square
feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation
or flood-proofing certificate. Elevation or flood-proofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with §
152.26(C).
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.42 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
152.07, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
152.40, shall apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet
each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined- based on the following criteria.
      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or flood-proofed in accordance with standards in §§
152.40 and
152.41.
      (2)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of §§
152.41 and
152.44.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such
base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with §
152.07 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or flood-proofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05. All other applicable provisions of §
152.41 shall also apply.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.43 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
FLOODWAYS OR NONENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor nonencroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
152.40 and
152.41; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or nonencroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.44 FLOODWAYS AND NONENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or nonencroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.07. The floodways and nonencroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of flood waters that have erosion potential and carry
debris and potential projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in §§
152.40 and
152.41, shall apply to all development within such areas:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion
of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If §
152.44(A) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
152.41(C); and
         (b)   The no encroachment standard of §
152.44(A).
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.45 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
   (A)   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.07, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate.
   (B)   In addition to §§
152.40 and
152.41, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements.
      (1)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least four feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be flood-
proofed to the same level as required in §
152.45(A) so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below that level shall be water-tight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with §
152.26 and §
152.41(B).
      (3)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 152.60 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION CHAPTER.
   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted January 1, 2002 as amended,
and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding
instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance
of the town enacted on January 1, 2002, as amended, which are not reenacted
herein are repealed.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.61 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development or any part thereof for
which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2008)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   DESIGNATION OF HISTORICAL PROPERTY
      
III.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     An agreement between the town and the North Carolina
-        6-19-1973   Telephone Company allowing the company to construct
                     telephone lines and underground conduits within the town
                    
 
TABLE II: DESIGNATION OF HISTORICAL PROPERTY
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        11-21-1988  An ordinance designating Burris Hall as historic property
-        11-21-1988  An ordinance designating the Stewart- Braswell house as
                     historic property
-        -12-4-1995  Designates Efird Memorial Library building as historic
                     property
2020-01  7-28-2020   Designates Shubert property located at 203, 205, 207-209,
                     211 North Main Street as historic property
                    
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        3-18-1996   Grants franchise to Time Warner Entertainment for cable
                     television system
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
 
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section              Code Section
1-116                     151.09
1-593                     10.05
Chapter 7A                152.29
7A-228                    151.18
                          50.99,
                          90.99,
14-4                      150.44,
                          150.99,
                          151.99
14-4(a)                   10.99
14-4(b)                   70.99
14-269                    131.01
14-288.20                 31.05
15-27.2                   151.08
Chapter 18B               94.19
18B-201                   34.06
18B-202                   34.04
18B-1001                  112.02
19A-1 et seq.             Ch. 90
Chapter 20                72.99
20-4.01                   70.01
20-4.01(12b)              76.04
20-4.01(27h)              76.04
20-4.01(48c)              76.04
20-7                      76.05
20-50                     76.02,
                          76.04
20-138.2                  76.02,
                          76.04
20-156                    72.36,
                          72.55
20-219.11                 96.23
20-279.21                 76.06
20-309                    76.02,
                          76.04
42-29                     151.18
44A-I                     96.25
62-3(17)                  114.01
67-1 et seq.              Ch. 90,
                          90.20
105-113.77                112.01
Chapter 114               131.01
121-12(a)                 34.30
Chapter 130A              152.05
130A-190                  90.21,
                          90.40
130A-290(a)(6)            152.05
130A-290(a)(35)           152.05
130A-290(a)(36)           152.05
130A-311 et seq.          51.032
136-143                   96.28
143-21-6                  152.01
                          30.16,
143-33C                   34.21,
                          34.24
143-138 et seq.           51.032
143-138                   92.01
143-143.15                152.41
143-145(7)                150.02
159.7 et seq.             32.01
Chapter 160A, Article 19, 51.007
Part D
160A-7-2                  35.02
160A-8                    152.01
160A-10                   150.42
160A-12                   32.03
160A-19-3                 152.01,
                          151.16
160A-19-3C                34.21
160A-19-5                 152.01
160A-19-6                 150.01
160A-19-8                 152.01
160A-71(b)                30.16
160A-72                   30.20
160A-74                   30.19
160A-76                   114.16
160A-101                  35.01
160A-102                  35.01
160A-103                  35.01
160A-175                  10.99,
                          90.99
160A-175(c)               72.99
160A-175(d)               90.99
160A-175(e)               90.99
160A-176                  90.56
160A-181                  113.01
160A-186                  Ch. 90
160A-189                  131.02
160A-190                  131.02
160A-266(c)               32.03
160A-270                  32.03
160A-303                  96.15
160A-303.2                96.15
160A-320                  51.007
160A-499                  51.007
162-207(c)                51.007
Chapter 162A, Article 8   51.007
162A-201                  51.007
162A-211                  51.007
164-7                     10.14
166A-19.24                30.19
                          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Reference Code Section
Prior Code Reference Code Section
30.01                30.01
30.15                30.15
30.16                30.16
30.17                30.17
30.18                30.18
30.19                30.19
30.20                30.20
30.30                30.35
30.31                30.36
30.32                30.37
30.33                30.38
31.01                31.01
31.02                31.02
31.03                31.03
31.04                31.04
32.01                32.01
32.02                32.02
33.01                33.01
33.02                33.02
33.03                33.03
33.04                33.04
33.05                33.05
33.20                33.20
33.21                33.21
33.22                33.22
33.23                33.23
33.24                33.24
33.25                33.25
33.26                33.26
33.27                33.27
33.28                33.28
50.01                50.01
50.02                50.02
50.03                50.03
50.04                50.04
50.05                50.05
50.06                50.06
50.07                50.07
50.99                50.99
51.01                51.001
51.02                51.002
51.03                51.003
51.04                51.004
51.05                51.005
51.06                51.006
51.20                51.020
51.21                51.021
51.22                51.022
51.23                51.023
51.24                51.024
51.25                51.025
51.26                51.026
51.27                51.027
51.28                51.028
51.29                51.029
51.30                51.030
51.40                51.045
51.41                51.046
51.42                51.047
51.43                51.048
51.44                51.049
51.45                51.050
51.60                51.065
51.61                51.066
51.62                51.067
51.63                51.068
51.64                51.069
51.65                51.070
51.66                51.071
51.67                51.072
51.68                51.073
51.69                51.074
51.99                51.999
70.01                70.01
70.02                70.02
70.03                70.03
70.04                70.04
70.05                70.05
70.06                70.06
70.20                70.20
70.21                70.21
70.22                70.22
70.99                70.99
71.01                71.01
71.02                71.02
71.03                71.03
71.15                71.15
71.35                71.30
71.36                71.31
71.37                71.32
71.38                71.33
71.39                71.34
72.01                72.01
72.02                72.02
72.03                72.03
72.04                72.04
72.05                72.05
72.06                72.06
72.15                72.20
72.16                72.21
72.30                72.35
72.31                72.36
72.32                72.37
72.33                72.38
72.34                72.39
72.35                72.40
72.36                72.41
72.45                72.55
72.99                72.99
73.01                73.01
73.02                73.02
73.03                73.03
73.04                73.04
73.05                73.05
Ch. 74, Sch. I       Ch. 74, Sch. I
Ch. 75, Sch. I       Ch. 75, Sch. I
90.01                96.15
90.02                96.16
90.03                96.16
90.04                96.18
90.05                96.19
90.06                96.19
90.07                96.21
90.08                96.22
90.09                96.23
90.10                96.24
90.11                96.25
90.12                96.26
90.13                96.27
90.14                96.28
90.15                96.29
91.01                97.01
91.02                97.02
91.03                97.03
91.04                97.04
91.05                97.05
91.20                97.20
91.21                97.21
91.22                97.22
91.23                97.23
91.24                97.24
91.35                97.35
91.36                97.36
91.37                97.37
91.38                97.38
91.39                97.39
91.40                97.40
92.01                91.01
92.02                91.02
92.03                91.03
92.04                91.04
92.05                91.05
92.06                91.06
92.07                91.07
92.08                91.08
92.09                91.09
92.10                91.10
92.11                91.11
92.12                91.12
93.01                92.01
93.02                92.02
93.04                92.03
93.05                92.04
93.06                92.05
93.21                92.20
94.01                95.01
94.02                95.02
94.03                95.03
94.04                95.04
94.05                95.05
94.06                95.06
94.07                95.07
94.08                95.08
95.01                93.01
95.02                93.02
95.03                93.03
95.04                93.04
95.05                93.05
95.06                93.06
95.07                93.07
95.08                93.08
110.01               110.01
110.10               110.15
110.11               110.16
110.12               110.17
110.13               110.18
110.14               110.19
110.15               110.20
110.16               110.21
110.17               110.22
111.01               111.01
112.01               112.01
113.01               113.01
113.02               113.02
113.03               113.03
114.01               114.01
114.02               114.02
114.03               114.03
114.04               114.04
114.05               114.05
114.06               114.06
114.07               114.07
114.08               114.08
114.09               114.09
114.10               114.10
114.11               114.11
114.12               114.12
114.13               114.13
114.14               114.14
114.15               114.15
114.16               114.16
130.01               130.01
150.01               150.01
150.02               150.02
150.03               150.03
150.04               150.04
150.05               150.05
150.06               150.06
150.07               150.07
150.08               150.08
150.09               150.09
150.10               150.10
150.11               150.11
150.12               150.12
150.13               150.13
150.14               150.14
150.15               150.15
150.30               150.30
150.31               150.31
150.32               150.32
150.33               150.33
150.34               150.34
150.35               150.35
150.36               150.36
150.37               150.37
150.38               150.38
150.39               150.39
150.40               150.40
150.41               150.41
150.42               150.42
150.43               150.43
150.44               150.44
150.98               150.45
150.99               152.41
                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     51.020 -
                     51.030,
                     51.045 -
-        - -         51.050,
                     51.065 -
                     51.074,
                     51.999
-        - -         96.15 -
                     96.29
-        9-1-1964    Ch. 74, Sch. I
-        11-1-1965   Ch. 75, Sch. I,
                     72.38
-        1-30-1973   51.005
-        2-23-1973   Ch. 75, Sch. I
-        6-19-1973   TSO, Table I
-        10-1-1974   93.01 -
                     93.08
                     113.01 -
                     113.03,
-        2-4-1976    114.06,
                     114.14 -
                     114.16
-        10-2-1978   51.021
                     150.01 -
                     150.15,
-        10-1-1984   150.30 -
                     150.45,
                     150.99
-        11-21-1988  TSO, Table II
-        11-21-1988  TSO, Table II
-        2-19-1990   112.01
-        9-4-1990    72.36,
                     72.99
-        9-17-1990   72.55,
                     72.99
-        11-19-1990  33.20 -
                     33.28
-        7-1-1991    50.01,
                     50.99
                     96.01 -
-        1-13-1992   96.03,
                     96.99
-        12-21-1992  34.20 -
                     34.32
-        10-2-1995   Ch. 74, Sch. I
-        10-2-1995   131.01
-        12-4-1995   TSO, Table II
-        3-18-1996   TSO, Table III
-        5-4-1999    35.01
-        9-30-2003   51.032,
                     51.999
                     94.01 -
-        - -2004     94.22,
                     94.99
-        10-26-2004  51.031,
                     51.999
                     90.55,
-        10-26-2004  90.56,
                     90.99
-        3-7-2006    Ch. 74, Sch. I
-        3-21-2006   72.36
-        3-21-2006   95.04
                     90.01 -
                     90.09,
-        6-27-2006   90.20 -
                     90.25,
                     90.40,
                     90.99
                     132.01 -
2008-05  3-18-2008   132.09,
                     132.99
-        4-15-2008   Ch. 74, Sch. III
-        4-15-2008   Ch. 74, Sch. II
-        4-15-2008   71.35
-        4-15-2008   71.36
-        9-16-2008   52.01 -
                     52.11
-        10-21-2008  33.06
                     152.01 -
                     152.12,
                     152.25 -
                     152.29,
-        11-18-2008  152.40 -
                     152.45,
                     152.60,
                     152.61,
                     152.99
-        2-23-2010   34.01 -
                     34.08
-        5-18-2010   32.03
                     151.01 -
-        7-20-2010   151.19,
                     151.99
-        10-19-2010  Ch. 74, Sch. I
-        10-19-2010  35.02
-        11-11-2010  Ch. 74, Sch. I
-        2-19-2013   72.99,
                     Ch. 75, Sch. I
                     76.01 -
-        -           76.09,
                     76.99
-        -           90.10
-        12-17-2018  112.02
-        6-23-2020   31.05
2020-01  7-28-2020   TSO, Table II
-        1-19-2021   51.007
-        2-16-2021   Ch. 74, Sch. I
-        9-17-2024   131.02
                    
 
