BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Commissioner Ordinance 2025-03, passed 5-12-
2025; and
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service, 2025 Acts,
Pamphlet No. 3
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
COUNTY OFFICIALS
OF
BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY, INDIANA
COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
Carl Lienhoop (Chairman)
Larry Kleinhenz
Tony London
COUNTY COUNCIL
Michael Bell
Leah Beyer (President)
Mark E. Gorbett
Marcus Speer
Jorge R. Morales
Kim Bennett
Greg Patterson
                  
COUNTY ASSESSOR   Ginny Whipple
COUNTY AUDITOR    Pia O’Connor
COUNTY PROSECUTOR Lindsey Holden-Kay
COUNTY RECORDER   Tami Hines
COUNTY SHERIFF    Chris Lane
COUNTY SURVEYOR   Jake Fitzsimmons
COUNTY TREASURER  Barbara Hackman
COUNTY CLERK      Shari Lentz
COUNTY CORONER    Tom Barrett
                  
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE #2011- 02
ORDINANCE AMENDING, REVISING, COMPILING, CODIFYING, ADOPTING AND ENACTING THE
EXISTING ORDINANCES OF BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY, INDIANA AND OFFICIALLY ADOPTING THE
BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY CODE
   WHEREAS, Indiana Code 36-1-5-3 requires the legislative body of counties to
codify its ordinances into a complete and simplified code;
   WHEREAS, the Bartholomew County Commissioners most recently codified its
ordinances in 1994;and
   WHEREAS, there have been a number of amendments, revisions, deletions from
and additions to the County's ordinance since that time; and
   WHEREAS, the Bartholomew County Commissioners believe it to be appropriate
to update its existing County Code; and
   WHEREAS, Bartholomew County has reviewed its existing Code and Ordinances
and has identified those which should be part of the recodified Bartholomew
County Code; and
   WHEREAS, the Bartholomew County Commissioners believe that this codification
and adoption of the Bartholomew County Code is in the best interest of
Bartholomew County.
   NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF BARTHOLOMEW
COUNTY, INDIANA AS FOLLOWS:
   SECTION I:   The ordinances of Bartholomew County, Indiana, as amended,
revised, restated, compiled and codified are hereby adopted and shall be known
as the “Bartholomew County Code.”
   SECTION II.   The "Bartholomew County Code" as adopted herein shall consists
of the following titles and chapters:
TITLE PAGE
TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE
CERTIFICATION PAGE
PUBLIC OFFICIALS PAGE
TITLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE II - ADMINISTRATION
TITLE III - PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE IV - TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE V - GENERAL REGULATIONS
TITLE VI - BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE VII - GENERAL OFFENSES
TITLE VIII-LAND USAGE
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
PARALLEL REFERENCES
INDEX
      SECTION III.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
this code of ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this Ordinance except as the same are included, readopted and codified
or recodified in whole or in part in such code; provided however, that such
repeal shall not effect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right
or duty established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall
such repeal effect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, assessing fines
or fees, appropriating money, annexing or de-annexing territory, establishing
franchises, or granting of special rights to certain persons, authorizing
public improvements, authorizing issuance of bonds or the borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the code.
      SECTION IV.   Any and all additions or amendments to such code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of County
Commissioners to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in such code, such that reference to the Bartholomew County Code
shall be understood and intended to include such subsequent additions and
amendments.
      SECTION V.   Two copies of the Bartholomew County Code shall be kept on
file in the office of the County Auditor, or the Auditor's designee, to insert
in their designated places all amendments or new ordinances which indicate the
intention of the Bartholomew County Commissioners to make the same a part of
such code and to extract from such code all provisions which may be from time
to time repealed by the Board of County Commissioners. A copy of such code
shall be available to all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be
considered the official code of Bartholomew County, Indiana.
      SECTION VI.   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of
County Commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and
phrases of such code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph, section, article, division or chapter of such code shall be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections,
articles, divisions or chapters of such code.
      SECTION VII.   Whenever in this ordinance or in such code an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in
this ordinance or in such code the doing of any act is required or the failure
to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision
of this ordinance or of such code shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$2,500.00. The fine assessed for the violation of any ordinance requiring a
license may be the sum equal to the amount required by the ordinance to be paid
for such license, unless otherwise provided. Minimum fines for traffic
violations shall be $25.00 or as further addressed in the code, and the minimum
fines for load limit violations on county roads and bridges shall be $100.00
for as further addressed in the code.
      SECTION VIII.   In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
such code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by the County abated as
provided by law, and each day such condition shall continue shall be regarded
as a new and separate offense.
      SECTION IX.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
      SECTION X.   This ordinance shall be in full force and affect from and
after it's passage and approval as provided by law.
      PASSED ON FIRST READING THIS 31st DAY OF May, 2011.
                                 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF
                                 BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY, INDIANA
                                 Carl H. Leinhoop /s/
                                 Carl H. Leinhoop, Chairman
                                 Larry S. Kleinhenz /s/
                                 Larry S. Kleinhenz, Member
                                 Paul Franke /s/
                                 Paul Franke, Member
ATTEST:
By:   Barbara Hackman /s/
   Barbara Hackman, Auditor of
   Bartholomew County, Indiana
      PASSED ON SECOND READING AND ADOPTED THIS 13th DAY OF June, 2011.
                                 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF
                                 BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY, INDIANA
                                 Carl H. Leinhoop /s/
                                 Carl H. Leinhoop, Chairman
                                 Larry S. Kleinhenz /s/
                                 Larry S. Kleinhenz, Member
                                 Paul Franke /s/
                                 Paul Franke, Member
ATTEST:
By:   Barbara Hackman /s/
   Barbara Hackman, Auditor of
   Bartholomew County, Indiana
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   Codes property of county
   
10.18   County seal
   
10.19   Roles of County Auditor
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
"Bartholomew County Code", for which designation "code of ordinances",
"codified ordinances" or "code" may be substituted.
   (B)   Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of
the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGENCY. When used to designate a subordinate element of government, all
offices, departments, institutions, boards, commissions and corporations of the
county government and, when so specified, all offices, departments,
institutions, boards, commissions and corporations which receive or disburse
county funds.
      BOARD. Whenever the words BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, THIS BOARD or THE BOARD
are used, the words shall be construed to mean the governing body of the County
of Bartholomew, Indiana.
      BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS. The Board established pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-
900 which has the authority to hear and determine appeals regarding orders,
requirements, decisions or determinations in relation to a zoning ordinance and
which has the authority to approve or deny all special exceptions, special
uses, contingent uses and conditional uses.
      CLERK. The Clerk of the Circuit Court.
      CODE. Local government code of the County of Bartholomew, Indiana, which
is designated as "The Bartholomew County Code" or "this code".
      COMMISSION. The Plan Commission.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. When a statute requires that a notice be given, or
any other act be done, no later than a certain period of time before the filing
of any motion or the commencement of any proceeding, the computation of the
period shall not include the day for the filing of the motion or for the
commencement of the proceeding, but may include the day on which the notice is
given, or on which the act is done. When a statute requires that a notice be
given, or any other act be done, within a certain period of time after the
occurrence of any event or after the commencement of any proceeding, the
computation of the period shall not include the day on which the event occurred
or on which any proceeding commenced, but shall include the day on which the
notice is to be given, or on which the act is to be done.
      COUNTY. Bartholomew County, Indiana.
      COUNTY EXECUTIVE. The Board of Commissioners of Bartholomew County.
      DESIGNEE. Following an official of the county, the authorized agent,
employee or representative of the official.
      ET SEQ. Latin phrase meaning "and the following".
      GENDER. Words used in the masculine and shall include feminine and
neuter.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      I.A.C. Rules and regulations found in the Indiana Administration Code.
      I.C. State law found in the Indiana Code.
      MAY. The word may is permissive and discretionary.
      MONTH. A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
      MUST. The word is mandatory.
      NUMBER. A word importing the singular number only may, where the context
requires, extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one
person or thing; a word importing the plural number only may, where the context
requires, extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several
persons or things.
      OATH. Any form of attestation, affirmation or declaration by which a
person signifies that he or she is bound to perform an act or to speak
faithfully and truthfully and, in those cases, the words "swear" and "sworn"
shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
      ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS. The ordinances and resolutions of the County
of Bartholomew and all amendments including this code and its supplements.
      OWNER. As applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or a part of the building or land.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every kind of property, except real property.
      PLAN COMMISSION. The Commission established to carry out the duties of
I.C. 36-7-1-14.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Property not owned by a public entity.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park, or
other state, county, or municipal property.
      QUORUM. A majority of the members of a board, commission, committee or
council holding office, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
      REAL PROPERTY. Land, tenements and hereditaments.
      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where any provision shall require any act
to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given to any person,
the REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be
necessary in the prompt execution of the duty, or compliance with the notice.
      REGISTERED MAIL. Shall include certified mail with return receipt
requested.
      SHALL. The word is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE AND SUBSCRIPTION. The name of a person, mark or symbol appended
by him or her to a writing with intent to authenticate the instrument as one
made or put into effect by him or her.
      STATE, THE STATE and THIS STATE. The State of Indiana.
      STATE LAW REFERENCES. The Indiana Code (I.C.) and any subsequent
amendments.
      STREET. Includes all roads, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts,
squares, boulevards, viaducts or other public ways in the county which have
been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use for vehicular
traffic.
      SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by planning and development
laws of the state, including a fee interest, a life estate, a future interest,
a present possessory interest, or an equitable interest of a contract
purchaser.
      TENANT and OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, include any person
holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of the
building or land, either alone or with others.
      TIME. Includes words used in the past or present tense and includes the
future as well as the past and present.
      TREASURER. The Treasurer of Bartholomew County.
      WILL. Is a mandatory direction.
      WORDS AND PHRASES. According to the common and approved usage of the
language, but technical words and phrases and others that have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to the meaning.
      WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Any representation of words, letters or figures
whether by printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5) (Prior Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the county exercising the
powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Board
of Commissioners refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name
designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that
ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities
placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the
named board, bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its
effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to
which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former
section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section
or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides.
   (B)   The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty,
forfeiture or liability incurred under the section, unless the repealing
section so expressly provides.
   (C)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of
the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, to the
prosecution of offenses or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in a previous year and subsequently amended,
the previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by "(Prior
Code, §      )".
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.17 CODES PROPERTY OF COUNTY.
   All copies of the county code, except those sold by the county to private
individuals or given or sold to public libraries, shall be the property of the
county. Any copies delivered to elected or appointed officials shall not be
retained by the individuals after the expiration of their term(s) of office or
appointment.
(Prior Code, § 1-12)
§ 10.18 COUNTY SEAL.
   (A)   The proposed design by Catherine Burns of Bartholomew County to be
used for the Official Seal of Bartholomew County, a copy of which is made a
part of this resolution, is accepted and approved.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners adopts the design for the Official Seal of
Bartholomew County and proclaims that, from and after this date, the Official
Seal of Bartholomew County shall be as indicated in this resolution.
   (C)   The Official Seal of Bartholomew County is depicted on the
certification page of this code.
   (D)   The County Auditor shall be the custodian of the county's Seal and
affix it to documents and instruments, as required.
(Prior Code, § 1-13) (Res. 1990-03, passed 2-26-1990)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes a county to have a corporate seal, see I.C. 36-1-4-4
§ 10.19 ROLES OF COUNTY AUDITOR.
   (A)   Two copies of the county code shall be kept on file in the office of
the County Auditor, or the Auditor's designee, to insert in their designated
places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the Board
of County Commissioners to make the same a part of the code when the same shall
have been printed or reprinted in page form and to extract from the code all
provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Board of County
Commissioners. A copy of the code shall be available to all persons desiring to
examine the same and shall be considered the official code of the county.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the code, any ordinance or the law of the county to
be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this
section shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 1-14) (Ord. 1994-09, passed 6-6-1994) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation.
   (B)   Each day a violation of this code is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by statute
or a specific section of this code, any person convicted of an ordinance
violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 for each
independent offense or violation.
   (D)   The county may bring a civil action to enjoin any person from:
      (1)   Violating any ordinance regulation or prohibiting a condition or
use of property; or
      (2)   Engaging in conduct without a license if any ordinance requires a
license to engage in the conduct.
   (E)   The court may suspend all or any part of a penalty imposed for an
ordinance violation and may require as a condition of the suspension that the
defendant shall perform uncompensated work that benefits the community.
   (F)   Any person adjudged guilty of violating any provision of this code may
also be adjudged to pay the costs of prosecution.
   (G)   Whenever in this code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this code the doing of any action is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation
of any provision of this code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,500.
The fine assessed for the violation of any ordinance requiring a license may be
a sum equal to the amount required by the ordinance to be paid for the license,
unless otherwise provided. Minimum fines for traffic violations shall be $25 as
further addressed in Title VII of this code and the minimum fines for load
limit violations on county roads and bridges shall be $100 as further addressed
in Title VII of the code.
   (H)   In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of the code
shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by the county abated as provided
by law, and each day the condition shall continue shall be regarded as a new
and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 1-11) (Ord. 1994-09, passed 6-6-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Class C infractions, see I.C. 34-28-5-1 et seq., 34-28-5-4
   Infraction and ordinance violation enforcement proceedings, see I.C. 34-28-
5-1 et seq.
   Injunctions, see I.C. 36-1-6-4
   Maximum ordinance violation amounts, see I.C. 36-1-3-8
   Ordinance violations affecting real property and the county taking expenses
of compliance as a
    lien against the property, see I.C. 36-1-6-2
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
      
32.   COUNTY COUNCIL
      
33.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
34.   COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   FINANCE; FUNDS, TAXES
      
36.   FEES, LICENSES AND PERMITS
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   County boundaries
   
30.02   Election duties
   
30.03   Form of ordinance
   
30.04   Community services plan
   
30.05   Long-term economic strategy adopted by reference
   
30.06   Restricted addresses on county website
§ 30.01 COUNTY BOUNDARIES.
   The boundary of the county is as follows: beginning at the northeast corner
of Section 1, in Township 10 North, of Range 7 East; thence south to the
southeast corner of Section 13, in Township 8 North, of Range 7 East; thence
west to the southwest corner of Section 18, in Township 8 North, of Range 7
East; thence south following the range line to the intersection of the range
line and the Sand Creek; thence following the creek to its junction with the
East Fork of the White River; thence south following the river to a point 1,700
feet west of the southeast corner of Section 16, in Township 7 North, of Range
6 East; thence west to the southwest corner of Section 15, in Township 7 North,
Range 4 East; thence north to the northwest corner of Section 3 in Township 10
North of Range 4 East; thence east to the place of beginning.
(Prior Code, § 2-1)
Statutory reference:
   Division of state into counties, see I.C. 36-2-1 through I.C. 36-2-1-8
§ 30.02 ELECTION DUTIES.
   (A)   The members of the various precinct boards of election shall be
compensated for the performance of all the duties of their respective offices
for each election in the amounts for each respective office as follows.
      (1)   Each inspector shall be paid the sum of $55 and, in addition
thereto, the sum of $15 for the inspector’s services in calling at the Circuit
Court Clerk’s office for the precinct election supplies, and the sum of $15 for
the inspector’s services in the return of the precinct election supplies to the
Circuit Court Clerk’s office, regardless of whether these services are rendered
before, on or after the election day.
      (2)   Each judge, poll clerk, assistant poll clerk and election sheriff
shall be paid the sum of $55.
      (3)   Each judge of the opposite party from the inspector shall be paid
the sum of $10 for the judge’s services in accompanying the inspector in the
return of the precinct election supplies to the Circuit Court Clerk’s office
after the close of the election.
(Prior Code, § 2-50)
   (B)   In addition to the per diem compensation paid to each member of the
election boards, each precinct election officer shall be paid a meal allowance
in the amount of $15 instead of being provided meals under I.C. 3-6-6-31(a), as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 2-51)
   (C)   (1)   Boards sent to confined electors. Absent voters’ boards which
are sent to confined electors shall be paid a per diem allowance of $50 and a
sum for mileage equal in rate to that rate then currently paid to state
officers and employees.
      (2)   Boards assigned to County Clerk’s office. Absent voters’ boards
assigned to the Circuit Court Clerk’s office during the period from 30 days
before election day through the day before election day shall be paid a per
diem allowance of $50.
      (3)   Boards which are assigned to deliver absentee voters’ ballots.
Absent voters’ boards that are assigned to deliver the absentee voters’ ballots
to the precincts on election day shall be paid a per diem allowance of $50 and
a sum for mileage equal in rate to that rate then currently paid to state
officers and employees.
      (4)   Training sessions. If the county election board conducts a training
session for the members of the precinct boards of election and the absent voter
boards as permitted by law, each member shall be paid a per diem allowance of
$10 for attending the training session.
(Prior Code, § 2-52)
   (D)   (1)   The position of Precinct Election Sheriff shall be eliminated
from each Precinct Election Board in the county effective immediately.
      (2)   Beginning with the general election to be conducted in November,
1995, and continuing for every primary and general election to be held
thereafter, the precinct election judges shall perform the duties and have the
rights of the election sheriffs of each precinct in the county.
(Prior Code, § 2-53)
(Ord. 1993-09, passed 7-26-1993; Ord. 1995-07, passed 7-31-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes the county executive to fix the compensation paid for elections,
see I.C. 3-6-6-27
§ 30.03 FORM OF ORDINANCE.
   All ordinances which are of a general and permanent nature and which would
amend the county code shall be in the form depicted on the following page.
(Prior Code, § 2-565)
§ 30.04 COMMUNITY SERVICES PLAN.
   The early intervention plan, as submitted by the Early Intervention Team, is
as follows:
   Early Invention Plan
   The purpose of this document is to establish a community services plan for
early intervention to provide services to adjudicated delinquents, alleged
delinquents, or children identified to be at risk of becoming delinquents or
children in need of services in Bartholomew County, Indiana.
   The Early Intervention Team consisted of: Juvenile Referee Jim Holland,
Chief Probation Officer, Victor Parker, Child Welfare Supervisor, Helen
Jackson, Bill Barton representing Bartholomew Consolidated School Corporation,
Amy Keller representing Flat Rock-Hawcreek School Corporation, Eugene Eckrote
and Joe Bill Whipker representing the Bartholomew County Council, Cindy Helmich
representing Step Ahead,(Shirley Arney representing Quinco Community Health
Center, Therese Farley, CASA director, and County Director Keith Weedman,
(Hereafter, referred to as “the team”).
   The team reviewed and considered existing publicly and privately funded
programs that are available or that could be made available in the county to
provide supportive services to or for the benefit of children above described
without removing the children from the family home.
   The programs reviewed were:
      After care services
      Alcohol and drug education program
      Alternative education programming
      Anger management
      CASA and GAL services
      Case management services
      Community Based Family Resource
      Community service work
      Crisis intervention services
      Custody home studies
      Day treatment services
      Detention services
      Developmental services
      Diagnostic and evaluation services
      Domestic Violence Prevention and Treatment Fund
      Emergency shelter care services
      Family Planning of Central and Southern Indiana
      Family Services of Bartholomew Co.
      First Steps Program
      Flat Rock-Hawcreek Family Center
      Head Start
      Healthy Families Program
      Home based services
      Home based services funded through Medicaid Rehabilitation Option
      Homemaker services
      House arrest
      Independent living skills training
      Job search and job retention services
      Local Prevention Services Coalitions
      Mentoring
      Out patient counseling services
      Parent/child interactions
      Parenting classes
      Preventative care services
      Recreational activities
      Respite care
      Sexual Offense Services Prevention grant
      Short term emergency psychiatric care
      Study groups
      Supervised visitation
      Teen Court
      Work crew
      Youth Challenge Program
      Youth Services Bureau
   The objectives of the plan are:
      1.   Promoting the welfare of children and self sufficiency of families,
with children at risk of abuse or neglect, dependency, or delinquency;
      2.   Preventing or reducing the number of cases of child abuse,
delinquency, or neglect that may require juvenile court intervention;
      3.   Coordinating available resources to promote efficiency and avoid
duplication of programs and services;
      4.   Reducing or minimizing the cost of providing services to children
and families with children who are or may become delinquent children; and
      5.   Reducing or eliminating to the extent possible the need to remove
children from their parents, guardians, or custodians for foster home care or
institutional placement.
   The team shall meet, at least, annually.
   The team recommends the following:
      1.   The Step Ahead Council must take a leading role in coordinating the
community’s efforts to intervene earlier in the lives of children at risk. The
council could possibly become a clearing house, or establish one, concerning
services to children. The council should encourage agencies to come together to
address the community’s needs. Cooperation between ail agencies affecting
children must be encouraged. Whenever possible, eliminate duplicity of services
and case managers.
      2.   There should be a coordinated community effort to follow up on
referrals made to the Bartholomew County Office of Family and Children (OFC)
and the Probation Department when they do not become formally involved with the
child because of unsubstantiated abuse, neglect or delinquency. The Probation
Department and OFC should make referrals to other agencies and programs in the
community at en early stage in the child's fife rather than waiting for the
problems to escalate.
      3.   We support the efforts of the Bartholomew Consolidated School
Corporation and Flatrock Hawcreek School Corporation to design a program to
address non attendance issues in the community. Bartholomew County needs one
(1) or more full time attendance officers to cooperate with law enforcement and
other agencies to keep children in school.
      4.   The Bartholomew County Office of Family and Children and Probation
Department should work closely with other community agencies.
      5.   The Bartholomew County Department of Public Health needs to be
responsive to issues involving children when requested.
      6.   First Call for Help should be incorporated into early Intervention
efforts.
      7.   Wise use of fiscal resources should always be an underlying theme in
all efforts made toward early intervention.
(Council Res. 98-14, passed - -1998)
§ 30.05 LONG-TERM ECONOMIC STRATEGY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The County Commissioners hereby approve the 2009 County Long-term Economic
Recovery Strategy Plan.
(Res. 2009-08, passed 12-21-2009)
§ 30.06 RESTRICTED ADDRESSES ON COUNTY WEBSITE.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners is required to establish a policy for
county departments to comply with the requirements of I.C. 36-1-8.5
specifically related to “covered persons” and the publicly accessible property
website managed by the County GIS Department.
      (2)   I.C. 36-1-8.5 provides a means for an individual defined as a
“covered person” to submit a written request to have their home address
restricted from disclosure on a public property database website. The
restricted information will not be made available to a member of the general
public.
      (3)   According to I.C. 36-1-8.5, only those individuals providing
information or verification required by this policy to be classified as a
“covered person” as herein defined are eligible:
         (a)   A judge;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer;
         (c)   A victim of domestic violence; or
         (d)   A public official.
      (4)   The following policy defines the procedure used for processing
those requests.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the follow definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Additional definitions and clarifications can be found by visiting the
website for the State General Assembly and searching for I.C. 36-1-8.5.
      JUDGE. An individual who holds or formerly held office as:
         (a)   A judge of the supreme court, court of appeals, tax court,
circuit court, superior court, municipal court, county court, federal court,
probate court, or small claims court; or
         (b)   A magistrate, commissioner, or juvenile referee of a court.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An individual who is employed or was formerly
employed as:
         (a)   A police officer (including a tribal police officer, a
correctional police officer, and a hospital police officer employed by a
hospital police department established under I.C. 16-18-4), sheriff, constable,
marshal, prosecuting attorney, special prosecuting attorney, special deputy
prosecuting attorney, the Securities Commissioner, or the Inspector General;
         (b)   A deputy of any of the persons specified in division (a);
         (c)   An investigator for a prosecuting attorney or for the Inspector
General;
         (d)   A conservation officer;
         (e)   An enforcement officer of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission; or
         (f)   An enforcement officer of the Securities Division of the Office
of the Secretary of State.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-4)
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. An individual who holds or formerly held office at any
time during the preceding four years in the executive or legislative branch of
the state or federal government or a political subdivision of the state or
federal government. The actual criteria are as follows:
         (a)   A position for which the duties include performance of some
sovereign power for the public’s benefit;
         (b)   Are continuing; and
         (c)   Are created by law instead of by contract.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-4.5)
      PUBLIC PROPERTY DATABASE WEBSITE. An internet website that:
         (a)   Is available to the general public over the internet;
         (b)   Does not require registration, subscription, or the creation of
a user name and password to search the website; and
         (c)   Connects a covered person’s home address to the covered person’s
name, so that a search of the website for the covered person’s name discloses
the covered person’s home address.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-5)
      VICTIM OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE. A victim of domestic violence who is
certified as a program participant in the address confidentiality program
established by the Attorney General under I.C. 5-26.5-2.
(I.C. 36-1-8.5-6)
   (C)   Duty to comply. The duty to prevent disclosure of an address as it
falls under I.C. 36-1-8.5 rests upon the County Auditor's Office regarding the
county website. The process to comply with this requirement is outlined below.
      (1)   Submit a written request.
         (a)   A covered person who wants to restrict access to the covered
person's home address by means of a public property database website must
submit a written request to the County Auditor's Office.
         (b)   The written request shall be submitted on the address
restriction form obtained from the Auditor's Office.
         (c)   Individuals that have moved and are still covered according to
statute must submit a new request and fee.
         (d)   Written requests are valid for up to one calendar year and must
be resubmitted each year at no additional fee. It is the responsibility of the
covered person to renew their request within the first month of the new year.
      (2)   Information or verification required for processing written
request. The following describes what information or verification is required
for a covered person's written request to be processed. The Auditor's Office
will verify that submission is valid and requestor is covered according to 36-
1-8.5.
         (a)   Judge. Provide a signed letter in paper copy stating current or
previous employment status as:
            1.   A judge of the supreme court, court of appeals, tax court,
circuit court, superior court, municipal court, county court, or small claims
court; or
            2.   A magistrate, commissioner, or juvenile referee of a court.
         (b)   Law enforcement officer. Provide a signed letter in paper copy
stating current or previous employment status as:
            1.   A police officer (including a correctional police officer),
sheriff, constable, marshal, prosecuting attorney, special prosecuting
attorney, special deputy prosecuting attorney, the Securities Commissioner, or
the Inspector General;
            2.   A deputy of any of the persons specified in division (C)(2)
(b)1.;
            3.   An investigator for a prosecuting attorney or for the
Inspector General;
            4.   A conservation officer;
            5.   An enforcement officer of the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission;
or
             6.   An enforcement officer of the Securities Division of the
Office of the Secretary of State.
         (c)   Victim of domestic violence. Provide a paper copy of proof of
program participation in the Attorney General Address Confidentiality Program.
         (d)   Public official. Provide a signed letter in paper copy stating
current or previous service as a public official who holds or formerly held
office at any time during the preceding four years in the executive or
legislative branch of the state or federal government, or a political
subdivision of the state or federal government.
      (3)   Person or department to receive and process written request.
Written requests regarding the redaction of a home address on the county
website shall be received and processed by the Auditor's Office. If a written
request for redaction of a home address is denied by the Auditor's Office, the
applicant may appeal to the Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   Fee structure. The following fee structure applies to applicants
making a written request under I.C. 36-1-8.5.
         (a)   Initial request. A $50 per parcel fee will be assessed for
individual requests.
         (b)   Additional requests. A $50 per parcel fee will be assessed for
any changes to the title of the parcel or relocation of the covered person.
         (c)   Annual renewal of initial request. There is no fee assessed for
the annual renewal of an individual's previous request.
         (d)   Deposits. All fees collected will be deposited to the County
General Fund.
   (D)   Result of changes to access of property information. The process of
restricting home addresses on the county website will have the following
consequences.
      (1)   The county website. Requests to restrict access to home addresses
affect either one or possibly multiple parcels that may display the home
address. A parcel's state key parcel identification number (PIN) will be added
to a built-in suppression list. The act of adding a parcel's PIN number to the
suppression list will redact all the information available for the affected
parcel(s). Performing a search on suppressed PINs will return no search results
nor display the parcel's location on the map.
      (2)   Internal county property record databases. Property information
stored on internal county databases will still exist and be made available to
the public per request, unless blocked by state statute.
   (E)   Immunity and litigation proceedings.
      (1)   It is the intention of the county to comply with the intent of the
state code to not make property information associated with a home address
accessible by means of removing the link between name and parcel information.
      (2)   The county may not be held liable for failure to timely restrict
disclosure of an address under this chapter unless the county's act or omission
constitutes gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.
   (F)   Reversal of privacy settings.
      (1)   The public access of removed information can only be done at the
request of the original covered person. Per the state code, an individual may
request reinstatement of their excluded information.
      (2)   Should any changes to the title of a covered parcel be made, the
existing residence will be removed from the list of confidential properties. A
new request will need to be made in order to have the parcel covered again.
   (G)   Confidentiality. All requests made to the Auditor's Office by a
covered person are confidential.
   (H)   Excluded properties. This policy is in effect for requestor's primary
residence only per I.C. 36-1-8.5-7. If the requestor owns or is involved in
additional properties that utilize the primary home address as the mailing
address, they will be displayed. If the requestor wishes to have those
addresses removed as well, the $50 fee will apply to each submission.
(Ord. 2018-07, passed 12-26-2018)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 36-1-8.5-6 was repealed by P.L. 180-2023, Sec. 3
Statutory reference:
   Confidentiality, see I.C. 36-1-8.5-11
   Duty to comply, see I.C. 36-1-8.5-7
   Immunity and litigation proceedings, see I.C. 36-1-8.5-12
   Reversal of privacy settings, see I.C. 36-1-8.5-9
CHAPTER 31: COUNTY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
31.01   Establishment
   
31.02   Regular and special meetings
   
31.03   Business hours
   
31.04   Three Commissioner districts
   
31.05   Electronic meeting policy
Statutory reference:
   County executive, see I.C. 36-2-2-2
   Election of the county executive and terms of office, see I.C. 36-2-2-3
   Meals and meal allowances, see I.C. 3-6-6-31
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The three-member Board of Commissioners duly elected pursuant to applicable
state law shall be the county executive and shall transact the business of the
county. The term of office for each Commissioner is four years beginning
January 1 following the election and continuing until a successor is elected
and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-56)
§ 31.02 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be held on Monday
of each week commencing at 10:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time unless a holiday
then Tuesday at 10:00 a.m.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners shall meet in the Commissioners’ Chambers,
Governmental Office Building, 440 Third Street, Columbus, Indiana 47201.
   (C)   Special meetings of the Board of Commissioners shall be called
pursuant to the applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-57) (Res. 1994-01, passed 1-5-1994)
Statutory reference:
   Regular meetings, see I.C. 36-2-2-6
   Special meetings, see I.C. 36-2-2-8
§ 31.03 BUSINESS HOURS.
   The Commissioners shall keep their offices open on each business day as
prescribed by applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-58)
Statutory reference:
   Business hours, see I.C. 36-2-2-10
§ 31.04 THREE COMMISSIONER DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The county executive shall divide the county into three districts that
are composed of contiguous territory and are reasonably compact. The county
executive must not cross precinct boundary lines and must divide townships only
when a division is clearly necessary to accomplish restricting. If necessary,
the County Auditor shall call a special meeting of the county executive to
establish or revise districts.
   (B)   The county is divided into three County Commissioner Election
Districts.
(Prior Code, § 2-59) (Ord. 1993-19, passed 12-28-1993; Ord. 1997-10, passed 8-
18-1997; Ord. 1997-15, passed 12-29-1997; Ord. 1998-02, passed 2-2-1998; Ord.
2021-08, passed 12-20-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Division of the county into three districts, see I.C. 36-2-2-4
§ 31.05 ELECTRONIC MEETING POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq., effective April 20,
2021 apply to this section.
      (2)   This section shall be known as the “Electronic Meeting Policy” of
the Board of Commissioners and shall apply to Commissioners’ meetings and
meetings of any committee appointed directly by the Board of Commissioners or
its presiding officer.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to divisions (C) and (E) below, any member may
participate in a meeting by any electronic means of communication that:
         (a)   Allows all participating members of the governing body to
simultaneously communicate with each other; and
         (b)   Other than a meeting that is an executive session, allows the
public to simultaneously attend and observe the meeting.
      (2)   A member who participates by an electronic means of communication:
         (a)   Shall be considered present for purposes of establishing a
quorum; and
         (b)   May participate in final action only if the member can be seen
and heard.
      (3)   All votes taken during a meeting at which at least one member
participates by an electronic means of communication must be taken by roll call
vote.
   (C)   (1)   At least 50% of the members must be physically present at a
meeting at which a member will participate by means of electronic
communication. Not more than 50% of the members may participate by an
electronic means of communication at that same meeting.
      (2)   A member may not attend more than 50% of the meetings in a calendar
year by an electronic means of communication, unless the member’s electronic
participation is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
      (3)   A member may attend two consecutive meetings (a set of meetings) by
electronic communication. A member must attend in person at least one meeting
between sets of meetings that the member attends by electronic communication,
unless the member’s absence is due to:
         (a)   Military service;
         (b)   Illness or other medical condition;
         (c)   Death of a relative; or
         (d)   An emergency involving actual or threatened injury to persons or
property.
   (D)   The minutes of a meeting at which any member participates by
electronic means of communication must:
      (1)   Identify each member who:
         (a)   Was physically present at a meeting;
         (b)   Participated in the meeting by electronic means of
communication; and
         (c)   Was absent; and
      (2)   Identify the electronic means of communication by which:
         (a)   Members participated in the meeting; and
         (b)   Members of the public attended and observed the meeting if the
meeting was not an executive session.
   (E)   No member of the Board may participate by means of electronic
communication in a meeting at which the Board may take final action to:
      (1)   Adopt a budget;
      (2)   Make a reduction in personnel;
      (3)   Initiate a referendum;
      (4)   Impose or increase a fee;
      (5)   Impose or increase a penalty;
      (6)   Exercise the Board’s power of eminent domain; or
      (7)   Establish, impose, raise or renew a tax.
   (F)   This section shall be effective from and after adoption by this Board
and compliance with I.C. 36-2-4-8.
(Res. 2021-5, passed 5-24-2021)
CHAPTER 32: COUNTY COUNCIL
Section
   
32.01   Establishment
   
32.02   Meetings
   
32.03   President and President pro tempore
   
32.04   Council Attorney
   
32.05   Council districts
Statutory reference:
   County fiscal body, see I.C. 36-2-3-1 through 36-2-3-9
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The seven-member County Council duly elected pursuant to applicable
state law shall be the fiscal body of the county.
   (B)   The term of office for each Council member shall be four years,
beginning January 1 after his or her election and continuing until his or her
successor is elected and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-64)
Statutory reference:
   Term of office, see I.C. 36-2-3-3
§ 32.02 MEETINGS.
   The County Council shall hold regular and special meetings pursuant to
applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 2-65)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings of the County Council, see I.C. 36-2-3-7
§ 32.03 PRESIDENT AND PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE.
   The fiscal body shall elect a President and President pro tempore from its
membership at a regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-66)
Statutory reference:
   Election of a President and President Pro Tempore, see I.C. 36-2-3-6
§ 32.04 COUNCIL ATTORNEY.
   The fiscal body may employ an attorney to represent and advise it.
(Prior Code, § 2-67)
Statutory reference:
   Council Attorney, see I.C. 36-2-3-10
§ 32.05 COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   The county is divided into four County Council Election Districts consisting
of the election precincts set out.
(Prior Code, § 2-68) (Ord. 1993-18, passed 1-29-1993; Ord. 2021-07, passed 12-
20-2021; Ord. 2025-03, passed 5-12-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Division of the county into districts, see I.C. 36-2-2-4 and 36-2-3-4
CHAPTER 33: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   County Auditor
   
33.002   Elected county officials
   
33.003   Appointed county employees
   
33.004   Appointment of deputies and employees
   
33.005   Surety bonds on certain county officials
   
33.006   Blanket bond for certain employees, Commission members and persons
acting on behalf of the county
   
33.007   Employee Benefit Trust Plan
   
33.008   Circuit and Superior Courts
   
33.009   Personnel policy adopted by reference
   
33.010   Credit card usage
   
33.011   Internet, e-mail usage
   
33.012   Internal control standards
Drug-Free Workplace
   
33.025   Controlled substances prohibited
   
33.026   Drug-Free Awareness Program established
   
33.027   Condition of employment
   
33.028   Notice to state agencies of convictions
   
33.029   Sanctions and remedial measures
   
33.030   Good faith effort by Board of Commissioners
Indiana Public Employers Plan, Inc.
   
33.045   County Commissioners’ designated roles
   
33.046   Auditor’s role
Public Employees’ Retirement Fund (PERF)
   
33.060   County to participate
   
33.061   Financial contributions
   
33.062   Employees and officers covered
   
33.063   Verification of positions
   
33.064   Membership effective date
   
33.065   County Auditor’s role
Operation and Use of County-Owned Vehicles
   
33.080   Marking county-owned vehicles
   
33.081   Prohibition on personal use
   
33.082   Certain employees permitted to take vehicles to their residences
   
33.083   Use of Sheriff’s Department vehicles by law enforcement officers
during non-working hours
   
33.084   Mileage reimbursement
Taking County-Owned Vehicles to Residences
   
33.095   Determination of need to respond to emergency situation
   
33.096   Authorization to take vehicles to residences
   
33.097   Personal use prohibited
Deferred Compensation Plan
   
33.110   Plan adopted
   
33.111   Agent to administer Plan
   
33.112   Commission established; duties
Alcohol and Drug Abuse Policy and Testing Procedure
   
33.125   Statement of facts
   
33.126   Regulations; testing of safety sensitive employees
   
33.127   Guidelines for testing
   
33.128   Retention of records and confidentiality
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 COUNTY AUDITOR.
   (A)   The County Auditor is the fiscal officer of the county.
   (B)   The Auditor’s term is for four years and continues until his or her
successor is elected and qualified.
   (C)   The Auditor is charged with recording the official proceedings of the
Board of Commissioners and the County Council meetings.
   (D)   The Auditor shall exercise and perform the duties prescribed by law
which pertain to this office.
(Prior Code, § 2-73)
Statutory reference:
   Duties and powers of the County Auditor, see I.C. 36-2-9-1 through 36-2-9-18
   Record-keeping function, see I.C. 36-2-2-11 and 36-2-3-6
§ 33.002 ELECTED COUNTY OFFICIALS.
   The following county officials are recognized by position and applicable
state law:
   (A)   County Assessor, I.C. 36-2-15-1 et seq.;
   (B)   County Auditor, I.C. 36-2-9-1 et seq.;
   (C)   County Clerk, I.C. 33-10.5-8-2;
   (D)   County Coroner, I.C. 36-2-14-1 et seq.;
   (E)   County Prosecutor, I.C. 33-14-1-2 et seq.;
   (F)   County Recorder, I.C. 36-2-11-1 et seq.;
   (G)   County Sheriff, I.C. 36-2-12-1 et seq.;
   (H)   County Surveyor, I.C. 36-2-12-1 et seq.; and
   (I)   County Treasurer, I.C. 36-2-10-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 2-74)
§ 33.003 APPOINTED COUNTY EMPLOYEES.
   The following appointed positions are recognized along with the relevant
state laws, where applicable:
   (A)   County Attorney, I.C. 36-2-2-30;
   (B)   County Engineer, I.C. 36-9-8-3;
   (C)   County Highway Superintendent, I.C. 8-17-3-1 et seq.;
   (D)   County Physician;
   (E)   Animal Control Officer;
   (F)   County Building and Maintenance Supervisor;
   (G)   County Highway Superintendent;
   (H)   Veterans Officer;
   (I)   Technical Code Enforcement Officer;
   (J)   Columbus/Bartholomew Planning Director;
   (K)   Office of Emergency Preparedness Director;
   (L)   Weights and Measures and IOSHA Director;
   (M)   Emergency Operations Director; and
   (N)   Information Services Director.
(Prior Code, § 2-75)
§ 33.004 APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES.
   Deputies and employees of the county are governed by I.C. 36-2-16-1 et seq.,
as it may be amended from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 2-76)
§ 33.005 SURETY BONDS OF CERTAIN COUNTY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The bonds of the Treasurer of the county, Sheriff of the county, Clerk
of the Circuit, Superior and County Court, each Township Trustee in the county
and any conservancy district financial clerks in the county, and any Barrett
Law Fund custodians, who are employees or officers of the county are fixed for
each of the persons in an amount equal to $30,000 for each $1,000,000 of
receipts of the officer’s office during the last complete fiscal year before
the purchase of the bond; however, the amount of the bonds shall not be less
than $30,000, nor more than $300,000.
   (B)   The bond of the Auditor of the county is fixed for an amount equal to
$30,000 for each $1,000,000 of receipts of the officer’s office during the last
complete fiscal year before the purchase of the bond; however, the amount of
the bond shall not be less than $30,000, nor more than $300,000.
   (C)   The bonds of all other persons who are required by I.C. 5-4-l-18(a) to
file individual surety bonds are fixed for each of the persons at no less than
$15,000.
   (D)   The bonds, as required herein, shall be in the form as required by
I.C. 5-4-l-18(e) and shall cover the faithful performance of the duties of the
officer or employee, including the duty to comply with I.C. 35-44-1-2, and the
duty to account properly for all monies and properly received by virtue of his
or her position and employment.
(Prior Code, § 2-77) (Ord. 1983-4, passed 3-15-1983)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 5-4-1-19
§ 33.006 BLANKET BOND FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYEES, COMMISSION MEMBERS AND PERSONS
ACTING ON BEHALF OF THE COUNTY.
   The county is authorized to purchase a blanket bond to cover the faithful
performance of all employees of the county, all of the County Commission
members and all persons acting on behalf of the county who are not County
Prosecuting Attorneys, Auditors, Treasurers, Recorders, Surveyors, Sheriffs,
Coroners, Assessors, Clerks, Township Trustees, appointed board members,
commission members or fiscal officers responsible for approving vouchers or
payments or other employees directed to file an individual bond by the county
fiscal body, in amounts and from an authorized surety company as determined by
the County Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 2-78) (Ord. 1983-3, passed 3-15-1983)
§ 33.007 EMPLOYEE BENEFIT TRUST PLAN.
   (A)   Effective 12-1-1989, the County Employee Benefit Trust took effect.
   (B)   All group plan benefits shall be governed by the summary plan
description, a copy of which is on file in the office of the County Auditor and
open for inspection during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 2-531)
§ 33.008 CIRCUIT AND SUPERIOR COURTS.
   (A)   The county shall constitute the Ninth Judicial Circuit of the state
pursuant to I.C. 33-33-3-1.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 33-33-3-2, a Superior Court in and for the county is
created.
   (C)   The Superior Circuits have concurrent jurisdiction, both original and
appellate, with the Circuit Court in all civil actions and proceedings at law
and in equity and in all criminal and probate matters, actions and proceedings
of which the Circuit Court has jurisdiction.
   (D)   Pursuant to I.C . 33-33-3-6, the Judge of the Superior Court No. 2 may
appoint one full-time magistrate to serve the Court.
(Prior Code, § 2-580)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 33-33-3-2 and I.C. 33-33-3-6 were repealed by P.L. 201-2011, Sec. 115
§ 33.009 PERSONNEL POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The County of Bartholomew, Indiana, Personnel Policies Handbook, which is
attached to Ord. 2013-05 and on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full. These
policies and procedures shall be in full force and effect on and after November
1, 2013, and shall supersede and repeal existing oral or written personnel
policies and procedures.
(Res. 1997-03, passed - -; Ord. 1998-05, passed 4-13-1998; Res. 1998-19, passed
12-28-1998; Ord. 2000-06, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 2000-10, passed 10-30-2000;
Ord. 2001-06, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 2004-06, passed 12-13-2004; Ord. 2005-03,
passed 10-17-2005; Ord. 2006, passed 1-3-2006; Ord. 2005-03, passed 10-17-2005;
Ord. 2005-05, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 2007-05, passed 8-20-2007; Ord. 2009-07,
passed - -2009; Ord. 2009-12, passed 10-19-2009; Ord. 2010-01, passed 1-25-
2010; Ord. 2010-09, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. 2012-06, passed 6-4-2012; Ord. 2012-
07, passed 6-25-2012; Ord. 2012-09, passed 10-8-2012; Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-1-
2013; Ord. 2013-05, passed 10-28-2013; Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-21-2014; Res.
2016-04, passed 4-11-2016; Ord. 2016-09, passed 12-19- 2016; Ord. 2023-06,
passed 10-30-2023; Ord. 2024-03, passed 4-1-2024; Ord. 2024-08, passed 6-17-
2024; Ord. 2024-12, passed 12-23-2024)
§ 33.010 CREDIT CARD USAGE.
   (A)   The County Auditor or designated elected official/department head,
shall be the designated official responsible for the use and issuance of county
credit cards. Account numbers and other information of the county-owned credit
cards will be maintained in the Auditor’s office.
   (B)   The Auditor’s office shall maintain an accounting system or log which
will include the names of individuals requesting usage of county credit cards,
their position, estimated amounts to be charged, fund and account numbers to be
charged, and date the card is issued and returned.
   (C)   County employees may request the use of a county credit card for
travel related expenses associated with attending conferences, workshops,
business meetings, or other work related expenses. All requests, including
name, position, estimated amount(s) to be charged, must be in writing and
submitted to the County Auditor. County credit cards are for business use only
and shall not be used for personal purchases. Other examples of specifically
prohibited uses include the purchase of alcohol and/or movies and
entertainment.
   (D)   County employees, who are issued a county credit card, shall only use
such card as approved by the County Auditor.
   (E)   When the purpose for which the credit card has been issued has been
accomplished, the card and all supporting documents (such as, receipts) shall
be submitted to the custody of the Auditor’s office.
   (F)   Payment of county credit cards should not be made on the basis of a
statement or a credit card slip only. Credit card payments must be made through
the statutory claims process. If interest or penalty is incurred due to late
filing or furnishing of documentation by an officer or employee, such interest
or penalty shall be the responsibility of that officer or employee.
   (G)   County issued credit cards are the property of the county and
employees are required to return such cards and all supporting documents upon
request. If a card is lost or stolen, the employee should report the missing
card immediately to the Auditor’s office.
   (H)   County employees violating this policy shall be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 2007-04, passed 7-20-2007; Ord. 2009-12,
passed 10-19-2009)
§ 33.011 INTERNET, E-MAIL USAGE.
   (A)   Preamble.
      (1)   This policy describes the county’s guidelines with regard to
internet access and disclosure of electronic mail messages sent or received by
county employees with use of the county e-mail system.
      (2)   The county respects the individual privacy of its employees;
however, employee privacy does not extend to the employees’ work-related
conduct or to the use of county-provided equipment, services or supplies.
County personnel and employees should be aware that the following guidelines
may affect their privacy in the workplace.
   (B)   Provision of internet access. As a condition of providing internet
access to its personnel and employees, the county places certain restrictions
on workplace use of the internet. The county encourages appropriate employee
use of the internet as follows:
      (1)   To communicate with fellow employees and clients regarding matters
within an employee’s assigned duties;
      (2)   To acquire information related to, or design to facilitate the
performance of regular assigned duties; and
      (3)   To facilitate performance of any task or project in a manner
approved by an employee’s supervisor or department head.
   (C)   Compliance with applicable laws and licenses.
      (1)   Personnel and employees must comply with all software licenses,
copyrights and all other laws governing intellectual property protection,
privacy, sexual harassment, data security and on-line activity.
      (2)   Personnel and employees utilizing internet access provided by
county are expressly prohibited from doing the following:
         (a)   Game playing;
         (b)   Distribution of destructive programs (i.e., viruses and/or self-
replicating code);
         (c)   Hateful, harassing or other anti-social behavior;
         (d)   Intentional damage or interference with others (i.e., hacking
and distributing viruses);
         (e)   Making publicly accessible obscene files;
         (f)   Solicitation;
         (g)   Commercial usage of non-county business;
         (h)   Dissemination or printing of copyrighted materials (including
articles and software) in violation of copyright laws;
         (i)   Sending, receiving, printing or otherwise disseminating
proprietary data, trade secrets or other confidential information of the county
in violation of county policy or proprietary agreements;
         (j)   Offensive or harassing statements or language including, but not
limited to, disparagement of others based on their race, national origin, sex,
sexual orientation, age, disability, religious or political beliefs;
         (k)   Sending or soliciting sexually oriented messages or images;
         (l)   Operating a business, usurping business opportunities or
soliciting for personal gain or searching for jobs outside of the county
government; and/or
         (m)   Sending chain letters, gambling or engaging in any other
activity in violation of the law.
   (D)   Violation of the county’s internet/ e-mail usage policy. Violation of
the county’s internet/e-mail usage policy may result in disciplinary action.
The measure of discipline will correspond to the gravity of the offense as
weighed by its potential effect on county and fellow employees. When an
employee connects to the internet planning method at any county location or
uses any service provided by the county, it should be for county business
related activity.
   (E)   Right to access information.
      (1)   The electronic mail system has been installed by the county to
facilitate business communications.
      (2)   Although each employee has an individual password to access this
system, it belongs to the county and the contents of e-mail communications are
accessible at all times by the county management for any county purpose. The
systems may be subject to periodic unannounced inspections and should be
treated like other shared filing systems. All system password and encryption
keys must be available to the county management, and your passwords or
encryption keys must be available to your supervisor and department head.
Failure, upon request of the employee’s supervisor or department head, to
promptly make available system password and encryption keys shall subject the
employee to discipline up to and including discharge.
      (3)   All e-mail messages are county records. The contents of e-mail,
properly obtained for legitimate purposes, may be disclosed within the county
without your permission. You should not assume that messages are confidential.
Backup copies of e-mail may be maintained and referenced for business and legal
reasons.
   (F)   Personal use of e-mail.
      (1)   Because the county provides the electronic mail system to assist
personnel and employees in the performance of their job, the electronic mail
system should be used only for official county business.
      (2)   Incidental and occasional personal use of e-mail is permitted by
the county, but these messages will be treated the same as other messages.
      (3)   The county reserves the right to access and disclose, as necessary,
all messages sent over its e-mail system, without regard to content.
   (G)   Password and encryption keys security and integrity. Employees are
prohibited from the unauthorized use of the passwords and encryption keys of
other employees to gain access to the other employee’s e-mail messages.
   (H)   Downloading of software. Due to risk of virus, copyright and license
violation, downloading or installation of any materials or programs from the
internet or any other sources other than the County Information Services
Department is not permitted. If any applications or materials are desired to be
installed onto any county computer system, it must be evaluated and installed
by a member of the County Information Services Department.
   (I)   Waiver of privacy.
      (1)   The county has the right, but not the duty, to monitor any and all
aspects of its computer system, including, but not limited to, monitoring sites
employees visit on the internet, reviewing material downloaded or uploaded by
employees and reviewing e-mails sent and received by employees.
      (2)   Employees waive any right to privacy in anything they create,
store, send or receive on the computer or the internet.
   (J)   Amendments. This policy may be amended or revised from time to time.
Employees will be provided with notice of all amendments and revisions to this
policy.
(Res. 2001-01, passed 3-5-2001; Res. passed 12-28-2009)
§ 33.012 INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   The internal control standards as established by I.C. 5-11-1-27(c) are
hereby adopted and shall supersede and repeal existing oral or written
personnel policies and procedures in conflict therewith.
(Ord. 2016-08, passed 12-19-2016)
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE
§ 33.025 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
   The Board of Commissioners shall publish and provide to all of its employees
a statement notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensing, possession or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in the
workplace of the employees and specifying the actions that will be taken
against employees for violations of the prohibition.
(Prior Code, § 2-481) (Res. 1991-10, passed 4-8-1991)
§ 33.026 DRUG-FREE AWARENESS PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
   The Board of Commissioners shall establish a drug-free awareness program to
inform employees about:
   (A)   The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace;
   (B)   The policy of the county of maintaining a drug-free workplace;
   (C)   Any available drug counseling, rehabilitation and employee assistance
programs; and
   (D)   The penalties that may be imposed upon an employee for drug abuse
violations occurring in the workplace.
(Prior Code, § 2-482) (Res. 1991-10, passed 4-8-1991)
Statutory reference:
   Exec. Order 90-5, dated 4-12-1990, requires certification to the State
Department of Administration on county contracts in excess of $25,000
§ 33.027 CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT.
   The Board of Commissioners shall notify all employees in the statement
required by §
33.025 that as a condition of continued employment the employee will:
   (A)   Abide by the terms of the statement; and
   (B)   Notify the employer of any criminal drug statute conviction for a
violation occurring in the workplace no later than five days after the
conviction.
(Prior Code, § 2-483) (Res. 1991-10, passed 4-8-1991)
§ 33.028 NOTICE TO STATE AGENCIES OF CONVICTIONS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall notify in writing the contracting state
agency and the State Department of Administration within ten days after
receiving notice from an employee under §
33.027(B) or otherwise receiving actual notice of the conviction.
(Prior Code, § 2-484) (Res. 1991-10, passed 4-8-1991)
§ 33.029 SANCTIONS AND REMEDIAL MEASURES.
   The Board of Commissioners will, within 30 days after receiving notice under
§
33.027(B) of a conviction, impose the following sanctions or remedial measures
on any employee who is convicted of drug abuse violations occurring in the
workplace:
   (A)   Take appropriate personnel action against the employee, up to and
including termination; or
   (B)   Require the employee to satisfactorily participate in a drug abuse
assistance or rehabilitation program approved for the purposes by a federal,
state or local health, law enforcement or other appropriate agency.
(Prior Code, § 2-485) (Res. 1991-10, passed 4-8-1991)
§ 33.030 GOOD FAITH EFFORT BY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   It shall make a good faith effort to maintain a drug-free workplace through
implementation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 2-486) (Res. 1991-10, passed 4-8-1991)
INDIANA PUBLIC EMPLOYERS PLAN, INC.
§ 33.045 COUNTY COMMISSIONERS’ DESIGNATED ROLE.
   The Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to execute for and on behalf
of this body a membership agreement in the Indiana Public Employers’ Plan,
Inc., and provide and execute other documents as may be necessary to affect
membership in and the purpose of the plan.
(Prior Code, § 2-491) (Res. 1990-08, passed 9-17-1990)
§ 33.046 AUDITOR’S ROLE.
   The fiscal officer of the county is hereby authorized to pay or cause to be
paid any and all amounts required of the plan in order to affect membership in
and the purposes of the plan, subject to the prior appropriation of the amounts
by this body.
(Prior Code, § 2-492) (Res. 1990-08, passed 9-17-1990)
PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND (PERF)
§ 33.060 COUNTY TO PARTICIPATE.
   The county elects to become a participant in the Public Employees’
Retirement Fund, as established by I.C. 5-10.3-2-1, and all acts amendatory and
supplemental thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-511) (Res. passed 9-10-1976)
Statutory reference:
   Public Employees’ Retirement Fund, see I.C. 5-10.3-1-1 et seq.
§ 33.061 FINANCIAL CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The county agrees to make the required contributions under the Public
Employees’ Retirement Fund Act, which is the Acts of 1945, Chapter 340, being
I.C. 5-10.3-2-1 et seq., and all Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental
thereto, including specifically the Acts of 1955, Chapter 329, being I.C. 5-
10.2-1 et seq., commonly designated as “The Indiana Public Employees’ Social
Security Integration and Supplemental Retirement Benefits Act”.
(Prior Code, § 2-512) (Res. passed 9-10-1976)
§ 33.062 EMPLOYEES AND OFFICERS COVERED.
   The following are declared to be covered by the fund: all full-time
employees and elected and appointed officials not covered by an existing
requirement program.
(Prior Code, § 2-513) (Res. passed 9-10-1976)
§ 33.063 VERIFICATION OF POSITIONS.
   It is declared that none of the classifications or positions specified in §
33.062 are compensated on a fee basis or are of an emergency nature or are in a
part-time category.
(Prior Code, § 2-514) (Res. passed 9-10-1976)
§ 33.064 MEMBERSHIP EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The active participating membership of the county shall begin on 1-1-1977.
(Prior Code, § 2-515) (Res. passed 9-10-1976)
§ 33.065 COUNTY AUDITOR’S ROLE.
   The Auditor of the county is authorized to answer, on behalf of the county,
inquiries from the Public Employees’ Retirement Fund concerning the number of
years of creditable service of county employees for purposes of the Fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-516) (Res. 1985, passed 10-4-1982)
OPERATION AND USE OF COUNTY-OWNED VEHICLES
§ 33.080 MARKING COUNTY-OWNED VEHICLES.
   (A)   On all vehicles of any kind which are owned by the county and which
are normally operated on public streets and highways, the words “Bartholomew
County”, the name of the department or agency normally using the vehicle, and
the words “For Official Use Only” shall be conspicuously imprinted or affixed.
This provision shall not apply to Sheriff’s Department, fire or other emergency
vehicles which because of sirens, emergency lights, departmental decals or
other devices are clearly marked as such. This provision also does not apply to
unmarked vehicles which have been officially designated by the County Sheriff
for use in law enforcement functions.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that all county-owned
vehicles will be marked in a distinctive manner that, by reason of their
nature, they will not be susceptible to personal use; that they will qualify as
“qualified nonpersonal use vehicles” for purposes of § 274 of the Internal
Revenue Code, as now or hereafter amended; and that they will be exempt from
the substantiation requirements of § 274.
(Prior Code, § 2-496) (Res. 1992-03, passed 4-13-1992)
Statutory reference:
   Mileage allowance for certain county officials, see I.C. 36-2-7-3 and 36-2-
7-5
§ 33.081 PROHIBITION ON PERSONAL USE.
   No employee, agent or official of the county shall use any county-owned
vehicle for any personal, non-business purpose (other than de minimis use, such
as stopping for a meal between business functions). Except as specifically
provided in these rules, when a county-owned vehicle is not being used for
business purposes, it must be kept on county premises at a location designated
by the county official or department head normally responsible for controlling
the use of the vehicle unless the vehicle is temporarily located elsewhere for
repairs. As stated in §
33.080, the Board of Commissioners believes that, because of the distinctive
markings required under §
33.080, county-owned vehicles will not be susceptible to personal use and it is
highly unlikely that the personal use will occur.
(Prior Code, § 2-497) (Res. 1992-03, passed 4-13-1992)
§ 33.082 CERTAIN EMPLOYEES PERMITTED TO TAKE VEHICLES TO THEIR RESIDENCES.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may specifically authorize and require an
employee to take a county-owned vehicle to his or her residence when the
employee is not working if it is determined that the employee must have the
vehicle available in order to immediately respond from his or her residence to
emergency situations involving his or her job duties.
   (B)   In such cases, once the vehicle is taken to the employee’s residence,
the employee may not use the vehicle for personal purposes. It is the intent of
the Board of Commissioners that any use of a county-owned vehicle authorized
under this section shall be considered a bona fide business requirement of the
county and, therefore, any value to the employee attributable to the use shall
be excludable from the employee’s income as a “working condition fringe
benefit” under the provisions of § 132(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, as now
or hereafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 2-498) (Res. 1992-03, passed 4-13-1992)
§ 33.083 USE OF SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT VEHICLES BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
DURING NON-WORKING HOURS.
   (A)   Any law enforcement officer employed by the County Sheriff’s
Department may be assigned the use of a Departmental vehicle from time to time
by the County Sheriff and may be permitted by him or her to take the assigned
vehicle to his or her home when the employee is not on his or her regular
shift. This will enable the off-duty law enforcement officer to immediately
respond from his or her residence to emergency situations requiring a law
enforcement officer. The Board of Commissioners recognizes that law enforcement
officers do not work 24 hours a day, but it also recognizes that a law
enforcement officer has arrest powers and a duty to enforce the laws even when
not working his or her regular shift. Thus, the county’s interest in law
enforcement is served whenever a law enforcement officer is traveling the
public streets and highways if the officer, under departmental regulations,
still has the authority to make arrests. Therefore, the County Sheriff may
adopt rules whereby law enforcement officers employed by the Sheriff’s
Department may be permitted to use department vehicles to travel within the
county, even though the employees are not on their regular shifts if, under
Departmental regulations, the employees still have the authority to make
arrests.
   (B)   The rules, if adopted, shall contain the following conditions.
      (1)   The police radio must be turned on and at an audible level so the
operating officer can hear it at all times.
      (2)   While off duty, the officer must respond to emergency calls or
complaints if he or she is in the general vicinity.
      (3)   If the officer is responding to a life-threatening situation, he or
she must use due caution and remove all non-police personnel from the vehicle
at the earliest convenient moment.
      (4)   Off-duty use of any department vehicle will be restricted to any of
the contiguous counties surrounding the county. These are Jackson, Brown,
Johnson, Shelby, Decatur and Jennings Counties. Use of any Department vehicle
outside of these counties will be authorized on an individual basis and
approved by the Sheriff or his or her designee.
      (5)   A designee is any officer who holds the rank of sergeant or above.
It will be the responsibility of that officer to notify the Sheriff in a timely
manner either in writing or verbally of the out-of-contiguous county use.
      (6)   If the officer uses the vehicle out of the contiguous county area
and needs fuel, it will be the responsibility of that officer to refuel the
vehicle at his or her own expense.
   (C)   It is the intent of the Board of Commissioners that any use of a
departmental vehicle authorized under this section shall be considered a bona
fide business requirement of the county and, therefore, any value to the
employee attributable to the use shall be excludable from the employee’s income
as a “working condition fringe benefit” under the provisions of § 132(d) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as now or hereafter amended.
(Prior Code, § 2-499) (Res. 1992-03, passed 4-13-1992)
§ 33.084 MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT.
   The County Council, being the county fiscal body, hereby determines that the
mileage to be paid to officers, department heads and employees of the county,
except for the Sheriff, Surveyor and Coroner, and their employees, shall be
$0.40 per mile, for the actual miles driven by the person in the person’s own
motor vehicle in the course of performance of official duties of employment
with the county when the county has not furnished a motor vehicle that is
available for the person’s use which shall not include miles driven from the
person’s residence to the person’s place of work nor from the person’s place of
work to the person’s residence.
(Council Res. 98-13, passed 10-13-1998)
TAKING COUNTY-OWNED VEHICLES TO RESIDENCES
§ 33.095 DETERMINATION OF NEED TO RESPOND TO EMERGENCY SITUATION.
   The Board of Commissioners, having conducted an investigation and having
reviewed the work of the various offices and departments of the county, hereby
determines that the following officials and employees of the county must be
available to immediately respond from their residences to emergency situations:
   (A)   Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent of the County Highway
Department;
   (B)   Immunization representative of the State Board of Health employed by
County Health Department;
   (C)   Animal Control Officer; and
   (D)   Director of Weights and Measures.
(Prior Code, § 2-506) (Res. passed 12-23-1985)
§ 33.096 AUTHORIZATION TO TAKE VEHICLES TO RESIDENCES.
   The designated officials and employees in §
33.095 are authorized and required to take the county-owned vehicles which have
been assigned to them to their respective residences when they are not working.
(Prior Code, § 2-507) (Res. passed 12-23-1985)
§ 33.097 PERSONAL USE PROHIBITED.
   Once a county-owned vehicle is taken to a residence as set forth above, the
vehicle may not be used for personal purposes.
(Prior Code, § 2-508) (Res. passed 12-23-1985)
DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN
§ 33.110 PLAN ADOPTED.
   The County Deferred Compensation Plan, as set forth in “Exhibit A,” which is
attached to the adopting resolution, is adopted and the Commissioners have
individually executed the document. Copies of the plan shall be maintained in
the office of the County Auditor and be open for inspection during regular
business hours.
(Prior Code, § 2-526) (Res. passed 7-16-1984; Res. 1997-11, passed 9-29-1997;
Res. 1998-18, passed 12-28-1998)
Statutory reference:
   Deferred Compensation Plans, see I.C. 6-3-4-15.7
§ 33.111 AGENT TO ADMINISTER PLAN.
   The Hartford Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company is designated as the
agent of the county to administer the County Deferred Compensation Plan as it
pertains to accounting for deferrals, the disbursement of funds, withholding of
taxes and the proper reporting to participants, annuitants and governmental
agencies and the administrative services agreement between the county and
Hartford Variable Annuity Life Insurance Company, as set forth in “Exhibit B”,
which was attached to the adopting newsletter, is adopted and the Commissioners
have individually executed the agreement. Copies of the plan shall be
maintained in the office of the County Auditor and be open for inspection
during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 2-527) (Res. passed 7-16-1984)
§ 33.112 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; DUTIES.
   (A)   The County Deferred Compensation Plan Commission, as provided for in
the County Deferred Compensation Plan, is hereby established; and the
Commission shall be composed of the County Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The Commission shall:
      (1)   Monitor the administration of the County Deferred Compensation
Plan;
      (2)   Advise the county regarding the operation of the plan and the
desirability of amending the plan; and
      (3)   Determine whether any participant in the plan who seeks to withdraw
compensation because of an unforeseeable emergency is entitled to the
withdrawal under the terms of the plan, the regulations of the Internal Revenue
Service and any opinions rendered by the Internal Revenue Service.
(Prior Code, § 2-528) (Res. passed 7-16-1984)
ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE POLICY AND TESTING PROCEDURE
§ 33.125 STATEMENT OF FACTS.
   (A)   The county is concerned with the public’s safety and workplace safety
for our employees. This alcohol and drug abuse policy is designed to ensure
that employees are fit for duty. The county believes that our employees in
safety sensitive positions cannot safely operate vehicles while under the
influence of any controlled substance or while under the influence of alcohol.
This policy applies to all employees of the County Highway Department who
perform safety sensitive jobs, including mechanics and employees who are
required to hold a Commercial Drivers License (CDL), to perform their job
function. This policy covers truck drivers, mechanics, heavy equipment
operators, and any other positions that require a commercial driver’s license.
Safety sensitive employees are expected and required to be in suitable mental
and physical condition while at work, performing their jobs satisfactorily and
behaving appropriately. When the use of alcohol and other drugs interfere with
such expectations, an employees failure to meet these basic expectations could
result in disciplinary action. It is for this purpose that the county has
implemented the following Substance Abuse Policy which includes testing for the
presence of drugs and alcohol. The intent of the county is to also ensure that
the county is in compliance with federal law.
   (B)   This policy addresses the use of alcohol and illegal drugs or
substances on many fronts. The use, possession, sale, purchase or transfer of
unauthorized or illegal drugs or substances, or the abuse or misuse of legal
drugs on county property, while on county business or while operating vehicles
and equipment, is prohibited. Drinking alcoholic beverages resulting in having
any measurable amount of alcohol, as defined in the federal regulations, in his
or her system during working hours is prohibited, whether on or off county
property. Working hours include all breaks. Off-duty use of drugs and alcohol
is prohibited to the extent it affects an employee’s attendance or performance
and his or her ability to pass required Department of Transportation (DOT)
alcohol and controlled substance tests. Any violation of this policy is grounds
for discipline, up to an including termination. To that extent, the provisions
of this policy shall be deemed as additional requirements to the minimum
requirements of the county personnel policy.
   (C)   Physician-directed use of drugs can affect behavior and performance.
When such use of drugs adversely affects job performance or safety, it is in
the best interest of the employee, co-workers, the public, and the county that
the employee take sick, personal, or vacation days, or if necessary, unpaid
leave in accordance with the personnel policies concerning requesting medical
leaves.
   (D)   The county reserves the right to terminate any employee in a safety
sensitive position who violates the County Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy.
Reporting to work under the influence of alcohol or nonprescribed drugs or
using the same while on the job are listed as causes for disciplinary action as
stated in §
33.128(E) of the county personnel policy. The Supervisor or his or her designee
is authorized to implement this policy and program, including a periodic review
of the program to address any problems, changes, and/or revisions of it, and
maintenance of all records required by the federal regulations. The Supervisor
or his or her designee is responsible for communicating this policy to all
employees in safety sensitive positions and is accountable for its consistent
enforcement.
   (E)   For purposes of this policy, a safety sensitive position shall be
defined as a position which requires the employee to:
      (1)   Inspect equipment as required by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Regulations (FMCSR’s), or otherwise inspecting, servicing or conditioning any
commercial motor vehicle or County Highway Department vehicle at any time.
      (2)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle or County Highway Department
vehicle, which requires, for its operation, a commercial drivers license (CDL).
      (3)   Spend time, other than driving time, on or in a commercial motor
vehicle or a County Highway Department vehicle.
      (4)   Load or unload a commercial motor vehicle or a County Highway
Department vehicle, supervising or assisting in the loading or unloading,
attending a vehicle being loaded or unloaded, remaining in readiness to operate
the vehicle, or giving receipts for shipments.
      (5)   Perform driver requirements associated with an accident.
      (6)   Repair, obtain assistance for, or remain in attendance upon a
disabled vehicle.
(Res. 1998-02, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 33.126 REGULATIONS; TESTING OF SAFETY SENSITIVE EMPLOYEES.
   All safety sensitive employees will be tested for alcohol and drug abuse in
accordance with the approved procedures when directed by the Supervisor or his
or her designee. The county will specify the testing site and provide tests and
test interpretations at no cost to the employees.
(Res. 1998-02, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 33.127 GUIDELINES FOR TESTING.
   (A)   Pre-employment. Under no circumstance will an individual be placed in
a safety sensitive position without proof of the successful completion of an
alcohol and/or drug test. Any individual who refuses to submit to such tests,
has a detectable amount of alcohol in his or her system, or has a positive
controlled substance test result, as defined by the federal regulations, will
not be considered for employment with the county.
   (B)   Random.
      (1)   A minimum rate of 50% of employees in safety sensitive positions
shall be tested annually for drugs and 25% of employees in these positions
shall be tested annually for alcohol.
      (2)   Random drug and alcohol testing may be combined. For example, when
testing at 50% drug random rate and 25% alcohol random rate, half of the
randomly selected employees chosen for testing would be tested for both drugs
and alcohol, while the rest could be tested only for drugs. Alcohol testing
will be conducted just prior to, during, or immediately following performance
of a safety sensitive function.
      (3)   Random testing selection requires:
         (a)   Employee remains in the pool.
         (b)   Use of a valid random selection process.
         (c)   Dates for testing will not be announced in advance.
         (d)   Testing of 50% of employees for drugs and 25% of employees for
alcohol.
   (C)   Post accident.
      (1)   Employees in safety sensitive positions are required to submit to
drug and alcohol testing as soon as possible following a “DOT” accident which
involves the loss of human life, or the in the event the employee receives a
citation under state or local law for a moving traffic violation arising from
the accident.
      (2)   An employee who is subject to post accident testing shall remain
readily available for such testing for a period up to eight hours or he or she
may be deemed to have refused to subject to testing. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to require the delay of necessary medical treatment or to
prohibit the employee from leaving the scene of an accident for a period
necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to obtain
necessary medical care.
      (3)   No employee required to take a post accident alcohol test shall use
alcohol for eight hours following the accident or until he or she undergoes a
post accident alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
      (4)   If an employee is seriously injured and cannot submit to testing at
the time of the accident, he or she shall provide the necessary authorization
for obtaining hospital reports and other documents that would indicate whether
there were any drugs or alcohol in his or her system.
      (5)   The results of a breath or blood test for the use of alcohol, or a
urine test for the use of drugs conducted by federal, state, or local officials
having independent authority for the test, shall be considered to meet the
requirements for post accident testing if the results are obtained by the
county.
   (D)   Actions to take in a post accident testing situation:
      (1)   Treat injuries as necessary.
      (2)   Cooperate with law enforcement.
      (3)   Explain the need for testing.
      (4)   Cooperate with the appropriate medical facility.
      (5)   Collect all specimens promptly.
      (6)   Document all events.
   (D)   Reasonable suspicion.
      (1)   The county is required to test for the use of alcohol and
controlled substances upon “reasonable suspicion”. Reasonable suspicion is
defined to mean, that the county believes the behavior, speech, body odor, or
appearance of an employee while on duty is indicative of the use of alcohol
and/or controlled substances. The conduct must be witnessed by a supervisor, if
so trained. Supervisor(s) will receive at least two hours of training to
further their knowledge of possible signs of alcohol and/or drug abuse that
influences an employee’s fitness for duty. The mere possession of alcohol does
not constitute a need for an alcohol test. The witness must have received
training in the detection of probable alcohol and drug use by observing a
person’s behavior. If it is at all possible, the witness should not conduct the
alcohol test in order to protect the employee.
      (2)   Alcohol testing is authorized only if the observations are made
during, just before, or just after the period of the work day of the employee.
A written record shall be made of the observations leading to a reasonable
suspicion alcohol and/or controlled substance test. This record is to be signed
by the supervisor who requires a reasonable suspicion test and shall include
all observations that culminated in the test(s) being administered.
         (a)   If a reasonable suspicion alcohol test is not administered
within two hours following the observations, the witness shall prepare and
maintain on file a record stating the reasons the alcohol test was not
administered promptly. In addition, if not administered within eight hours, all
attempts to administer the test shall cease. A record shall be prepared and
maintained stating why the alcohol test was not administered.
         (b)   Prior to the start of work, an employee must report to his or
her immediate supervisor, use of any prescription and/or over the counter drugs
which may affect job performance or the safety of others. It is the employee’s
responsibility to obtain from his or her physician a determination as to
whether or not the drug could affect job performance.
         (c)   All information obtained in the course of testing of employees
shall be protected as confidential medical information. No data concerning this
information will be made a part of the employee’s personnel file nor will it be
provided to any other party without the direct written consent of the employee,
unless the results are grounds for discipline and/or the grievance procedure is
requested by the employee.
         (d)   Failure to sign a release for alcohol and drug testing will be
classified as a refusal to carry out an order of a supervisor and the employee
shall be terminated.
         (e)   Refusal to submit to an alcohol and/or controlled substance test
as required will be recorded as a positive test. Refusal to submit to an
alcohol or controlled substance test means that an employee fails to provide
adequate breath for testing without valid medical explanation after he or she
has received notice of the requirement for breath testing in accordance with
this policy; fails to provide adequate urine for controlled substance testing
without a valid medical explanation after he or she has received notice of the
requirement for testing in accordance with this policy; or engages in conduct
that clearly obstructs the testing process.
         (f)   Urine specimens which the laboratory reports as unacceptable
with regard to measured levels on creatinine, specific gravity or pH will be
issued by the Medical Review Officer as a negative with notation of dilute
status. The county reserves the right to require the employee to provide
another specimen for testing. The employee will be notified of such and have
the opportunity to have the dilute status explained to him or her before
recollection is scheduled. If a dilute specimen is reported, the employee will
be required to submit another specimen unless a medical condition is the cause
of the dilute result. If a second dilute specimen is obtained, the employee may
be suspended from work until a valid specimen is obtained at the employees
expense. If a valid specimen is not obtained within three days from the first
retest, the employees may be terminated.
         (g)   If the Medical Review Officer issues a cancelled test result,
the employee may be asked to submit another specimen depending on the reason
for the cancelled report.
      (3)   As stipulated in the federal regulations, an employee testing
positive for alcohol (.04 or greater) or for a controlled substance shall be
prohibited from driving or performing a safety sensitive function for the
county and be referred to the supervisor. Employees testing .02 or greater, but
less than .04 shall also not drive or perform safety sensitive functions for
the county, nor shall the county permit him or her to perform a safety
sensitive function, until the start of the employee’s next regularly scheduled
duty period, but not less than 24 hours following administration of the test or
until a disposition of possible discipline is decided. Employees may be subject
to discipline, as contained in the county personnel policy.
(Res. 1998-02, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 33.128 RETENTION OF RECORDS AND CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Records will be maintained, in keeping with federal regulations, by the
county drug and alcohol testing contracted services.
(Res. 1998-02, passed 3-2-1998)
CHAPTER 34: COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
34.01   Departments
   
34.02   Boards and Committees
   
34.03   Commissions and other entities
§ 34.01 DEPARTMENTS.
   The following departments are established and acknowledged in the county:
   (A)   Local Health Department, Board of Health and Health Officer;
(Prior Code, § 2-88) (Ord. 1992-04, passed 3-2-1992)
   (B)   Sheriff’s Department and retirement plan;
(Prior Code, § 2-90) (Council Res. 1986-2, passed - -1986)
   (C)   County Sheriff’s Reserve Unit;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-91, 2-91.1) (Ord. 1982-9, passed 10-4-1982; Ord. 1983-2,
passed 2-14-1983; Ord. 1996-02, passed 1-15-1996; Council Res. 1997-16, passed
12-16-1997)
   (D)   Department of Parks and Recreation;
(Prior Code, § 2-92) (Ord. 1982-6, passed 11-9-1982; Ord. 1982-15, passed 12-7-
1982)
   (E)   Department of Technical Code Enforcement;
(Prior Code, § 2-93)
   (F)   Weights and Measures Department; and
(Ord. 2001-04, passed 2-19-2001)
   (G)   Department of Redevelopment.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 9-22-2014)
§ 34.02 BOARDS AND COMMITTEES.
   The following boards and committees are established and acknowledged in the
county:
   (A)   Board of Finance;
(Prior Code, § 2-155)
   (B)   County Extension Board;
(Prior Code, § 2-156)
   (C)   Drainage Board;
(Prior Code, § 2-157)
   (D)   Property Tax Adjustment Board of Appeals;
(Prior Code, § 2-158)
   (E)   Solid Waste Management District Board;
(Prior Code, § 2-161)
   (F)   Board of Health;
(Prior Code, § 2-162)
   (G)   Hospital Board; Columbus Regional Hospital Board of Trustees;
(Prior Code, § 2-163) (Res. 1995-08, passed 12-26-1995)
   (H)   Storm Water Drainage Study Committee;
(Prior Code, § 2-164) (Res. 1989-02, passed 10-2-1989)
   (I)   Code Enforcement Advisory Board;
(Res. 1997-15, passed 11-10-1997)
   (J)   Board of Parks and Recreation;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-125—2-134)
   (K)   Communications Board;
(Ord. 2000-09, passed 7-10-2000)
   (L)   Community Corrections Advisory Board;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-112—2-116)
   (M)   Computer and Data Processing Board;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-106—2-109) (Ord. 2010-08, passed 11-1-2010)
   (N)   Sheriff’s Merit Board;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-137—2-138)
   (O)   County Public Defender Board; and
   (P)   Substance Abuse Public Funding Board.
(Ord. 2015-06, passed 7-6-2015; Ord. 2016-04, passed 5-2-2016; Ord. 2018-01,
passed 4-9-2018)
§ 34.03 COMMISSIONS AND OTHER ENTITIES.
   The following boards and committees are established and acknowledged in the
county:
   (A)   Plan Commission;
(Prior Code, § 2-235)
   (B)   Board of Zoning Appeals;
(Prior Code, § 2-236)
   (C)   Commission on Public Records;
(Prior Code, § 2-237)
   (D)   Economic Development Commission;
(Prior Code, § 2-238)
   (E)   Office of Emergency Preparedness;
(Prior Code, § 2-239)
   (F)   Columbus Area Arts Council;
(Prior Code, § 2-240) (Res. 1989-06, passed 12-11-1989)
   (G)   Drug Free Community Fund Advisory Committee;
(Prior Code, § 2-241) (Ord. 1991-09, passed 12-11-1991)
   (H)   Emergency Medical and Rescue Response Study Group;
(Prior Code, § 2-242) (Res. 1994-13, passed 8-29-1994)
   (I)   Animal Control Commission;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-170—2-173) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979)
   (J)   Cable TV Emergency Warning Commission;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-194—2-198) (Ord. 1990-07, passed 4-23-1990)
   (K)   Convention, Recreation and Visitor Promotion Commission;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-176—2-185) (Ord. 1987-5, passed 3-9-1987; Ord. 2012-08,
passed 10-8-2012)
   (L)   Alcoholic Beverage Board;
(Prior Code, § 2-159)
   (M)   Fire Prevention Bureau;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-142—2-152) (Ord. 1987-4, passed 3-9-1987)
   (N)   Health Department Donations Commission;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-229—2-233) (Ord. 1988-12, passed 8-15-1988)
   (O)   Juvenile Holdover Program Commission;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-201—2-205) (Ord. 1990-05, passed 4-16-1990)
   (P)   Youth Services Center;
(Prior Code, §§ 2-222—2-227) (Ord. 1992-01, passed 1-9-1992)
   (Q)   Redevelopment Commission; and
   (R)   Substance Abuse Services Advisory and Accountability Committee.
(Ord. 2014-06, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. 2018-01, passed 4-9-2018)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE; FUNDS, TAXES
Section
   
35.001   Required information for budget purposes
   
35.002   Investment of county funds
   
35.003   Electronic fund transfers
   
35.004   Reduction of account balance
   
35.005   Payment of certain claims in advance of Board allowance
   
35.006   Specific funds
   
35.007   Specific taxes
   
35.008   Electronic transmission of statements and other information for
property taxes and special assessments
   
35.009   Electronic signature on INDOT contracts
   
35.010   Allowable costs policy
Documents and Funds
   
35.020   Authorization for investment of funds by County Treasurer
   
35.021   Designation of funds
   
35.022   Funds designated for withholding purposes
   
35.023   Application of interest earned
   
35.024   Maintenance of documentation
   
35.025   Documentation
Tax Abatement
   
35.035   Economic revitalization areas for real property
   
35.036   Personal property tax abatement
Purchasing Procedures
   
35.050   Establishment
   
35.051   Powers and duties
   
35.052   Purchasing agents
Purchasing Policy
   
35.060   Purchasing policy
Investment Policy
   
35.075   Policy
   
35.076   Scope
   
35.077   Investment objectives
   
35.078   Delegation of authority
   
35.079   Prudence
   
35.080   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
35.081   Authorized securities and transactions
   
35.082   Investment diversification
   
35.083   Investment maturity and liquidity
   
35.084   Competitive transactions
   
35.085   Selection of broker/dealers
   
35.086   Safekeeping and custody
   
35.087   Performance benchmarks
   
35.088   Reporting
   
35.089   Policy revisions
Capital Asset Policy
   
35.095   Purpose
   
35.096   Classification of assets
   
35.097   Capitalization thresholds
   
35.098   Historical cost or estimated historical costs
   
35.099   Estimated useful lives of depreciable assets
   
35.100   Depreciation method/convention
   
35.101   Retirements
   
35.102   Responsibility for property record maintenance
   
35.103   Property control
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001 REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR BUDGET PURPOSES.
   The County Commissioners shall provide to the County Council an itemized
breakdown of the budget request specifying the amount of each request for the
machinery and equipment for each department expenditure contained in the budget
of the County Commissioners. The information shall be provided at the time the
County Commissioners first submit the budget requests to the County Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-355) (Res. 1983-4, passed 9-6-1983)
§ 35.002 INVESTMENT OF COUNTY FUNDS.
   (A)   The County Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest any money
under the control of the county from time to time in any or all of the
investments described in I.C. 5-13-9-1 et seq. and all acts amendatory thereof
or supplemental thereto.
   (B)   The County Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest the money
described in division (A) above from the specific funds and money on deposit,
as set by Council.
   (C)   Any interest earned from money invested from any of the above-
described funds shall be applied to that respective fund.
   (D)   The County Treasurer shall keep and maintain documentation of all
investment transactions as shall be sufficient for audit purposes and as shall
be required from time to time by the State Board of Accounts.
(Prior Code, § 2-356) (Ord. 1995-02, passed 1-3-1995)
§ 35.003 ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFERS.
   (A)   (1)   The County Auditor is authorized to transact the business of the
county with any financial institution through the use of electronic funds
transfers in the following types of transactions: ordering, instructing or
authorizing any financial institution to debit or credit any account
established and maintained by the County Auditor for the deposit or investment
of any of the county’s monies in any type of transaction, including, but not
limited to, deposits or transfers of any money or funds into any account or
investment, paying or transferring wages or other compensation to any county
employee or contractor, paying or transferring garnishment payments, wage
assignment payments, income withholding order payments and any other payments
to any person or entity.
      (2)   The County Treasurer is authorized to transact the business of the
county with any financial institution through the use of electronic funds
transfers in the following types of transactions: ordering, instructing or
authorizing any financial institution to debit or credit any account
established and maintained by the County Treasurer for the deposit or
investment of any of the county’s monies in any type of transaction, including,
but not limited to, tax sales and related transactions; deposits or transfers
of any money or funds into any account or investment, purchases of and payments
for any types of investments, collections of any taxes or receiving of payments
of any taxes or other indebtedness.
      (3)   The County Clerk is authorized to transact the business of the
county with any financial institution through the use of electronics funds
transfers in the following types of transactions: ordering, instructing or
authorizing any financial institution to debit or credit any account
established and maintained by the County Treasurer for the deposit or
investment of any of the county’s monies in any type of transaction, including,
but not limited to, accepting child support or other payments, disbursing
payments of child support or other types of payments, accepting garnishment
payments, wage assignment payments, income withholding order payments and any
other payments from any person or entity.
      (4)   The County Auditor, County Treasurer and the County Clerk shall
maintain adequate documentation of other transactions so that they may be
audited as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 2-357)
   (B)   The county elects to receive distributions from the state by means of
electronic transfer of funds pursuant to I.C. 4-8.1-2-7, and as the same may be
amended.
   (C)   (1)   The County Treasurer is authorized to make all debits and
credits to accounts and investments of funds belonging to the county with
financial institutions holding the funds through the use of electronic funds
transfer.
      (2)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFER shall mean any
transfer of funds, other than a transaction originated by check, draft or
similar paper instrument, that is initiated through an electronic terminal,
telephone or computer or magnetic tape for purpose of ordering, instructing or
authorizing a financial institution to debit or credit an account.
(Prior Code, § 2-256)
(Ord. 1983-7, passed 7-18-1983; Council Res. 1996-03, passed 4-9-1996; Council
Res. 98-15, passed 11-10-1998)
§ 35.004 REDUCTION OF ACCOUNT BALANCE.
   The County Council elects to reduce the required county income tax special
account balance from a six-month balance to a three-month balance within 90
days after the adoption of this section.
(Prior Code, § 2-358) (Council Res. 1996-10, passed 5-14-1996)
§ 35.005 PAYMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS IN ADVANCE OF BOARD ALLOWANCE.
   (A)   The County Auditor is hereby authorized to make claim payments in
advance of approval by the Board of Commissioners for the following type of
expenses:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from the United States
government, its agencies or its political subdivisions;
      (2)   License or permit fees;
      (3)   Insurance premiums;
      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (5)   General grant programs where advance funding is not prohibited and
the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the amount advanced;
      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (7)   Maintenance or service agreements;
      (8)   Leases or rental agreements;
      (9)   Bond or coupon payments;
      (10)   Payroll;
      (11)   State or federal taxes;
      (12)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency circumstances;
      (13)   Expenses described in an ordinance; and
      (14)   Payments made in order to receive a discounted price for goods or
services provided to the county.
   (B)   Each payment of expenses as described herein must be supported by
fully itemized invoice or bill and certification by the County Auditor.
   (C)   Any claim or expense paid hereunder shall be reviewed and approved by
the Board of Commissioners or the county board having jurisdiction over the
allowance of the claim or expense at the next regular or special meeting of the
Board of Commissioners or other county board.
   (D)   Any payment made hereunder must be published in the manner provided
for other claims paid by county government.
(Ord. 2001-10, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 2012-02, passed 2-20-2012)
§ 35.006 SPECIFIC FUNDS.
   (A)   Cash change funds.
Fund Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
Fund                                 Prior Code Ord. No.            Date Passed
Auditor Cash Change Fund*                       (R) Council 2003-04 3-11-2003
Cash Change Fund drawer for Clerk of § 2-272   (R) Council 1991-02 1-8-1991
Courts*
Code Enforcement Office Cash Change  § 2-271   (R) Council 1991-03 1-8-1991
Fund*
County Recorder Cash Change Fund*    § 2-265   (R) Council 1991-08 1-8-1991
County Treasurer Cash Change Fund*   § 2-270   (R) Council 1991-04 1-8-1991
Public Health Department
Environmental Division Cash Change   § 2-267   (R) Council 1991-07 1-8-1991
Funds*
Public Health Department Nursing     § 2-268   (R) Council 1991-06 1-8-1991
Division Cash Change Fund*
Solid Waste Disposal Authority       § 2-269   (R) Council 1991-05 1-8-1991
(SWDA) County Cash Change Fund*
NOTES TO TABLE:
*   See listed ordinance or resolution for specific or special provisions.
 
   (B)   Funds.
Fund Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
Fund                 Prior Code      Ord. No.             Date Passed
Bartholomew-Columbus §§ 2-301—                        11-26-198 4; 7-6-
Telecommunications   2-303           1984-10; 2015-06     2015
Non- Reverting Fund*
Cell Tower Lease                     2014-02              3-24-2014
Fund*
County Corrections   §§ 2-280—   1990-06; 1998-06;    4-23-1990 ; 4-20-1998
Fund*                2-285           Council (R) 1999-04  ; 4-26-1999
Cumulative Bridge    § 2-346        Tax Comm. Order 5694 9-18-1990
Fund*
Cumulative Capital                   (R) Council 2000-09; 7-10-2000 ; 6-19-2017
Development Fund*                    2017-06
Drug Enforcement     §§ 2-290, 2-291990-09              10-8-1990
Fund*
Fund 112; Local
Income Tax Economic                  2017-02              3-6-2017
Development Income
Tax Fund
Fund 117; Local
Income Tax Public                    2017-07           12-26-201 7
Safety-County Share
Fund
Fund 730; Local
Income Tax Certified                 2017-02              3-6-2017
Shares Fund
Fund 733; Local
Income Tax Economic                  2017-02              3-6-2017
Development Income
Tax Fund
Fund 734; Local
Income Tax Public                    2017-07              12-26-201 7
Safety Fund
Fund 1207                            2024-02              3-4-2024
Fund 1237: Opioid                    2022-10              11-28-202 2
Restricted Fund
Fund 1238: Opioid                    2022-10              11-28-202 2
Unrestricted Fund
Medical Care for     § 3-31         1994-16; 2008-04     7-25-1994 ; 2-25-2008
Inmates Fund*
Mental Health
Services                             2021-05              6-21-2021
Reimbursable Grant
Fund*
Perpetual
Telecommunications                   1999-05              4-26-1999
Fund*
Promotional Fund*    § 2-316        1987-5; 2001-09      3-9-1987; 11-5-2001
Rainy Day Fund*                      Council 2009-11;     - -2009;
                                     Council 2014-01      5-13-2014
Rental Payments Fund                 2017-01              2-27-2017
Sex or Violent
Offender                             2007-06              8-27-2007
Administration Fund*
Special Non-         §§ 2-307—
Reverting Capital    2-309           1982-16              12-7-1982
Fund*
Special Non-         §§ 2-295—
Reverting Operating  2-298           1985-2               3-12-1985
Fund*
Special Vehicle                      2008-12              11-17-200 8
Inspection Fund*
Substance Abuse Non-                 2018-02              4-9-2018
Reverting Fund*
Tax Sale Fee Fund*   § 2-321        1995-08              7-17-1995
Youth Services
Center Petty Cash    § 2-320        (R) 1994-20          11- -1994
Fund*
NOTES TO TABLE:
*   See listed ordinance or resolution for specific or special provisions.
 
§ 35.007 SPECIFIC TAXES.
 
Tax                  Prior Code      Ord. No.             Date Passed
                     §§ 2-331—
County Innkeepers’ 2-336;          1986-10; 1990-11     12-9-1986 ; 11-13-
Tax*                 2-554—                             1990
                     2-560
Economic Development                 (R) 1999-04; 2009-08 5-11-1999 ; 7- -2009
Income Tax*
Income tax special                   1996-10              5-14-1996
account balance*
Local Option Tax*    §§ 2-341, 2-34Council -            5-21-1973
NOTES TO TABLE:
*   See listed ordinance or resolution for specific or special provisions.
 
§ 35.008 ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION OF STATEMENTS AND OTHER INFORMATION FOR
PROPERTY TAXES AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   The county hereby authorizes the electronic transmission of statements
and other information for property taxes and special assessments first due and
payable after 2011.
   (B)   The county hereby authorizes each county taxpayer ("person") to direct
the County Treasurer and County Auditor to transmit the following to the person
by electronic mail and as applicable:
      (1)   A statement that would otherwise be sent by the County Treasurer to
the person by regular mail under I.C. 6-1.1-22-8.1(a)(1), including a statement
that reflects installment payment due dates under I.C. 6-1.1-22-9.5 or I.C. 6-
1.1-22-9.7;
      (2)   A provisional tax statement that would otherwise be sent by the
County Treasurer to the person by regular mail under IC 6-1.1-22.5-6;
      (3)   A reconciling tax statement that would otherwise be sent by the
County Treasurer to the person by regular mail under any of the following:
         (a)   I.C. 6-1.1-22-9;
         (b)   I.C. 6-1.1-22-9.7;
         (c)   I.C. 6-1.1-22.5-12, including a statement that reflects
installment payment due dates under I.C. 6-1.1-22.5-18.5;
      (4)   A statement that would otherwise be sent by the County Auditor to
the person by regular mail under I.C. 6-1.l-17-3(b);
      (5)   Any other information that:
         (a)   Concerns the property taxes or special assessments; and
         (b)   Would otherwise be sent:
            1.   By the County Treasurer or the County Auditor to the person
by-regular mail; and
            2.   Before the last date the property taxes or special assessments
may be paid without becoming delinquent.
   (C)   This section takes effect with the first installment of property taxes
of 2012 and shall continue indefinitely.
   (D)   Notice shall be given to county taxpayers of the option to direct
electronic transmission of statements and other information for property taxes
and special assessments in compliance with all applicable statutory provisions.
   (E)   The County Treasurer and County Auditor shall have the authority to
electronically submit to county taxpayers their statements and other
information for property taxes and special assessments first due and payable
after 2011.
   (F)   The County Auditor and County Treasurer are authorized to negotiate
and execute a contract with a provider to obtain such administrative,
technical, clerical and related services ("E-Billing Services") in order to
implement a program for the electronic transmission of statements and other
information for property taxes and special assessments.
   (G)   The E-Billing Services contract shall provide for the delivery of such
services by a contractor in compliance with all applicable statutory provisions
for the electronic transmission of statements and other information for
property taxes and special assessments. The E-Billing Services contract shall
also provide for the payment of fee(s) for each parcel that a county taxpayer
elects to participate in the electronic transmission of statements and other
information for property taxes and special assessments.
(Ord. 2012-04, passed 3-5-2012)
§ 35.009 ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE ON INDOT CONTRACTS.
   (A)   For purposes of entering into contracts with the Indiana Department of
Transportation, (“INDOT”), it shall be sufficient, in order to bind the county
to the terms and conditions of any contract with INDOT, if the contract is
signed by one Commissioner in an electronic format, or such other format as
INDOT designates, requires or allows and further, that said signature need not
be attested to by the County Auditor, provided that the following conditions
are met:
      (1)   The contract shall have been considered in a scheduled public
meeting of the County Commissioners.
      (2)   A quorum of the Commissioners shall have been in attendance at the
meeting in person or in such other manner as authorized by law or executive
order.
      (3)   The contract shall have been approved by at least a majority vote
of the Commissioners.
   (B)   The contract shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Commissioners
if the Chairperson is in attendance at the meeting at which the contract was
approved; in the absence of the Chairperson, the contract may be signed by any
Commissioner who is in attendance at the meeting at which the contract was
approved.
(Res. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 35.010 ALLOWABLE COSTS POLICY.
   (A)   The application of these cost principles is based on the fundamental
premises that:
      (1)   The non-federal entity is responsible for the efficient and
effective administration of the federal award through the application of sound
management practices;
      (2)   The non-federal entity assumes responsibility for administering
federal funds in a manner consistent with underlying agreements, program
objectives, and the terms and conditions of the federal award;
      (3)   The non-federal entity, in recognition of its own unique
combination of staff, facilities and experience, has the primary responsibility
for employing whatever form of sound organization and management techniques may
be necessary in order to assure proper and efficient administration of the
federal award;
      (4)   The application of these cost principles should require no
significant changes in the internal accounting policies and practices of the
non-federal entity. However, the accounting practices of the non-federal entity
must be consistent with these cost principles and support the accumulation of
costs as required by the principles, and must provide for adequate
documentation to support costs charged to the federal award;
      (5)   In reviewing, negotiating and approving cost allocation plans or
indirect cost proposals, the cognizant agency for indirect costs should
generally assure that the non-federal entity is applying these cost accounting
principles on a consistent basis during their review and negotiation of
indirect cost proposals. Where wide variations exist in the treatment of a
given cost item by the non-federal entity, the reasonableness and equity of
such treatments should be fully considered;
      (6)   For non-federal entities that educate and engage students in
research, the dual role of students as both trainees and employees (including
pre-and post-doctoral staff) contributing to the completion of federal awards
for research must be recognized in the application of these principles; and
      (7)   The non-federal entity may not earn or keep any profit resulting
from federal financial assistance, unless explicitly authorized by the terms
and conditions of the federal award.
   (B)   Composition of costs; total cost. The total cost of a federal award is
the sum of the allowable direct and allocable indirect costs less any
applicable credits.
   (C)   Factors affecting allowable costs. Except where otherwise authorized
by statute, costs must meet the following general criteria in order to be
allowable under these principles:
      (1)   Be necessary and reasonable for the performance of the federal
award and be allocable thereto under these principles;
      (2)   Conform to any limitations or exclusions set forth in these
principles or in the federal award as to types or amounts of cost items;
      (3)   Be consistent with policies and procedures that apply uniformly to
both federally-financed and other activities of the non-federal entity;
      (4)   Be accorded consistent treatment. A cost may not be assigned to a
federal award as a direct cost if any other cost incurred for the same purpose
in like circumstances has been allocated to the federal award as an indirect
cost;
      (5)   Be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP), except, for state and local governments and Indian tribes
only, as otherwise provided for in this part;
      (6)   Not be included as a cost or used to meet cost sharing or matching
requirements of any other federally-financed program in either the current or a
prior period;
      (7)   Be adequately documented; and
      (8)   Cost must be incurred during the approved budget period. The
federal awarding agency is authorized, at its discretion, to waive prior
written approvals to cany forward unobligated balances to subsequent budget
periods.
   (D)   Factors affecting reasonable costs. A cost is reasonable if, in its
nature and amount, it does not exceed that which would be incurred by a prudent
person under the circumstances prevailing at the time the decision was made to
incur the cost. The question of reasonableness is particularly important when
the non-federal entity is predominantly federal-funded. In determining
reasonableness of a given cost, consideration must be given to:
      (1)   Whether the cost is a type generally recognized as ordinary and
necessary for the operation of the non-federal entity or the proper and
efficient performances of the federal award;
      (2)   The restraints or requirements imposed by such factors as: sound
business practices; arm’s-length bargaining; federal, state, local, tribal and
other laws and regulations; and terms and conditions of the federal award;
      (3)   Market prices for comparable goods or services for the geographic
area;
      (4)   Whether the individuals concerned acted with prudence in the
circumstances considering their responsibilities to the non-federal entity, its
employees, where applicable its students or memberships, the public at large
and the federal government; and
      (5)   Whether the non-federal entity significantly deviates from its
established practices and policies regarding the incurrence of costs, which may
unjustifiably increase the federal award’s cost.
   (E)   Factors affecting allocable costs.
      (1)   A cost is allocable to a particular federal award or other cost
objective if the goods or services involved are chargeable or assignable to
that federal award or cost objective in accordance with relative benefits
received. This standard is met if the cost:
         (a)   Is incurred specifically for the federal award;
         (b)   Benefits both the federal award and other work of the non-
federal entity and can be distributed in proportions that may be approximated
using reasonable methods; and
         (c)   Is necessary to the overall operation of the non-federal entity
and is assignable in part to the federal award in accordance with the
principles in this division.
      (2)   All activities which benefit from the non-federal entity’s indirect
cost, including unallowable activities and donated services by the non-federal
entity or third parties, will receive an appropriate allocation of indirect
costs.
      (3)   Any cost allocable to a particular federal award under the
principles provided for in this part may not be charged to other federal awards
to overcome fund deficiencies, to avoid restrictions imposed by federal
statutes, regulations, or terms and conditions of the federal awards, or for
other reasons. However, this prohibition would not preclude the non-federal
entity from shifting costs that are allowable under two or more federal awards
in accordance with existing federal statutes, regulations, or the terms and
conditions of the federal awards.
      (4)   Direct cost allocation principles. If a cost benefits two or more
projects or activities in proportions that can be determined without undue
effort or cost, the cost must be allocated to the projects based on the
proportional benefit. If a cost benefits two or more projects or activities in
proportions that cannot be determined because of the interrelationship of the
work involved, then, notwithstanding division (E)(3) above, the costs may be
allocated or transferred to benefitted projects on any reasonable documented
basis. Where the purchase of equipment or other capital asset is specifically
authorized under a federal award, the costs are assignable to the federal award
regardless of the use that may be made of the equipment or other capital asset
involved when no longer needed for the purpose for which it was originally
required.
   (F)   This policy outlines the allowable cost with regards to federal
grants.
(Res. 2023-16, passed 11-13-2023)
DOCUMENTS AND FUNDS
§ 35.020 AUTHORIZATION FOR INVESTMENT OF FUNDS BY COUNTY TREASURER.
   The County Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest any money under
the control of the county from time to time in any or all of the investments
described in I.C. 5-13-9-1 et seq. and all acts amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-250) (Ord. 1993-01, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 35.021 DESIGNATION OF FUNDS.
   The County Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest the money
described in §
35.20 from the specific funds and money on deposit, as set by the county.
(Prior Code, § 2-251) (Ord. 1993-01, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 35.022 FUNDS DESIGNATED FOR WITHHOLDING PURPOSES.
   The County Treasurer is authorized to place monies into withholding funds as
deemed appropriate.
(Prior Code, §§ 2-252, 2-253)
§ 35.023 APPLICATION OF INTEREST EARNED.
   Any interest earned from money invested from any of the funds described in §
35.21 shall be applied to that respective fund.
(Prior Code, § 2-254) (Ord. 1993-01, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 35.024 MAINTENANCE OF DOCUMENTATION.
   The County Treasurer shall keep and maintain documentation of all investment
transactions as shall be sufficient for audit purposes and as shall be required
from time to time by the State Board of Accounts.
(Prior Code, § 2-255) (Ord. 1993-01, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 35.025 DOCUMENTATION.
   The County Treasurer shall maintain documentation of all electronic funds
transfer transactions in a form by which they may be audited and as may be
required from time to time by the State Board of Accounts.
(Prior Code, § 2-257) (Ord. 1983-7, passed 7-18-1983)
TAX ABATEMENT
§ 35.035 ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREAS FOR REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   For a building or structure that is rehabilitated, developed or
redeveloped in an economic revitalized area, and that meets all other
requirements of the applicable state statutes, the property owner shall be
entitled to a deduction from the assessed value of the building or structure,
not including land, for a period of ten years, if otherwise in full accord with
all other terms and provisions of I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 through 6-1.1-12.1-6 and
with all other terms and provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The amount of the deduction for a particular year equals the product
of the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation or
redevelopment multiplied by the applicable percentages hereinafter set forth.
Year of Deduction Percentage
Year of Deduction Percentage
1st               100%
2nd               95%
3rd               80%
4th               65%
5th               50%
6th               40%
7th               30%
8th               20%
9th               10%
10th              5%
 
(Prior Code, § 3-90) (Council Res. passed 7-17-1987)
§ 35.036 PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The assessed value of the new manufacturing equipment in the year that
the equipment is installed; multiplied by:
Year of Deduction Percentage
Year of Deduction   Percentage
1st                 100%
2nd                 95%
3rd                 90%
4th                 85%
5th                 80%
6th                 70%
7th                 55%
8th                 40%
9th                 30%
10th                25%
11th and thereafter 0%
 
   (B)   All other provisions addressing real and/or personal property are
addressed in County Council Res. 1993-03, adopted 5-11-1993, which is
incorporated herein by reference and is on file in the office of the County
Auditor.
(Prior Code, § 3-91) (Council 1993-03, passed 5-11-1993)
PURCHASING PROCEDURES
§ 35.050 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Board of Commissioners is hereby established as the purchasing agency
for the county.
(Ord. 1998-07, passed 7-13-1998)
§ 35.051 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The county purchasing agency shall have all of the powers and duties
authorized under the provisions of I.C. 5-22 as the same may be supplemented
from time to time by ordinances adopted by the Board of Commissioners and
policies adopted by the purchasing agency.
   (B)   The county purchasing agency shall act as the purchasing agency for
every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department or
other establishment of the county, including each elected county officials, the
Circuit, Superior and I and II Courts of the county and the County Prosecutor.
(Ord. 1998-07, passed 7-13-1998)
§ 35.052 PURCHASING AGENTS.
   (A)   The following are hereby designated as purchasing agents for the
county:
      (1)   Each elected county official;
      (2)   Each Circuit and Superior Court Judge;
      (3)   The County Highway Superintendent and Highway Engineer;
      (4)   Each department head;
      (5)   The County Drainage Board;
      (6)   The County Plan Commission; and
      (7)   The County Park Board.
   (B)   The above designated purchasing agents are hereby instructed to comply
with the terms of the counties purchasing policy, a copy of which is attached
to the ordinance codified herein.
(Ord. 1998-07, passed 7-13-1998; Res. 1998-08, passed 7-27-1998)
PURCHASING POLICY
§ 35.060 PURCHASING POLICY.
   (A)   The purpose of this purchasing policy is to maximize the purchasing
power and value of public funds and to ensure that the purchasing process is
conducted in an ethical, fair, open and consistent manner. This policy is
intended to promote efficiency, effectiveness, equity, fairness and consistency
in public purchasing.
   (B)   (1)   This policy applies to all county offices, departments and
employees. The County Commissioners reserve the right to waive the requirements
of this policy if, in their sole discretion, such waiver is in the best
interest of county government and not in violation of federal, state or local
law.
      (2)   This policy does not apply to purchases made in connection with
public works projects or to purchases required by state or federal law to be
formally bid.
   (C)   Prior to purchasing any equipment, materials, supplies or other items
costing more than $2,500 but less than $5,000 the following procedure must be
followed:
      (1)   Obtain and complete a “Request For Purchase Form” which is
available in the County Commissioner’s office.
      (2)   Obtain a minimum of three price quotes from businesses known to
sell the item being purchased. Office holders, department heads and employees
are encouraged to solicit quotes from local vendors whenever possible.
      (3)   Turn in the completed Request For Purchases Form indicating the
item selected for purchase, all quotes received and the invoice for the
purchase to the auditor’s office for payment.
   (D)   Prior to purchasing any equipment, materials, supplies or other items
costing $5,000 or more, the following procedure must be followed:
      (1)   Obtain at least three written price quotes or proposals from
businesses known to sell the item being purchased. Office holders, department
heads and employees are encouraged to solicit price quotes or proposals from
local vendors whenever possible.
      (2)   All price quotes or proposals are to be submitted to the County
Commissioners office no later than 12:00 noon on Wednesday in order to be
considered for approval at the following Monday Commissioners’ meeting.
      (3)   In order to facilitate processing for payment of an approved
purchase, a claim must be submitted to the Auditor’s office (utilizing the VIP
software or software being utilized at the time of claim submittal). The claim
must be accompanied by the vendor’s invoice, a copy of the Commissioners’ award
letter and a copy of the Commissioners’ meeting minutes from the meeting at
which the purchase was approved. Minutes may be obtained from the county
website homepage under “Meeting Center,” then proceed to “Minutes-Public
Meetings” - “Board of Commissioners Minutes.”
(Res. 2020-3, passed 3-23-2020; Res. 2023-06, passed 5-15-2023; Res. 2023-07,
passed 6-5-2023)
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 35.075 POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of Bartholomew County, Indiana (the county) to invest
public funds in a manner that will preserve its capital, meet its daily
liquidity needs, diversify its investments, conform to all state statutes
governing the investment of public funds, and generate market rates of return.
   (B)   This investment policy (the policy) addresses the methods, procedures
and practices which must be exercised to ensure effective and judicious fiscal
and investment management of the county's funds. It replaces any previous
investment policy or investment procedures of the county.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.076 SCOPE.
   (A)   This investment policy shall apply to all funds accounted for in the
county's financial statements.
   (B)   All cash shall be pooled for investment purposes. The investment
income derived from the pooled investment account shall be allocated to the
contributing funds based upon the proportion of the respective average daily
balances relative to the total pooled balance in the investment portfolio.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.077 INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES.
   The county's funds shall be invested in accordance with all applicable
county policies, state statutes, and federal regulations, and in a manner
designed to accomplish the following objectives, which are listed in priority
order:
   (A)   Preservation of capital and protection of investment principal;
   (B)   Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet anticipated cash flows;
   (C)   Attainment of a market rate of return; and
   (D)   Diversification to avoid incurring unreasonable market risks.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.078 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The County Treasurer is vested with responsibility for managing the
county's investment program and for implementing this policy. Should the
Treasurer not be able to perform the duties of investment officer, the Chief
Deputy Treasurer is designated to assume the investment duties under the
direction and recommendation of the Board of Finance. No person may engage in
an investment transaction except as expressly provided under the terms of this
policy.
   (B)   The Treasurer shall establish written procedures and internal controls
for the operation of the county's investment program, designed to prevent loss
of public funds due to fraud, error, misrepresentation and imprudent actions.
   (C)   The county may engage the support services of outside investment
advisors with respect to its investment program, so long as it can be
demonstrated that these services produce a net financial advantage or necessary
financial protection of the county's financial resources.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.079 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   The standard of prudence to be used for managing the county's
investment program is the Prudent Investor Rule applicable to a trustee, as set
forth in the Indiana Uniform Prudent Investor Act (I.C. 30-4-3.5). I.C. 30-4-
3.5-2a states that "A trustee shall invest and manage trust assets as a prudent
investor would, by considering the purposes, terms, distribution requirements,
and other circumstances of the trust. In satisfying this standard, the trustee
shall exercise reasonable care, skill, and caution."
   (B)   The county's overall investment program shall be designed and managed
with a degree of professionalism that is worthy of the public trust. The county
recognizes that no investment is totally without risk and that its investment
activities are a matter of public record. Accordingly, the county recognizes
that occasional measured losses may occur in a diversified portfolio and shall
be considered within the context of the overall portfolio's return, provided
that adequate diversification has been implemented and that the sale of a
security is in the best long-term interest of the county.
   (C)   The Treasurer and other authorized persons acting in accordance with
written procedures and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal
responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price
changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion
to the Board of Finance and appropriate action is taken to control adverse
developments.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.080 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officials involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the county's
investment program or that could impair or create the appearance of an
impairment of their ability to make impartial investment decisions. They shall
disclose to the Board of Finance any material financial interest they have in
financial institutions that conduct business with the county, and they shall
subordinate their personal investment transactions to those of the county's.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.081 AUTHORIZED SECURITIES AND TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   All investments shall be made in accordance with the Indiana Code as
follows: I.C. 5-13-9, Deposit and Investment Powers; I.C. 5-13-10.5, State
Investments; I.C. 5-13-9.5, Designation of State Depositories; I.C. 5-13-10,
Funds Invested by Treasurer of State and I.C. 36-1-7, Interlocal Cooperation.
Any revisions or extensions of these chapters of the statutes shall be assumed
to be part of this policy immediately upon being enacted.
   (B)   This investment policy further restricts the investment of county
funds to the following types of securities and transactions:
      (1)   U.S. Treasury securities. Treasury bills, treasury notes, treasury
bonds, and treasury strips with maturities not exceeding five years from the
date of trade settlement.
      (2)   Federal instrumentality securities. Debentures, medium-term notes,
discount notes, callable and step-up securities, and stripped principal or
coupons with maturities not exceeding five years from the date of trade
settlement issued by the following only; Federal National Mortgage Association
(FNMA), Federal Farm Credit Bank (FFCB), Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) and
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC).
      (3)   Time certificates of deposit. Issued by depositories designated by
the State Board of Finance as depositories for state deposits with maturities
not exceeding five years from the date of purchase.
      (4)   Repurchase agreements. With depositories designated by the State
Board of Finance as depositories for state deposits, that are fully
collateralized at not less than 100% by interest-bearing U.S. Treasury
securities or Federal Instrumentality securities listed in divisions (B)(1) and
(2) above as described in I.C. 5-13-9-3.
      (5)   Money market mutual funds that are registered under the Investment
Company Act of 1940, as amended; that are open end; "no-load" (no commission or
fee charged on purchases or sales of shares); have a constant net asset value
of $1 per share; limit assets of the fund to U.S. Treasury securities, federal
instrumentality securities, and repurchase agreements collateralized by the
same; and have a rating of AAAm or the equivalent by one or more nationally
recognized statistical ratings organizations. Investments in money market
mutual funds shall be made through depositories designated by the State Board
of Finance as depositories for state deposits and shall not exceed 50% of the
funds available for investment. The Treasurer may exceed this limit during
property tax collections, as described in I.C. 5-13-9-2.5.
      (6)   Local government investment pools established within the office and
custody of the Treasurer of the state that invest in funds in accordance with
I.C. 5-13-9-11.
      (7)   CDARS - certificate of deposit registry service established by I.C.
5-13-9-5.3.
      (8)   Negotiable certificates of deposit - established by I.C. 5-13-9.5
and I.C. 5-13-9-2.
      (9)   Municipal securities issued by an Indiana local government entity,
a quasi-governmental entity related to the state, or a unit of government,
municipal corporation, or special taxing district in Indiana, if the issuer has
not defaulted on any of the issuer’s obligations within the 20 years preceding
the date of the purchase.
   (C)   It is the intent of the county that the foregoing list of authorized
securities be strictly interpreted. Any deviation from this list must be pre-
approved by the Board of Finance.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.082 INVESTMENT DIVERSIFICATION.
   It is the intent of the county to diversify the investments within the
portfolio to avoid incurring unreasonable risks inherent in over-investing in
specific instruments, individual financial institutions or maturities. The
asset allocation in the portfolio should be flexible depending upon the outlook
for the economy, the securities markets and the county's anticipated cash flow
needs.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.083 INVESTMENT MATURITY AND LIQUIDITY.
   The portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid to meet all cash requirements
that may be reasonably anticipated. To the extent possible, investments shall
be matched with anticipated cash flows and known future liabilities.
Investments shall be limited to maturities not exceeding five years from the
date of trade settlement.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-202; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-20254)
§ 35.084 COMPETITIVE TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   Each investment transaction shall be competitively transacted with
authorized broker/dealers. At least three broker/dealers shall be contacted for
each transaction and their bid and offering prices shall be recorded.
   (B)   If the county is offered a security for which there is no other
readily available competitive offering, quotations for comparable or
alternative securities shall be documented.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.085 SELECTION OF BROKER/DEALERS.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall maintain a list of broker/dealers approved for
investment purposes, and it shall be the policy of the county to purchase
securities only from those authorized firms.
   (B)   To be eligible, a firm must meet at least one of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Be recognized as a primary dealer by the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York or have a primary dealer within its holding company structure;
      (2)   Report voluntarily to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; or
      (3)   Qualify under Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 15c3-l
(Uniform Net Capital Rule).
   (C)   Broker/dealers shall be selected by the Treasurer on the basis of
their expertise in public cash management and their ability to provide service
to the county's account. Each authorized broker/dealer shall be required to
submit and annually update a broker/dealer information request form that
includes the firm's most recent financial statements.
   (D)   In the event that an external investment advisor is not used in the
process of recommending a particular transaction in the county’s portfolio, any
authorized broker/dealer from whom a competitive bid is obtained for the
transaction shall attest in writing that he/she has received a copy of this
policy.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.086 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   The Treasurer shall approve one or more financial institutions to
provide safekeeping and custodial services for the county. A safekeeping
agreement shall be executed with each custodian bank. To be eligible, a
financial institution shall:
      (1)   Be designated by the State Board of Finance as a depository for
state deposits; or
      (2)   Have a combined capital and surplus of at least $10,000,000.
   (B)   The purchase and sale of securities and repurchase agreement
transactions shall be settled on a delivery versus payment basis. Ownership of
all securities shall be perfected in the name of the county. Sufficient
evidence to title shall be consistent with modern investment, banking and
commercial practices.
   (C)   All investment securities purchased by the county shall be delivered
by either book entry or physical delivery and shall be held in third-party
safekeeping by the county approved custodian bank, its correspondent bank or
the Depository Trust Company (DTC).
   (D)   The county's custodian shall be required to furnish the county a list
of holdings on at least a monthly basis and safekeeping receipts or customer
confirmations shall be issued for each transaction.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.087 PERFORMANCE BENCHMARKS.
   The county's investment portfolio shall be designed to attain a market rate
of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account
prevailing market conditions, risk constraints for eligible securities, and
cash flow requirements. The performance of the portfolio shall be compared to
the average yield on the U.S. Treasury security that most closely corresponds
to the portfolio's weighted average effective maturity. When comparing the
performance of the county's portfolio, all fees involved with managing the
portfolio shall be included in the computation of the portfolio's rate of
return net of fees.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.088 REPORTING.
   Each year on or before the last day of January, the Treasurer will prepare a
report for the Board of Finance summarizing the past fiscal year ending
December 31, according to I.C. 5-13-7-6 through 5-13-7-7.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
§ 35.089 POLICY REVISIONS.
   This investment policy shall be reviewed annually by the County Treasurer
and may be amended by the Board of Finance as conditions warrant. This policy
has been reviewed and approved by the Board of Finance on January 27, 2025 and
replaces all previous versions of the policy.
(Ord. 2019-01, passed 1-28-2019; Ord. 2020-01, passed 1-27-2020; Ord. 2021-01,
passed 1-25-2021; Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-24-2022; Ord. 2023-1, passed 1-23-
2023; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-29-2024; Ord. 2025-01, passed 1-27-2025)
CAPITAL ASSET POLICY
§ 35.095 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to facilitate the preparation of financial
statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.096 CLASSIFICATION OF ASSETS.
   Capital assets are personal and real property used in the operations of
government that have an expected estimated useful life beyond a single period.
Capital assets are to include any item that falls into one of the following
categories:
   (A)   Land;
   (B)   Buildings;
   (C)   Machinery and equipment;
   (D)   Vehicles;
   (E)   Computer software;
   (F)   General infrastructure; and
   (G)   Construction in progress.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.097 CAPITALIZATION THRESHOLDS.
   (A)   To be considered a capital asset for financial reporting purposes, an
item must be at or above the capitalization threshold. Assets will remain as
part of the property record until they are retired or are disposed of, sold,
traded-in, and the like, regardless of net book value amount.
   (B)   The capitalization threshold for the following classes of assets shall
be:
      (1)   Land: N/A.
      (2)   Building improvements: $100,000.
      (3)   Machinery and equipment: $10,000.
      (4)   Vehicles: $15,000.
      (5)   Computer software: $50,000.
      (6)   General infrastructure improvements: $100,000.
      (7)   Construction in progress: N/A.
   (C)   With regard to improvements to buildings and general infrastructure, a
capital outlay must be significant and increase capacity, increase efficiency,
or extend the asset's estimated useful life beyond the original expectation.
   (D)   A change in capacity increases the level of service provided by the
assets. A change in efficiency increases the level of service but without
increasing the size of the asset or the change maintains the same level of
service at a lower cost. For example, an addition to a building provides
increased square footage, hence, the capacity is increased and the capital
outlay is capitalized. An extended estimated useful life involves a significant
alternation, structural change or improvement.
   (E)   While substantial repairs and renovations will be reviewed for
potential capitalization, it is anticipated that most will be expensed in the
current year. These expenses often merely restore the asset to the original
service potential but do not necessarily improve the asset.
   (F)   All land, including rights-of-way, is capitalized at the time of
acquisition regardless of historical costs or fair value if donated.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.098 HISTORICAL COST OR ESTIMATED HISTORICAL COSTS.
   (A)   Annual updating and reporting. Capital assets are recorded at
historical cost which includes any ancillary charges necessary to place the
asset into its intended location and condition for use. Ancillary charges
include, for example, freight and transportation charges, site preparation
costs, and professional fees. Engineering costs (internal and external) include
related preliminary project and environmental studies; project estimating,
design, and planning (drawings and specifications); and construction
engineering, construction management, construction inspection and project
payment. Donated capital assets are recorded at their estimated fair value at
the time of acquisition.
   (B)   Retroactive reporting at transition of GASB Statement No. 34. When
actual historical cost source data was unavailable, estimated historical cost
was developed utilizing a normal costing approach. With this method of
estimating historical costs, a current replacement cost was ascertained. An
appropriate cost index (including Consumer Price Index and federal highway
price trends) corresponding to an estimated date of acquisition/construction
was then applied to “deflate” the replacement cost to an estimated historical
cost.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.099 ESTIMATED USEFUL LIVES OF DEPRECIABLE ASSETS.
   Capital assets have estimated useful lives extending beyond a single
reporting period (one year) and are depreciated using the straight-line method
with no allowance for salvage value. The estimated useful lives currently used
were developed with the input of knowledgeable staff and reflect our
government’s experience with these assets:
   (A)   Land: non-depreciable.
   (B)   Buildings and improvements: 50 years.
   (C)   Machinery and equipment: five years.
   (D)   Vehicles.
      (1)   Autos and light trucks: five years.
      (2)   Trucks: ten years.
   (E)   General infrastructure: 50 years.
   (F)   Computer software: ten years.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.100 DEPRECIATION METHOD/CONVENTION.
   Depreciation will be calculated using the straight-line method and full-year
convention. No salvage value or residual value will be recognized.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.101 RETIREMENTS.
   (A)   Retirements apply to all capital assets including land, buildings,
machinery and equipment, vehicles, and general infrastructure.
   (B)   When an asset is disposed of, scrapped, sold, subject to demolition,
and the like, it is to be removed from the property record and the appropriate
reduction will be made to historical cost, accumulated depreciation, and net
book value amounts.
   (C)   Retirements will reflect the actual historical cost of the asset when
the amount is ascertainable. When historical cost is not ascertainable, an
estimated historical cost will be determined.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.102 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPERTY RECORD MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The County Auditor will ensure that reporting for capital assets is
being exercised by establishing a capital asset inventory, both initially and
periodically in subsequent years. The County Auditor will further ensure that
the capital asset report will be updated annually to reflect improvements,
additions, retirements, and transfers and to reflect the new, annual capital
asset balance for financial reporting purposes and the annual and accumulated
depreciation calculations and net book value amounts.
   (B)   Day-to-day stewardship of personal property above the capitalization
threshold of $10,000 is the expressed responsibility of the department
utilizing the property.
   (C)   For annual updating of the capital asset report, the departments have
the responsibility to report improvements, additions, retirements, and
transfers in detail to the County Auditor. It is expected that this reporting
will be in a timely manner, as the capital asset record must be updated
annually. These departments include but are not limited to Highway,
Engineering, Planning, Sheriff, Information Technology, and the County Auditor.
Also, the Board of Commissioners will provide input as to additions and
retirements as information becomes available.
   (D)   To restate, additions of assets at or above the unit capitalization
threshold of $10,000 are to be reported to the County Auditor by the
departments upon purchase or receipt of the asset. These will be verified per
the claims process by the County Auditor’s Office. Transfers and retirements of
assets at or above the $10,000 per unit threshold are to be reported as such by
the departments to the County Auditor at the time of the transaction.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
§ 35.103 PROPERTY CONTROL.
   (A)   Capital assets below the capitalization threshold of $10,000 on a unit
basis but warranting “control” shall be inventoried at the department level and
an appropriate list will be maintained. Data elements are to include asset
description, location, make, model, serial number, condition, and other
information that assists control or is deemed relevant.
   (B)   Assets below the capitalization threshold but considered sensitive may
include, for example, weapons, radios, personal computers, laptop computers,
printers, fax machines, and small power tools. These minor but sensitive items
shall be inventoried and controlled at the department level. Stewardship of
these minor but sensitive items is the express responsibility of the
departments utilizing these properties.
   (C)   The County Auditor shall have the right to request copies of the
inventory and/or updated inventory of controllable items so as to periodically
review the information and adherence to policy.
(Res. 2023-14, passed 11-13-2023)
 
§ 35.02 INVESTMENT OF COUNTY FUNDS.
   (A)   The County Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest any money
under the control of the county from time to time in any or all of the
investments described in I.C. 5-13-9-1 et seq. and all acts amendatory thereof
or supplemental thereto.
   (B)   The County Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest the money
described in division (A) above from the specific funds and money on deposit,
as set by Council.
   (C)   Any interest earned from money invested from any of the above-
described funds shall be applied to that respective fund.
   (D)   The County Treasurer shall keep and maintain documentation of all
investment transactions as shall be sufficient for audit purposes and as shall
be required from time to time by the State Board of Accounts.
(Prior Code, § 2-356) (Ord. 1995-02, passed 1-3-1995)
CHAPTER 36: FEES, LICENSES AND PERMITS
Section
   
36.01   Authorization to pay membership fees
   
36.02   Authorization to pay meeting expenses
   
36.03   Authority to grant licenses, permits
   
36.04   Authority to charge fees
   
36.05   Specific fees
   
36.06   Health Department fees
§ 36.01 AUTHORIZATION TO PAY MEMBERSHIP FEES.
   The Board of Commissioners of the county is hereby authorized to budget, the
County Council is hereby authorized to appropriate from the County General Fund
or from other funds and the Auditor of the county is hereby authorized to pay
the amounts as are necessary to provide membership for the county, its elected
and appointed officials, its employees, the members of its boards, departments
and agencies and its duly authorized representatives in local, regional, state
and national organizations of a civic, educational or governmental nature which
have as their purpose the betterment and improvement of county government and/
or the functions and duties of persons involved in county government.
(Prior Code, § 2-543) (Ord. 1982-11, passed 11-15-1982)
§ 36.02 AUTHORIZATION TO PAY MEETING EXPENSES.
   The Board of Commissioners of the county is authorized to budget, the County
Council is authorized to appropriate from the County General Fund or from other
funds and the Auditor of the county is hereby authorized to pay amounts as are
necessary to cover the costs and expenses incurred by the county, its elected
and appointed officials, its employees, the members of its boards, departments
and agencies and its duly authorized representatives to attend meetings,
functions, seminars and conferences of a civic, educational or governmental
nature which have as their purposes the betterment and improvement of county
government and/or the functions and duties of persons involved in county
government. The costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, those
relating to registration fees, materials fees, transportation, lodging and
meals. In order to qualify for payment, it shall not be necessary that the
county, an elected or appointed official, an employee, or a member of a board,
department or agency be a member of the organization sponsoring a meeting,
function, seminar or conference.
(Prior Code, § 2-544) (Ord. 1982-11, passed 11-15-1982)
§ 36.03 AUTHORITY TO GRANT LICENSES, PERMITS.
   The Board of Commissioners may grant licenses, permits or franchises for the
use of county property if they:
   (A)   Are not exclusive;
   (B)   Are of a definite duration; and
   (C)   Are assignable only with the consent of the executive.
(Prior Code, § 3-1)
Statutory reference:
   Licenses, permits and franchises, see I.C. 36-2-2-23
§ 36.04 AUTHORITY TO CHARGE FEES.
   The county may impose a fee for licenses or permits which is reasonably
related to the administrative cost of exercising the regulatory powers.
(Prior Code, § 3-2)
Statutory reference:
   Limits the power of administrative costs, see I.C. 36-1-3-8
§ 36.05 SPECIFIC FEES.
Type Fee Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
Type                                Fee        Prior Code Ord. No.  Date Passed
Accident reports*                   $5.00                 Council   3-13-2007
                                                          2007-01
Bad check service charge*           $10.00     § 3-26    1985-3    5-13-1985
Building, zoning and code           50% of all            (R) 2001- 7-16-2001
enforcement permit fees*            fees                  04
Burial expenses for veterans*       $200.00               2003-04   9-8-2003
Co-payments for health care services at county
jail*                                                     1994-16;  7-25-1996;
   Medical care                  $15.00                1999-09;  9-20-1999;
   Dental care                   $15.00     § 3-30    2002-05;  7-22-2002;
   Eye care                      $15.00                2004-03   8-30-2004
   Any other health care related $15.00
service
 
Type Fee Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
Type                                                                        Fee     Prior Code   Ord. No. Date
                                                                                                          Passed
                                                                                                          3-31-
Drainage Board proceedings fee*                                             $250.00              1997-06; 1997;
                                                                                                 2009-01  2-2-
                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                 1990-10; 10-9-
Enhanced Emergency Telephone System fee*                                    $1.84   §§ 3-20— Council  1990;
                                                                                    3-23         2000-08  6-13-
                                                                                                          2000
Jurors’ fees*
   Each day the juror is in actual attendance in Court until the jury is $17.50
impaneled                                                                                        Council  12-10-
   Each day the juror is in actual attendance after impaneling and until $40.00               1996-20  1996
the jury is discharged
   The mileage rate paid to state officers for each mile necessarily
traveled to and from the Court
                                                                                                          12-10-
Real property endorsement fee*                                              $10.00               2007-08  2007
                                                                                                 2019-03  6-24-
                                                                                                          2019
Returned draft service charge*                                              $20.00               2015-02  2-9-
                                                                                                          2015
Sex or violent offender*                                                                                  8-27-
   Address change fee                                                    $5.00                2007-    2007;
   Registration fee (applies to residence, employment, education,                             06;2023- 10-16-
volunteering, or secondary residence)                                       $50.00               05       2023

Sheriff’s sale service fee*                                               $200.00              Council  8-19-
                                                                                                 2009-09  2009
Statement and postage charge*                                               Cost    § 3-27      1985-3   5-13-
                                                                            over $1                       1985
Supplemental fee for recording documents*                                   $3      § 3-29      1995-12  11-13-
                                                                                                          1995
Vehicle identification inspection (VIN checks)                              $5                   2008-12  11-10-
                                                                                                          2008
Wire transfer fee                                                           $20.00               2015-01  2-9-
                                                                                                          2015
NOTES TO TABLE:
*   See listed ordinance or resolution for specific or special provisions.
 
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Telephone system fees, see I.C. 36-8-16-1 through 36-8-16-19
§ 36.06 HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEES.
Type Fee Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
Type                                                                      Fee         Prior Ord.  Date
                                                                                      Code  No.   Passed
Birth certificate fees*                                                                     2007- 3-12-
                                                                                            02    2007
                                                                                            2010- 3-22-
                                                                                      § 3- 03    2010
   Regular (with sleeve)                                               $12.00      67    2013- 10-28-
                                                                                            04    2013
                                                                                            2024- 8-12-
                                                                                            10    2024

   Home birth registration                                             $30.00
   Correction by notification                                          $20.00
   Copy of paternity affidavit on file                                 $5.00
Corrected certificates*                                                                     2007- 3-12-
   Paternity affidavit                                                 $30.00            02    2007
   Paternity affidavit upon marriage                                   $30.00            2024- 8-12-
   Affidavit of amendment                                              $30.00            10    2024

                                                                                            2007- 3-12-
                                                                                            02    2007
Death certificate fees (each)*                                            $12.00      § 3- 2013- 10-28-
                                                                                      68    04    2013
                                                                                            2024- 8-12-
                                                                                            10    2024
Housing loan inspection fees*                                                               2007- 3-12-
   Water and septic                                                    $100.00     § 3- 02    2007
   Septic only                                                         $100.00     66    2024- 8-12-
   Water only or water re-sample                                    $50.00            10    2024

Immunizations/oral/mist vaccines*
   All pediatric vaccines: children who do not meet state criteria for At
vaccine for children (VFC) or the 317 Program                             insurance
                                                                          pay rate
                                                                          At                2007- 3-12-
   Administration fee (per immunization)                               insurance         02    2007
                                                                          pay rate          2012- 3-26-
                                                                          At          § 3- 05    2012
   Injectable vaccines: children and adults with private insurance     insurance   71    2013- 10-28-
                                                                          pay rate          04    2013
                                                                          At                2024- 8-12-
   Nasal mist vaccines                                                 insurance         10    2024
                                                                          pay rate
                                                                          At
   Oral vaccines                                                       insurance
                                                                          pay rate
Laminating fees (each)*                                                   $1.00       § 3- 2007- 3-12-
                                                                                      69    02    2007
Mobile retail food establishment*                                                           2007- 3-12-
   Annual                                                              $150.00           02    2007
                                                                                      § 3- 2013- 10-28-
                                                                                      63    04    2013
   July through December                                               $75.00            2024- 8-12-
                                                                                            10    2024

On-site waste water disposal*
   Permit fee
      New system                                                    $200.00
      Repair system                                                 $100.00           2007- 3-12-
      Minor repair (structure through distribution box)             $50.00      § 3- 02    2007
   Preliminary certificate; site assessment fee                                    65    2024- 8-12-
      One lot                                                       $200.00           10    2024
      Each additional lot                                           $100.00
   Contractor registration fee or annual renewal (effective 1-1-       $50.00
2008)      
Public or semi-public swimming pool or spa*                                                 2007- 3-12-
   Annual                                                              $150.00           02    2007
                                                                                            2024- 8-12-
   Seasonal                                                            $75.00            10    2024

Retail food establishment permanent location*
                                                                          $140.00
                                                                          (annually);
   1 - 5 employees                                                     $70.00
                                                                          (July
                                                                          through
                                                                          December)
                                                                          $240.00
                                                                          (annually);       2007- 3-12-
   6 - 10 employees                                                    $120.00     § 3- 02    2007
                                                                          (July       61    2013- 10-28-
                                                                          through           04    2013
                                                                          December)
                                                                          $340.00
                                                                          (annually);
   11 or more employees                                                $170.00
                                                                          (July
                                                                          through
                                                                          December)
   Retail food application fee                                         $50.00
Screenings*
                                                                          At Health
   TB test                                                             Department
                                                                          cost
                                                                          At Health
   Blood work                                                          Department        2007- 3-12-
                                                                          cost              02    2007
                                                                          At Health         2010- 3-22-
   STD/Hepatitis/HIV Testing                                           Department        03    2010
                                                                          cost              2012- 3-26-
                                                                          At                05    2012
   Administration fee                                                  insurance   § 3- 2013- 10-28-
                                                                          pay rate    72    04    2013
                                                                          At                2019- 4-15-
   Lead: Testing/screening                                             insurance         02    2019
                                                                          pay rate          2019- 12-2-
                                                                          At                09    2019
   Lead: Case management                                               insurance         2024- 8-12-
                                                                          pay rate          10    2024
                                                                          At
   Lead: Risk assessment                                               insurance
                                                                          pay rate
                                                                          At
   Lead: Follow-up risk assessment                                     insurance
                                                                          pay rate
Tattoo and body piercing facility*                                                          2024- 8-12-
   Annual fee                                                          $250.00           10    2024

Tattoo artist*                                                                              2024- 8-12-
   Annual fee                                                          $25.00            10    2024

Temporary food establishment (for each day of operation, not to exceed 14 $20.00
days)*                                                                    ($280.00)         2007- 3-12-
                                                                                      § 3- 02    2007
   Temporary farmers’ market food service                            $50.00      62    2024- 8-12-
                                                                                            10    2024

NOTES TO TABLE:
*   See listed ordinance or resolution for specific or special provisions.
 
(Ord. 1999-02, passed 4-5-1999; Ord. 2008-09, passed 6-9-2008; Ord. 2010-03,
passed 3-22-2010; Ord. 2012-05, passed 3-26-2012; Ord. 2013-04, passed 10-28-
2013; Ord. 2019-02, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 2019-09, passed 12-2-2019; Ord.
2024-10, passed 8-12-2024)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
      
51.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
      
52.   ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS
      
53.   STORM WATER; ILLICIT DISCHARGES
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT
Section
   
50.01   Establishment of District
   
50.02   Territory included in District
   
50.03   Membership of Board of Directors
   
50.04   Terms of office
   
50.05   Powers of District
   
50.06   Delegation of authority of Board of Directors
   
50.07   Appointment of Advisory Committee
   
50.08   Compensation
   
50.09   Oath
   
50.10   Organization
   
50.11   Receipt and disbursement of funds
   
50.12   Release of funds
   
50.13   Group health insurance benefits for employees of District
§ 50.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT.
   The county is hereby designated as a county solid waste management district,
to be known as the "Bartholomew County Solid Waste Management District".
(Prior Code, § 6-205) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.02 TERRITORY INCLUDED IN DISTRICT.
   All of the incorporated and unincorporated territory of the county shall be
included in the County Solid Waste Management District.
(Prior Code, § 6-206) (Ord. 1992-09, passed 7-27-1992)
§ 50.03 MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   The Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District shall
consist of seven members, who shall be appointed as follows:
   (A)   Three members shall be the Board of Commissioners;
   (B)   One member shall be appointed by the County Council from its
membership;
   (C)   One member shall be the Mayor of the City of Columbus, Indiana;
   (D)   One member shall be appointed by the Common Council of the City of
Columbus, Indiana, from its membership; and
   (E)   One member who shall be a member of the town council of an
incorporated town in county shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of
the county to represent the municipalities in the county other than the City of
Columbus, Indiana.
(Prior Code, § 6-207) (Ord. 1992-09, passed 7-27-1992)
§ 50.04 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The term of office of a member of the Board of Directors of the County
Solid Waste Management District who is an executive or is appointed from the
membership of an executive, legislative or fiscal body of the county, the City
of Columbus or an incorporated town in the county shall be coextensive with the
member's term of office on that body.
   (B)   The term of office of other appointed members of the Board of
Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District shall be two years.
   (C)   All members appointed by the appointing authority described in §
50.03 shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
(Prior Code, § 6-208) (Ord. 1992-09, passed 7-27-1992)
§ 50.05 POWERS OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   The powers of the County Solid Waste Management District shall include
the following:
      (1)   The power to develop and implement a district solid waste
management plan under I.C. 13-21-5-1 et seq.;
      (2)   The power to impose district fees on the final disposal of solid
waste within the County Solid Waste Management District under I.C. 13-16-1-2 et
seq.;
      (3)   The power to receive and disburse funds;
      (4)   The power to sue and be sued;
      (5)   The power to borrow money from the District Planning Revolving Loan
Fund under I.C. 13-21-13-2;
      (6)   The power to plan, design, construct, finance, manage, own, lease,
operate and maintain facilities for solid waste management;
      (7)   (a)   The power to enter with any person into a contract or
agreement that is necessary or incidental to the management of solid waste.
Contracts or agreements that may be entered into under this paragraph include
those for:
            1.   The design, construction, operation, financing, ownership or
maintenance of facilities by the County Solid Waste Management District or any
other person;
            2.   The managing or disposal of solid waste; or
            3.   The sale or other disposition of materials or products
generated by any facility.
         (b)   Notwithstanding any statute to the contrary, the maximum term of
a contract or agreement described in this division (A)(7) may not exceed 40
years.
      (8)   The power to enter into agreements for the leasing of facilities in
accordance with I.C. 36-1-10 or I.C. 36-9-30;
      (9)   The power to purchase, lease or otherwise acquire real or personal
property for the management or disposal of solid waste;
      (10)   The power to sell or lease any facility or part of a facility to
any person;
      (11)   The power to make and contract for plans, surveys, studies and
investigations necessary for the management or disposal of solid waste;
      (12)   The power to enter upon property to make surveys, soundings,
borings and examinations;
      (13)   The power to accept gifts, grants or loans of money, other
property or services from any source, public or private, and to comply with the
terms of the gift, grant or loan;
      (14)   The power to levy a tax within the County Solid Waste Management
District to pay costs of operation in connection with solid waste management,
subject to regular budget and tax levy procedures;
      (15)   The power to borrow in anticipation of taxes;
      (16)   The power to hire the personnel necessary for the management or
disposal of solid waste in accordance with an approved budget and to contract
for professional services;
      (17)   The power to otherwise do all things necessary for the reduction,
management and disposal of solid waste and the recovery of waste products from
the solid waste stream; and
      (18)   The power to adopt resolutions that have the force of law.
   (B)   The powers of the County Solid Waste Management District do not
include the following:
      (1)   The power of eminent domain; and
      (2)   The power to exclusively control the collection or disposal of
solid waste within the County Solid Waste Management District.
(Prior Code, § 6-209) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.06 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   (A)   The Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District
may delegate any of the authority of the Board of Directors to any board or
legislative body of the county, the City of Columbus or any other municipality
in the county, by resolution; however:
      (1)   An exercise by any board or legislative body of the county, city or
other municipality of the taxing power of the County Solid Waste Management
District must be ratified by the Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste
Management District; and
      (2)   If the board of the county, city or other municipality has been
delegated authority under this paragraph, the legislative body of the county,
city or other municipality must approve an action of the board of the county,
city, or other municipality that involves:
         (a)   An exercise of the taxing power of the County Solid Waste
Management District;
         (b)   The issuance of bonds authorized under I.C. 13-21-12-8; or
         (c)   The fees, rates and charges under I.C. 13-9.5-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District
may delegate authority to the Board's officers to carry out the directions of
the Board of Directors.
   (C)   A resolution delegating powers of the Board of Directors of the County
Solid Waste Management District under this division (C) must contain reasonable
standards and parameters within which the delegated powers may be exercised.
(Prior Code, § 6-210) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.07 APPOINTMENT OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District
shall appoint and convene a Solid Waste Management Advisory Committee of
citizens, including representatives of the solid waste management industry
operating in the County Solid Waste Management District, who are knowledgeable
about and interested in environmental issues. All members of the Committee must
be residents of the County Solid Waste Management District. In the resolution
establishing an advisory committee, the Board of Directors of the County Solid
Waste Management District shall specify the terms of the members and the
purposes of the Committee. The Advisory Committee shall do the following:
      (1)   Study the subjects and problems specified by the Board of Directors
of the County Solid Waste Management District and recommend to the Board
additional problems in need of study and discussion; and
      (2)   If invited by the Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste
Management District to do so, participate, without the right to vote, in the
deliberations of the Board.
   (B)   The Solid Waste Management Advisory Committee shall report only to the
Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District and shall make
inquiries and reports only on the subject and problems specified by the Board's
resolution establishing the Committee.
(Prior Code, § 6-211) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.08 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the County Solid Waste Management District Board of Directors
shall not receive a salary or other compensation; however, members of the Board
of Directors may be entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred
in the performance of their respective duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-212) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.09 OATH.
   Each member of the Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management
District, before entering his or her duties, shall take an oath of office in
the usual form, to be indorsed upon his or her certificate of appointment and
promptly filed with the Clerk of the County Circuit Court.
(Prior Code, § 6-213) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.10 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District
shall meet immediately after the appointment of the members for the purpose of
organization. The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairperson, another
Vice-Chairperson and another Secretary. The members elected to those offices
shall perform the duties pertaining to their respective offices, as follows:
      (1)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board of
Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District and, subject to the
approval of the Board of Directors thereof, shall direct the policies and
management of the County Solid Waste Management District. The Chairperson shall
discharge all the duties inherent to a presiding officer and perform other
duties as from time to time may be assigned by the Board of Directors of the
County Solid Waste Management District or as prescribed by law.
      (2)   The Vice-Chairperson shall perform all duties incumbent upon the
Chairperson during the absence or disability of the Chairperson and shall
perform other duties as the Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste
Management District may prescribe.
      (3)   The Secretary shall attend all meetings of the Board of Directors
of the County Solid Waste Management District and shall keep, or cause to be
kept, a true and complete record of the proceedings of the meetings, and shall
perform a like duty for all standing committees appointed by the Board of
Directors of the County Solid Waste Management District, when required. The
Secretary shall attend to the giving and serving of all notices of the County
Solid Waste Management District, shall authenticate the records of the County
Solid Waste Management District, shall, unless the Board of Directors thereof
provides otherwise, maintain the records of the district and shall perform
other duties as the Board of Directors of the County Solid Waste Management
District may prescribe.
   (B)   (1)   Assistants to any duly elected officer of the County Solid Waste
Management District may be appointed by the Board of Directors thereof. The
assistant officers shall have the powers and duties as the officers whom they
are elected to assist shall have specified and delegated to them and other
powers and duties as the Board of Directors thereof may prescribe.
      (2)   An Assistant Secretary may, in the event of the absence or
disability of the Secretary, attest to the execution by the Board of Directors
of the County Solid Waste Management District, or any of its officers, of all
documents.
   (C)   In case of the absence of any officer of the County Solid Waste
Management District, or for any other reason that the Board of Directors
thereof may deem sufficient, the Board of Directors thereof may delegate the
powers or duties of the officer to any other officer or to any director of the
County Solid Waste Management District, for the time being, provided a majority
of the entire Board of Directors thereof concurs therein.
   (D)   The officers elected or appointed under this section shall serve from
the date of their election or appointment until their respective successors are
elected and qualified.
   (E)   (1)   A majority of the members of the Board of Directors of the
County Solid Waste Management District shall constitute a quorum at any regular
or specially called meeting of the Board of Directors.
      (2)   The concurrence of a majority of the members of the Board of
Directors thereof shall be necessary to authorize any action.
(Prior Code, § 6-214) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.11 RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   All money coming into possession of the County Solid Waste Management
District shall be deposited, held, secured, invested and paid in accordance
with statutes relating to the handling of public funds. The handling and
expenditure of money coming into possession of the County Solid Waste
Management District shall be subject to audit and supervision by the State
Board of Accounts.
(Prior Code, § 6-215) (Ord. 1991-10, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 50.12 RELEASE OF FUNDS.
   The Board of Commissioners directs the County Auditor to release all funds
held by the county in Fund 009 Solid Waste Management Authority and 509 SWMA-
Post-Closure Fund to the Solid Waste Management District on 12-31-1993.
(Prior Code, § 6-217) (Res. 1993-20, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 50.13 GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS FOR EMPLOYEES OF DISTRICT.
   The Commissioners shall permit the employees of the County Solid Waste
Management District to be covered by group health insurance as a part of the
County Employee Benefit Trust upon the following conditions:
   (A)   The District will make payments into the Trust in accordance with the
plan Administrator's determination; and
   (B)   The Solid Waste Management District comply with the summary plan
description for the County Employee-Benefit Trust.
(Prior Code, § 6-218) (Res. 1993-20, passed 12-20-1993)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
Permits
   
51.015   Permit from Health Officer required
   
51.016   Permit fee; role of County Treasurer
   
51.017   Public entities exempt from fees
   
51.018   Plans required
   
51.019   Central use permits
Inspection of Public Disposal Sites and Operations
   
51.030   Monthly inspections of disposal sites
   
51.031   Violations; suspensions of disposal sites
   
51.032   Inspection reports
Sanitary Requirements
   
51.045   Roles of Health Officer and Plan Commission
   
51.046   Pollution prohibited
   
51.047   Disposal requirements
   
51.048   Salvage material
   
51.049   Burning restricted
   
51.050   Equipment and road requirements
   
51.051   Fire prevention
   
51.052   Garbage for animal consumption prohibited
   
51.053   Rodents and insects prohibited
   
51.054   Hazardous materials prohibited
   
51.055   Drainage and grading requirements
   
51.056   Dust control
   
51.057   Rule modification
   
51.058   Compacting requirements
   
51.059   Weekly compaction required
   
51.060   Corrective work
   
51.061   Evaluation and approval
   
51.062   Vehicle regulations
   
51.063   Personnel and locking requirements
   
51.064   Import, storage, and application of biosolid material
Enforcement
   
51.075   Enforcement by Health Officer and Plan Commission
   
51.076   Roles of County Attorney or prosecuting attorney
Bonds
   
51.090   Performance bond or corporate surety bond required
   
51.091   Amounts of bonds
 
   
51.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Solid waste, see I.C. 36-9-30-2
   Solid waste disposal, see I.C. 36-9-30-1 through 36-9-30-35
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNTY. Those areas which are under the jurisdiction of the County Health
Officer and situated outside the corporate limits of any city or town.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes generated within the county, including every
waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for
food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of
meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables.
   GROUND WATER. Water in the ground that is in the zone of saturation.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Includes, but is not limited to, explosives,
pathological wastes, radioactive materials and chemicals.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer or his or her authorized
representative.
   OPERATOR. The person, firm, corporation, association or governmental unit,
as defined herein, who shall have been issued a permit under §§
51.015 through
51.019.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association or government unit.
   PLAN COMMISSION REPRESENTATIVE. Building Commissioner, Zoning Administrator
or persons designated as enforcement officers of the County Zoning Ordinance.
   PUBLIC DISPOSAL. Disposal of garbage and rubbish which has been removed from
premises used, owned or leased by one or more persons, firms, corporations or
associations within the county, and transported to other premises and disposed
of either with or without the payment of a fee.
   REFUSE. Any combination of garbage and rubbish generated within the county.
   RUBBISH. Such matter as ashes, cans, metalware, broken glass, crockery,
dirt, sweepings, boxes, wood, grass, weeds or litter of any kind, generated
within the county.
   SALVAGING. The controlled removal of reusable materials.
   SANITARY LANDFILL. Method of disposing of refuse on land without creating
nuisances or hazards to public health or safety, by utilizing principles of
engineering to confine the refuse to the smallest practical area, to reduce it
to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a layer of suitable
cover at the conclusion of each day's operation or at more frequent intervals
as necessary.
   SCAVENGING. The uncontrolled picking of materials.
   SURFACE WATER. A body of water whose top surface is exposed to the
atmosphere, including a flowing body as well as a pond and a lake.
(Prior Code, § 6-155) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
PERMITS
§ 51.015 PERMIT FROM HEALTH OFFICER REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the public disposal of
garbage or rubbish in the county, who does not possess an unrevoked permit from
the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative. Only persons
who comply with the requirements of this subchapter shall be entitled to
receive and retain a permit. The permit shall be for the term of one year on a
calendar-year basis and will be renewable as long as the operator is in
compliance with this chapter. Any permit issued by the Health Officer and
designated Plan Commission representative shall contain the name of the person
to whom the permit is granted, the address of the premises for which it is
issued and other pertinent information as may be required by the Health Officer
and designated Plan Commission representative. A permit shall be issued to any
person who has complied with the requirements of this chapter and no permit or
renewal thereof shall be denied on arbitrary or capricious grounds. A permit
may be temporarily suspended by the Health Officer and designated Plan
Commission representative upon violation, by the holder, of any of the terms of
this chapter, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the Health
Officer and designated Plan Commission representative upon serious or repeated
violations. A separate permit shall be required for each public disposal site
operated, or to be operated, by any person.
(Prior Code, § 6-158) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
Statutory reference:
   Requires approval from the Department of Environmental Management, see I.C.
36-9-30-4
§ 51.016 PERMIT FEE; ROLE OF COUNTY TREASURER.
   (A)   No permit signed by the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission
representative shall be valid until it has been countersigned by the Treasurer
of the county. The Treasurer of the county shall countersign a properly signed
permit upon payment to the Treasurer of the county of a permit fee in the
amount of $50.
   (B)   The monies or fees collected under the terms of this chapter shall
revert to the General Fund of the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-159) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.017 PUBLIC ENTITIES EXEMPT FROM FEES.
   No fee shall be charged for a state-, county-, municipally-owned and
operated public garbage and rubbish disposal site in the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-160) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.018 PLANS REQUIRED.
   Before a permit is issued by the Health Officer and designated Plan
Commission representative for any new disposal site, detailed plans and
specifications and necessary reports bearing signatures of approval of various
Plan Commission agencies must be submitted to the Health Officer and designated
Plan Commission representative by a registered professional engineer.
(Prior Code, § 6-161) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.019 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   No permit shall be issued until a conditional use permit is obtained from
the County Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, § 6-162) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
INSPECTION OF PUBLIC DISPOSAL SITES AND OPERATIONS
§ 51.030 MONTHLY INSPECTIONS OF DISPOSAL SITES.
   At least once each month, the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission
representative shall inspect each garbage and rubbish disposal site located
within the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-165) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.031 VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSIONS OF DISPOSAL SITES.
   If the Health Officer, or designated Plan Commission representative,
discover a violation of any item of sanitation pertinent to the provisions of
this chapter, he or she shall make a second inspection after the lapse of time
as he or she deems necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second
inspection shall be used in determining compliance with terms of this
subchapter. Any violation of the same item of this subchapter on the second
inspection shall call for suspension or revocation of permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-166) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.032 INSPECTION REPORTS.
   (A)   One copy of the Health Officer's and designated Plan Commission
representative's inspection report, on which violations of any item of
sanitation pertinent to the provisions of this subchapter shall be enscribed,
shall be delivered to the licensee by the Health Officer and designated Plan
Commission representative. Another copy of the aformentioned inspection report
shall be filed by the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission
representative with the records of the County Health Department and County Plan
Commission.
   (B)   The person operating the public disposal site shall, upon request of
the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative, permit access
to all parts of the grounds by the Health Officer, and designated Plan
Commission representative, and shall permit him or her to copy any and all
records pertaining to the source of garbage and rubbish transported thereto for
public disposal.
(Prior Code, § 6-167) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
SANITARY REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.045 ROLES OF HEALTH OFFICER AND PLAN COMMISSION.
   The issuance of any permit to a person for the operation of a proposed
garbage and rubbish disposal site shall be subject to approval of the Health
Officer, and designated Plan Commission representative, who shall inspect the
proposed site prior to the issuance of a permit.
(Prior Code, § 6-170) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.046 POLLUTION PROHIBITED.
   Sanitary landfill operations shall be so designed and operated that
conditions of unlawful pollution will not be created. Pollution of ground and
surface waters shall be avoided if they might interfere with legitimate water
uses. Water-filled areas not directly connected to natural lakes, rivers or
streams may be filled with specific inert material which is not detrimental to
legitimate water uses and which will not create a nuisance or hazard to health.
Special approval of inert material to be used in this manner is required in
writing from the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-171) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.047 DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Any and all materials considered food for rodents and insects, including tin
cans and other receptacles for food, shall be disposed of daily in a sanitary
manner by a sanitary landfill, or by a method approved by the Health Officer
and designated Plan Commission representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-172) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.048 SALVAGE MATERIAL.
   Salvaging, by operator, shall be organized so that it will not interfere
with prompt sanitary disposal of refuse or create unsightliness or health
hazards. Scavenging shall not be permitted. All salvage material must be
removed from the disposal area at least once each week.
(Prior Code, § 6-173) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.049 BURNING RESTRICTED.
   No garbage or rubbish containing garbage shall be burned at a sanitary
landfill. Burning of select materials shall be severely restricted and shall be
conducted only in designated areas with the permission of the Health Officer
and designated Plan Commission representative and other appropriate
authorities, separately from the landfill area, and approved by the County
Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative to minimize fire
hazards and the creation of a public nuisance resulting from smoke and stench.
The County Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative may
order that all material be covered or disposed of in a satisfactory manner.
(Prior Code, § 6-174) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.050 EQUIPMENT AND ROAD REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person engaged in public garbage and rubbish disposal by sanitary
landfill shall have available at all times earth moving equipment of adequate
size and capacity to satisfactorily operate the sanitary landfill. An all-
weather road shall be provided to the trench or sanitary landfill site.
(Prior Code, § 6-175) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.051 FIRE PREVENTION.
   Fire prevention is the responsibility of the operator and will be considered
at the time of the conditional use approval.
(Prior Code, § 6-176) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.052 GARBAGE FOR ANIMAL CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be expressly forbidden to make uncooked garbage available for
animal consumption at any sanitary landfill site.
(Prior Code, § 6-177) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.053 RODENTS AND INSECTS PROHIBITED.
   Infestation of rodents and insects on the premises of a garbage and rubbish
public disposal site shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the
violation shall be determined by the County Health Officer and designated Plan
Commission representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-178) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.054 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PROHIBITED.
   Hazardous materials, including liquids and sewage, shall not be disposed of
in a sanitary landfill unless special provisions are made for the disposal
through the Health Department. This provision, in no way, precludes the right
of a landfill operator to exclude any materials as a part of his or her
operational standards.
(Prior Code, § 6-179) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.055 DRAINAGE AND GRADING REQUIREMENTS.
   The entire site, including the full surface, shall be graded and provided
with drainage facilities to minimize runoff onto and into the fill, to prevent
erosion or washing of the fill, to drain off rain water falling on the fill and
to prevent the collection of standing water.
(Prior Code, § 6-180) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.056 DUST CONTROL.
   Measures shall be provided to control dust and blowing paper. The entire
area shall be kept clean and orderly.
(Prior Code, § 6-181) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.057 RULE MODIFICATION.
   Modification of rules on sanitary landfills, as applicable to existing
disposal areas, may be permitted for a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days,
after the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, if approved in writing by
the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-182) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.058 COMPACTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Garbage and rubbish shall be spread so that it can be compacted in layers
not exceeding a depth of two feet of compacted material. Large and bulky items,
when not excluded from the site, shall be disposed of in a manner approved by
the Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-183) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.059 WEEKLY COMPACTION REQUIRED.
   A layer of suitable cover material compacted to a minimum thickness of two
feet shall be placed over the entire surface of each portion of the final lift
not later than one week following the placement of refuse within that portion
and within seeding shall be affected to permit erosion.
(Prior Code, § 6-184) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.060 CORRECTIVE WORK.
   An inspection of the entire site shall be made by the Health Officer and
designated Plan Commission representative to determine compliance with approved
plans and specifications before the earth-moving equipment is removed from the
site. Any necessary corrective work shall be performed before the landfill
project is accepted as completed. Arrangements shall be made for the repair of
all cracked, eroded and uneven areas in the final cover during the first two
years following completing of the landfill.
(Prior Code, § 6-185) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.061 EVALUATION AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Any other proposed privately (non-government) operated method of solid
waste disposal not covered by these rules shall be reviewed by the Health
Department and Plan Commission for the purposes of evaluating the design and
operational methods with reference to the nuisance factor and the safety of
employees and protection of the public health, unless previously approved by
the State Board of Health.
   (B)   Other disposal methods shall be subject to the evaluation and approval
of the Health Officer and designated Plan Commission representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-186) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.062 VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   Any material transported to any landfill area must be covered by a closed
vehicle or tarpaulin in a manner to control the blowing or spilling of the
material along the roadways.
(Prior Code, § 6-187) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.063 PERSONNEL AND LOCKING REQUIREMENTS.
   A qualified supervisor must be on hand at all hours the landfill site is
open. When the landfill site is not open, provisions must be made for locking
the area.
(Prior Code, § 6-188) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.064 IMPORT, STORAGE, AND APPLICATION OF BIOSOLID MATERIAL.
   (A)   The import or transport of biosolid material from counties other than
Bartholomew into Bartholomew County properties is prohibited.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BIOSOLIDS. Processed human or other waste processed and/or produced by
utility or other treatment plants.
   (C)   Exclusion. This section is not intended to apply to commercially
bagged or other material which may include biosolids which is intended for
residential use.
   (D)   It is a violation of this section and the Bartholomew County Code for
any resident, company or other entity to apply to real estate in Bartholomew
County or to store on real estate in Bartholomew County biosolids that were not
processed by the City of Columbus Utility Department.
   (E)   Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punished in the amount
of $5,000 per day.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 4-22-2024)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.075 ENFORCEMENT BY HEALTH OFFICER AND PLAN COMMISSION.
   The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the County Health Officer and
designated Plan Commission representative.
(Prior Code, § 6-191) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.076 ROLE OF COUNTY ATTORNEY OR PROSECUTING ATTORNEY.
   It shall be the duty of the County Prosecuting Attorney or the County
Attorney, to whom the County Health Officer and designated Plan Commission
representative shall report any violations of the provisions of this chapter,
to cause proceedings to be commenced against the person violating the
provisions of this chapter and to prosecute to final termination.
(Prior Code, § 6-192) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
BONDS
§ 51.090 PERFORMANCE BOND OR CORPORATE SURETY BOND REQUIRED.
   Except in the case of the county operating its own disposal facility, no
license shall be issued or effective unless there is, on file, a performance
bond or a bond with a corporate surety to ensure that:
   (A)   The licensee, his or her agents and servants, will comply with all of
the terms, conditions, provision requirements and specifications contained in
this chapter;
   (B)   The licensee, his or her agents and servants, will faithfully operate
the sanitary landfill for which the license is issued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter; and
   (C)   The licensee, his or her agents and servants, will hold the county
harmless from any expense incurred through the failure to operate and maintain
the sanitary landfill as required by this chapter, including any expense the
county may be put to for correcting any condition or violation of this chapter
by the county's own labor and equipment, whenever the Board of Health or Plan
Commission determines it is necessary to correct any condition in violation of
this chapter, or from any damages growing out of the negligence of the licensee
or his or her agents or servants.
(Prior Code, § 6-198) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.091 AMOUNTS OF BONDS.
   (A)   For any bond required herein, it shall be the responsibility of the
County Commissioners to determine and establish the amount and terms of the
bond.
   (B)   The bond shall be a minimum bond to cover the estimated cost for the
operation of any disposal facility for a period of one year.
(Prior Code, § 6-199) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   Any non-government person violating the provisions of this chapter, with
respect to the hauling of non-covered material of a nature that would blow off
and spill along the highway, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction, the violator shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of
not more than $500; for the second and each subsequent offense by a fine of not
more than $1,000; and each day after the expiration of the time limit for
abating unsanitary conditions and completing improvements to abate the
conditions as ordered by the County Board of Health or the duly appointed
Health Officer or the county, or the duly designated Plan Commission
representative of the county, shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-195) (Ord. 1970-1, passed 3-2-1970)
CHAPTER 52:  ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS
Section
   
52.01   Authority
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Required on-site sewage system or connection to sanitary sewer
   
52.04   Installer registration
   
52.05   Sewage holding tanks
   
52.06   General requirements for on-site sewage systems
   
52.07   Connection or reconnection to an existing on-site sewage system
   
52.08   Enforcement
   
52.09   Procedure for appeal
   
52.10   Remedies
   
52.11   Fee schedule
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 AUTHORITY.
   The Bartholomew County Health Department is hereby authorized to issue
residential and commercial on-site sewage system permits, collect permit fees
and penalties, perform inspections, hold hearings, and order or otherwise
compel correction of violations of this chapter, and is otherwise authorized to
perform all actions necessary for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION, NEW.
      (1)   Construction of a new dwelling, residential outbuilding, or
commercial facility where there previously was no home, outbuilding, or
commercial facility; or
      (2)   Replacing, rebuilding, or remodeling an existing dwelling,
residential outbuilding, or commercial facility when the design daily flow of
the new structure(s) exceeds what was previously at the site.
      (3)   Best judgment, as described in Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 for
replacement of failed soil absorption systems, shall not be used for new
construction.
   CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR/REPLACEMENT. Repair or replacement of a residential on-
site sewage system for an existing home, residential outbuilding, or commercial
facility or the rebuilding or remodeling of an existing home, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility without an increase in the design daily
flow of the project. In accordance with Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3, the best
judgment of the Bartholomew County Health Department may be used, when
necessary and appropriate, for the repair or replacement of a failing
residential on-site sewage system.
   INSTALLER. Any individual who performs any work in furtherance of
construction, installation, replacement, alteration, repair, or abandonment of
any residential or commercial on-site sewage system in Bartholomew County,
State of Indiana.
   INVOLUNTARY. A need to modify or improve a dwelling, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility due to factors outside of the owner's
control, such as destruction by wind, fire, flood, or other natural disaster,
or due to condemnation of a dwelling.
   ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM MALFUNCTION or MALFUNCTION. A residential or
commercial on-site sewage system component that is not functioning in
accordance with this chapter or per manufacturers' requirements. ON-SITE SEWAGE
SYSTEM MALFUNCTION does not have to meet the definition of on-site sewage
system failure, but may also be a failure. MALFUNCTION may include, but is not
limited to, one or more of the following:
      (1)   The backup of sewage into an upstream on-site sewage system
component;
      (2)   The liquid level in a septic tank consistently above the invert of
the septic tank outlet;
      (3)   An outlet filter that is plugged sufficiently to cause backup in
the septic tank;
      (4)   The liquid level in a dosing tank above the invert of the dosing
tank inlet;
      (5)   The liquid level in a treatment unit above that recommended by the
manufacturer;
      (6)   The liquid level in a distribution box consistently above the
invert of the outlets or a distribution box that does not provide equal
distribution;
      (7)   Structural failure of a septic tank, dosing tank, treatment unit,
distribution box or other required component;
      (8)   Electrical failure of a float, an effluent pump, alarm, or other
electrical component of an on-site sewage system; or
      (9)   Removal of an outlet filter, an effluent pump, or any other system
component if that outlet filter, pump, or component was required in the
construction or operating permit.
   VOLUNTARY. An owner's intentional or deliberate action to construct, modify
or improve a dwelling or residential outbuilding or increase the design daily
flow of a structure.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.03 REQUIRED ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM OR CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWER.
   (A)   All persons owning, leasing, or otherwise occupying property that has
a dwelling, residential outbuilding or commercial facility with plumbing not
connected to sanitary sewer shall comply with the requirements of Rules 410
I.A.C. 6-8.3 et seq., 410 I.A.C. 6-10.1 et seq., and/or Bulletin S.E. 11, as
applicable, and the provisions of this ordinance for an on-site sewage system.
   (B)   In the event of a residential or commercial on-site sewage system
failure, the dwelling, residential outbuilding, or commercial facility shall be
required to make a direct connection to a sanitary sewer, if the sanitary sewer
is available within 300 feet of the affected property line and is available for
connection at a construction cost and connection fee estimated not to exceed
150% of the cost estimated for installing an on-site sewage system to serve the
dwelling, residential outbuilding or commercial facility.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.04 INSTALLER REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All on-site sewage system installers in Bartholomew County shall abide
by all associated requirements in state statutes, rules, and this chapter
regarding on-site sewage systems.
   (B)   An installer must register with Bartholomew County Health Department
if they wish to install, replace, alter, repair, or abandon any residential or
commercial on-site sewage system in Bartholomew County, Indiana. Registration
requires:
      (1)   Applying to Bartholomew County Health Department for registration
on a form provided by the Department;
      (2)   Paying the appropriate registration fee as required in the
Bartholomew County Health Department Fee Ordinance; and
      (3)   Providing proof of certification by either:
         (a)   Passing an examination offered by the Bartholomew County Health
Department or another entity approved by the Battholomew County Health
Department; or
         (b)   Providing proof of:
            1.   Current, valid registration in another Indiana county;
            2.   A certificate being issued from the Indiana On-site Wastewater
Professional Association (IOWPA) for the type of system(s) to be installed; and
            3.   Membership in good standing with IOWPA.
   (C)   Registration is valid from January 1 to December 31 of the same year
and must be renewed annually. Proof of continued registration in another county
and/or certification is required for renewal of registration.
   (D)   Certification must be maintained throughout the period of
registration. A lapse of certification will render the registration with
Bartholomew County Health Department invalid.
   (E)   A certification examination will be offered no less than monthly by
the Bartholomew County Health Department.
      (1)   A registration fee as required in the Bartholomew County Health
Department Fee Ordinance will be due upon successful completion of the exam.
      (2)   The test will consist of 36 questions: true/false, multiple choice,
and drawing.
      (3)   A score of 80% or above is considered passing.
      (4)   A retest will be allowed for anyone failing the test no more
frequently than once per week.
   (F)   A registered installer must be on-site during installation, repair,
replacement, alteration, modification, or system abandonment and shall be
deemed responsible for the work done.
   (G)   A lapse of certification and/or registration or repeated violation of
any state statute, rules, or this chapter pertaining to on-site sewage systems
may result in revocation of registration or denial of registration renewal. Any
registration revocation or denial of registration renewal may be appealed to
the Bartholomew County Board of Health.
      (1)   The period of revocation shall be no less than 90 days, or a time
period deemed appropriate by the Bartholomew County Health Officer; and
      (2)   The registered individual shall be advised in writing for the basis
of the revocation, the right and procedure for appeal and the opportunity for a
hearing.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.05 SEWAGE HOLDING TANKS.
   (A)   A sewage holding tank is an alternative method of sewage disposal in
accordance with I.C. 16-41-25-9.
   (B)   An application for a sewage holding tank must be filed by the property
owner or property owner's agent including:
      (1)   An application form provided by the Bartholomew County Health
Department;
      (2)   A construction plan of sufficient clarity to show compliance with
this chapter;
      (3)   A copy of a written contract with an operator of a septage
management vehicle providing for the removal of septage at regular intervals;
      (4)   A written statement, signed by the property owner, indicating that
copies of all receipts and other records as requested be submitted to the local
health department within 30 days of service; and
      (5)   For commercial sites where IDOH has completed plan review and
approval for a commercial holding tank, a copy of the written approval from
IDOH.
   (C)   All sewage holding tanks shall:
      (1)   Have a minimum capacity of:
         (a)   For holding tanks that are permitted as septic and/or dosing
tanks and planned to precede a soil absorption field, as determined by Rule 410
I.A.C. 6-8.3 or Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-10.1 for septic and/or dosing tanks.
         (b)   For permanent holding tanks, the greater of:
            1.   1,000 gallons; or
            2.   At least three times the design daily flow of the home or
commercial structure as determined by Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 or Rule 410 I.A.C.
6-10.1.
      (2)   Have a capacity of no more than 10,000 gallons.
   (D)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all separation distances required for
septic tanks in Rules 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 and 410 I.A.C. 6-10.1.
   (E)   A sewage holding tank shall meet all construction requirements of
septic tanks in Rules 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 and 410 I.A.C. 6-10.l.
   (F)   All sewage holding tanks shall have at least one riser to the surface
for ease in pumping the tank. A secondary childproof plug shall be installed
under a safely secured riser lid.
   (G)   A construction permit issued by the Bartholomew County Health
Department is required prior to the installation of the holding tank or sewer.
   (H)   A sewer, meeting the requirements for a residential sewer in Rule 410
I.A.C. 6-8.3 or the requirements for a building sewer in Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-10.l
, shall be used to make a direct connection between the plumbing of the
structure and the holding tank.
   (I)   All sewage holding tanks installed in Bartholomew County shall have:
      (1)   An installation inspection to confirm proper installation and to
confirm the outlet of the last tank has been appropriately sealed prior to
backfilling; and
      (2)   The alarm wired in and verified operational.
   (J)   All holding tanks shall be required to have an operating permit issued
by the Bartholomew County Health Department.
      (1)   The construction permit issued for the installation of the holding
tank shall also serve as the operating permit for the first two years of
service.
      (2)   An operating permit for a sewage holding tank shall be valid for a
period of two years from the date of issuance.
      (3)   Prior to operating permit renewal, a registered installer must
inspect the holding tank(s) for verification of proper operation of the tank
and alarm system. An inspection report must be provided to the Bartholomew
County Health Department prior to renewal.
      (4)   An operating permit shall be renewed prior to, or within ten days
of, expiration.
      (5)   An operating permit fee as stated in the Bartholomew County Health
Department Fee Ordinance shall be due at the time of operating permit renewal.
      (6)   Upon sale of a property for which an operating permit is required,
the operating permit shall not transfer to the new owner but shall remain
active for 60 days after the date of sale. The new owner shall apply for an
operating permit within 60 days of the date of sale.
   (K)   All receipts from pumping and maintenance of a sewage holding tank and
other documents for repair or modification of a sewage holding tank need to be
submitted to the Bartholomew County Health Department within 30 days of the
service provided.
   (L)   An operating permit not renewed within 30 days of expiration, or a
sewage holding tank not operated in a safe and sanitary manner, including
receipts and other paperwork not submitted as required, is a violation of this
chapter and may be subject to penalty as described in §
52.99, permit revocation, and/or denial of operating permit renewal.
   (M)   In the event that a sewage holding tank is not operated in a safe and
sanitary manner and in accordance with I.C. 16-41-25-9 and this chapter, the
Bartholomew County Health Department may require the dwelling, residential
outbuilding, or commercial facility to:
      (1)   Connect to the sanitary sewer if the sanitary sewer is available
within 300 feet of the affected property line and is available for connection
at a construction cost and connection fee estimated not to exceed 150% of the
cost estimated for installing an on-site sewage system to serve the dwelling,
residential outbuilding or commercial facility; or
      (2)   Install an on-site sewage system with a soil absorption field in
compliance with Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 or Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-10.1 or connect to
an existing system that has not failed.
   (N)   Upon connection to an approved soil absorption field, as part of a
full on-site sewage system, or sanitary sewer, the sewage holding tank shall be
abandoned, unless it will be converted for use as a septic tank or a dosing
tank in an on-site sewage system.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   An on-site sewage system construction permit issued by the Bartholomew
County Health Department shall be obtained prior to the installation of any
component of an on-site sewage system or prior to the repair, replacement,
alteration, or modification of any component of an on-site sewage system.
   (B)   An on-site sewage system soil evaluation is required, as described in
Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 or Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-10.1, prior to permit issuance for
all residential and commercial sites where a soil absorption field is to be
installed, expanded, or replaced and as needed for repairs.
      (1)   A minimum of three soil profile evaluations are required to be
evaluated in the area of the soil absorption field. The soil profile
evaluations may be conducted using three soil borings, three soil pits, or any
combination of borings and pits. The Bartholomew County Health Department may
request additional soil borings or soil pits if deemed necessary by the
Bartholomew County Health Officer.
      (2)   If the on-site soil evaluation report created from the evaluation
of the soil profile is to be used for obtaining an on-site sewage system
construction permit, the report must be signed by the professional soil
scientist and submitted directly to the Bartholomew County Health Department by
the soil scientist.
   (C)   All distribution boxes shall be stabilized so as to prevent movement
during installation and operation.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.07 CONNECTION OR RECONNECTION TO AN EXISTING ON-SITE SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   An existing residential or commercial on-site sewage system may be
considered for connection or reconnection to a new or replacement dwelling,
residential outbuilding, or commercial facility if:
      (1)   Either:
         (a)   The original system installation was permitted through the
Bartholomew County Health Department; or
         (b)   The original system was not permitted through the Bartholomew
County Health Department, but a registered installer develops a plan of the
site and system showing compliance with the rules and this chapter; and the
existing system is appropriately sized for the structure to be served.
      (2)   If the connection or reconnection is due to involuntary events, the
Bartholomew County Health Department may utilize their best judgment for the
soil absorption field when approving a connection or reconnection to an
existing system.
      (3)   If the connection or reconnection is due to voluntary events, the
system being connected to must meet the requirements of the appropriate rule,
unless the site meets the requirements of the definition of repair or
replacement construction in this chapter.
   (B)   All commercial facilities wanting to connect or reconnect to an
existing on-site sewage system must have written approval from the Indiana
Department of Health.
   (C)   A construction permit for connection or reconnection to an existing
on-site sewage system shall be obtained prior to the start of construction of
the dwelling, residential outbuilding, or commercial facility.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer determines there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of this chapter, Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3,
or Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-10.1 the Bartholomew County Health Officer shall issue a
notice of violation to the person or persons responsible, as hereafter
provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Indicate the date and location of the violation;
      (2)   Clearly indicate the nature of the violation and the related
chapter, statute, and/or rule citation;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of necessary
remediation;
      (4)   Be properly served upon the person(s) responsible. Proper service
shall include any of the following:
         (a)   Sent to the person directly via first class mail;
         (b)   Sent by certified mail to the last known mailing address of the
person;
         (c)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the property affected
by the notice; or
         (d)   Other method of service authorized or required under the laws of
this state.
   (B)   After receiving an order in writing from the Bartholomew County Health
Officer, the owner of the property shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter and/or rule as set forth in said order and within the time limit
specified therein. Said order shall be served on the owner but may be served on
any person who, by contract with the owner, has assumed the duly of complying
with the provisions of an order. Failure to comply with such order shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and the violator shall be subject to the
penalties as prescribed in §
52.99.
   (C)   The Bartholomew County Health Officer may compel an immediate stop
work order of work completed, in progress, or planned, which is in violation of
any provision(s) of this chapter. Such stop work order shall:
      (1)   Result in the immediate suspension of all work at the worksite; and
      (2)   Be posted at the construction site and confinned by written notice
to the owner or occupant of the premises and any person engaged in the
performance of said work or any person causing such work to be performed.
      (3)   Failure to comply with such stop work order shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and the violator shall be subject to the penalties as
prescribed in §
52.99.
   (D)   Whenever the Bartholomew County Health Officer finds that an emergency
exists which requires immediate action to protect public health, the
Bartholomew County Health Officer may, without notice or hearing, issue an
emergency order declaring the existence of such an emergency and require that
action be taken as the Health Officer deems necessary. Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this chapter, Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-8.3, Rule 410 I.A.C. 6-
10.l, and Bulletin S.E. 11 , such order shall be effective immediately.
   (E)   Any person to whom such an emergency order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Bartholomew County Health
Officer, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible in the manner provided
in §
52.09.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.09 PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeals may be filed with the Bartholomew County Board of Health for
any of the following decisions or actions taken by the Bartholomew County
Health Officer:
      (1)   Denial of a permit to install, construct, reconnect, replace,
alter, or repair an on-site sewage system, holding tank, or sanitary vault
privy;
      (2)   Revocation of a permit;
      (3)   The issuance of a notice of violation, a stop work order, or an
emergency order as prescribed in §
52.08;
      (4)   Registration revocation, or duration of revocation, or denial of
registration renewal as prescribed in §
52.04; or
      (5)   A penalty as prescribed in §
52.99.
   (B)   Any person(s) filing such appeal shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Bartholomew County Health Board, The request shall be in
writing and received at the office of the Bartholomew County Health Department
within ten calendar days of receipt of the notice. If a request for hearing is
not received within the ten calendar days, the decision or action shall stand.
   (C)   Such request shall briefly state the reasons for the requested
hearing. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Bartholomew County Health
Officer shall arrange a time and a place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof.
   (D)   Such hearing shall be held as soon as practical after receipt of the
request in compliance with I.C. 5-14-1.5-5 (Open Door Law).
   (E)   At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be
heard and to show evidence as to why such decision or action should be modified
or withdrawn. Additionally, the Health Officer shall be given time to explain
the circumstances of the decision and/or action.
   (F)   The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Bartholomew County Health Board, shall be summarized in the minutes of
the hearing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
Bartholomew County Health Department. In addition, all pertinent information
including, but not limited to, permit application and written correspondence,
shall be included in the public record. Any person may seek relief thereof from
any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the law of the state.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.10 REMEDIES.
   Upon refusal or neglect of any person to correct an unlawful or unsanitary
condition when the abatement of the condition has been ordered in writing by
the Health Officer or an appeal against the decision and/or action has been
sustained by the Health Board, the Health Officer may, through an attorney
representing the Health Department, institute proceedings in the judicial court
district wherein the offense occurs for enforcement by prohibitory or mandatory
injunction to restrain any person from violating the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.11 FEE SCHEDULE.
   All applicable fees as set forth in the Bartholomew County Health Department
Fee Ordinance and any amendments or revisions hereafter shall be made payable
to the Bartholomew County Health Department.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or entity found to be in violation of any provision
of this chapter and/or rule shall be fined not more than $2,500. Each day after
the expiration of the time-limit for abating unsanitary conditions and
completing improvements to abate such conditions as ordered by the Bartholomew
County Health Department shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (B)   The Bartholomew County Health Department shall also be entitled to
seek any other legal remedy available against any person who shall violate any
provision of this chapter and/or rule.
   (C)   The Bartholomew County Health Department shall be entitled to seek all
legal fees incurred during enforcement of this chapter and/or rule.
   (D)   The penalties provided in this section shall be cumulative, and not
exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other remedy provided by law.
(Ord. 2025-02, passed 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 53: STORM WATER; ILLICIT DISCHARGES
Section
   
53.01   Purpose and intent
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Applicability
   
53.04   Responsibility for administration
   
53.05   Ultimate responsibility
   
53.06   Discharge prohibitions; exemptions and requirements
   
53.07   Elimination of illegal discharges
   
53.08   Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections
   
53.09   Suspension of MS4 access
   
53.10   Industrial or construction activity discharges
   
53.11   Access and inspection of properties and facilities
   
53.12   Requirement to remediate
   
53.13   Requirement to monitor and analyze
   
53.14   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants by the
use of best management practices
   
53.15   Notification of spills
   
53.16   Violations and enforcement
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality
of our watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent
with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and to also
provide for the health, safety and general welfare of citizens of the county,
through the reduction of pollutants in stormwater discharges and the regulation
of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction
of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process and specifically meet the requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To regulate, pursuant to the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management's (IDEM) NPDES Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System General Permit
(MS4GP), the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by
any person;
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4;
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter; and
      (4)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, grease,
oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste,
sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by
chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of Bartholomew County.
   BASEMENT. The floor of a building which is partly or entirely below ground
level.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONCENTRATED FLOW. Any flow observable in an MS4 conveyance such as a pipe,
gutter or swale.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to the NPDES Construction
Stormwater General Permit (CSGP). These include construction projects resulting
in land disturbances of one acre or more, or from sites smaller than one acre
if the construction activity is part of a larger plan of development or sale
that disturbs one acre or more. The activities include, but are not limited to,
clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
   CONTIGUITY. An entity’s proximity to a designated MS4 area in a way that
allows for direct discharges of stormwater run-off into the regulated MS4
conveyance.
   CONVEYANCE. Any structure which transfers liquid between at least two
points. The term includes, but is not limited to, piping, ditches, swales,
curbs, gutters, catch basins, channels, storm drains and roadways.
   COUNTY. The employees or designees of the county designated to enforce this
chapter.
   CRAWL SPACE. A building substructure that is a shallow space typically used
for access to plumbing or wiring.
   DISPOSAL. The discharge; deposit; injection; spilling; leaking; or placing
of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that the
solid or hazardous waste, or any constituent of the waste, may enter the
environment, be emitted into the air, or be discharged into any waters,
including ground waters.
   EPA. The federal Environmental Protection Agency.
   FACILITY. Any building including private homes, structures, installations,
processes or activities from which there is or may be a pollutant discharge.
   FLOATABLE. Any liquid or solid that, due to its physical characteristics,
will float on the surface of water. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
does not include naturally occurring floatable, such as leaves or tree limbs.
   GARBAGE. All animal solid, vegetable solid and semisolid wastes resulting
from the processing; handling; preparation; cooking; serving; or consumption of
food or food materials.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   IDEM. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except naturally occurring floatable, such as leaves or
tree (shrub) limbs or as exempted in Article VI(B).
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including,
but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater or non-pure
ground water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains, basement sump pumps and sinks, regardless of whether the drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by the county;
or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected to the storm drain system which
has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by
the county.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a MS4 conveyance that is not composed
entirely of stormwater, except naturally introduced floatables, such as leaves
or tree limbs. Sources of ILLICIT DISCHARGES include but are not limited to
sanitary wastewater, septic tank effluent, commercial car wash wastewater, oil
spills or disposal, radiator flushing disposal, laundry wastewater, roadway
accident spillage, pollutant runoff, and household hazardous wastes.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, which is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by a federal, state, city, town, county,
district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state
law) having jurisdiction over stormwater, including special districts under
state law such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage
district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency
under § 208 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1288) that discharges into
waters of the state; or privately owned stormwater utility, hospital,
university, or college having jurisdiction over stormwater that discharges into
waters of the state;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at
40 C.F.R. 122.2.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER PERMIT. A
permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33
U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to the state's
watercourses, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or
general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation, limited liability company or other entity recognized by law.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, solvents; oil and
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, and floatables; pesticides; herbicides; fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, effluent, fecal coliform, E. coli and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
   POLLUTION. The presence in watercourse of any pollutant listed above or a
substance listed with the U.S. EPA.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved, and including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   RECEIVING WATER. A waterbody that receives a discharge from an outfall. The
term does not include private drains, retention and detention basins, or
constructed wetlands used as treatment.
   SPILL. An unintentional release of solid or liquid material, which may cause
pollution of the MS4 or its receiving waters.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Also defined as MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
(MS4).
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from precipitation.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) OR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
(SWMP). A document which describes the best management practices and activities
to be implemented by a person to identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, MS4 and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   THREATENED DISCHARGE. A condition creating a substantial probability of a
pollutant entering an MS4 or surface waters which may cause harm when the
probability and potential extent of harm make it reasonably necessary to take
immediate action to prevent, reduce or mitigate damages to persons, property or
natural resources.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
   WATER QUALITY. A term used to describe the chemical, physical or biological
characteristics of water, usually in respect to its suitability for a
particular purpose.
   WATERCOURSE. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or manmade
drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff or floodwaters flow either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the county unless
explicitly exempted by this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The county shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the county may be delegated
in writing by the County Commissioners to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the county.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.06 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS; EXEMPTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the (MS4)
waterbodies or watercourses, directly or indirectly, any materials, including,
but not limited to, pollutants or water containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater. Common stormwater pollutants include, but are not limited to,
paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; trash, refuse, rubbish, garbage, food
waste, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
oil and grease; cleaning products; pesticides; herbicides and fertilizers;
landscaping materials; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform
and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from construction or land disturbing activities including;
but not limited to, painting, paving, concrete placement, sawcutting and
grading; wastes and residues that result from mobile washing operations;
discharges from toilets; sinks; industrial processes; cooling systems; boilers;
fabric cleaning; equipment cleaning; commercial vehicle cleaning; substances
added to the storm drain to control root growth and noxious or offensive matter
of any kind.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally dump liquids
or solids that are considered pollutants on the ground where there is potential
exposure to rain or stormwater and potential for the pollutant to reach the MS4
of the county.
      (3)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition expressly
includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless
of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable of
prevailing at the time of connection.
      (4)   No person owning or in control of any premises shall connect a
sewage conveyance to the MS4 or allow such connection to continue.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to cause materials to be deposited in a manner
or location as to constitute a threatened discharge into storm drains, gutters
or other watercourses. Materials that are no longer contained in a pipe, tank
or other container are considered to be threatened discharges unless they are
actively being cleaned up.
      (6)   No person shall maliciously destroy or interfere with BMPs
implemented to protect water quality.
   (B)   Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter when properly managed:
      (1)   Water line and hydrant flushing for maintenance; irrigation water;
uncontaminated pumped ground water; uncontaminated foundation, footing, and
crawl space drains; fire suppression activities; uncontaminated excess storm
sewer cleaning water not collected by a vacuum truck; residential car washing;
non-commercial washing of vehicles by community organizations; external
building wash down without detergents; uncontaminated condensate from air
conditioning units, coolers, and other compressors, and from outside storage of
refrigerated gases or liquids; springs; dechlorinated/debrominated residential
swimming pool discharges; pavement wash waters, provided spills or leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has
been removed) and where detergents are not used; and uncontaminated ground
water infiltration (as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 35.2005 (20));
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety;
      (3)   Dye testing, provided the person undertaking the testing provides
verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency 24 hours prior to the
time of the test;
      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the EPA or IDEM, provided
that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system;
and
      (5)   The county may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges
which are not a source of pollutants to the MS4 or other watercourses.
   (C)   Requirements applicable to potential dischargers.
      (1)   Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which
a watercourse passes, or the person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part
of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly
retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or
lessee shall maintain existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent to
a watercourse, so that the structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse. It shall be the property
owner's responsibility to maintain the watercourses on their lots and to take
preventive measures against any and all erosion and/or deterioration of natural
or manmade features on their lots. Owner/lessee maintenance responsibilities
shall include the following:
         (a)   Maintaining the watercourse free of trash, debris, excessive
vegetation, and obstacles that impede flow;
         (b)   Not removing healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually
necessary for maintenance;
         (c)   Not removing healthy bank vegetation in such a manner that makes
the banks vulnerable to erosion; and
         (d)   Maintaining and stabilizing the watercourse in order to protect
against erosion and degradation.
      (2)   Minimization of landscaping irrigation runoff. A discharge of
landscaping irrigation water that is of sufficient quantity to cause a
concentrated flow in the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited.
Irrigation systems shall be managed to reduce the discharge of water from a
site.
      (3)   Cleaning of paved surfaces required. The owner of any paved parking
lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as necessary to prevent the
buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup on a paved service of
mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or debris is a violation of this
chapter. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping
or other methods in compliance with this chapter.
      (4)   Mobile cleaning operations. Mobile cleaning operations shall not
discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system in violation of this
chapter.
      (5)   Maintenance of equipment. Any leak or spill related to equipment
maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to prevent the
potential release of pollutants.
      (6)   Reduction of leaking fluids. Vehicles, machinery and equipment must
be maintained to reduce leaking fluids.
      (7)   Materials storage. In addition to other requirements of this
chapter, materials such as, but not limited to, stockpiles used in construction
and landscaping activities shall be stored to prevent the potential release of
pollutants.
      (8)   Pet waste. Pet waste shall be disposed of as a solid waste or
sanitary sewage in a timely manner to prevent the discharge to the MS4.
      (9)   Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations
and applicable laws. Excessive application shall be avoided. Pesticides,
herbicides and fertilizers shall be stored in a manner to prevent release to
the MS4.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07 ELIMINATION OF ILLEGAL DISCHARGES.
   The county may require by written notice, that a person responsible for an
illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinues the
discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the
discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08 REQUIREMENT TO ELIMINATE OR SECURE APPROVAL FOR ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The county may require, by written notice, that a person responsible
for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the
requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval from the County
Engineer for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not
the connections or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to
the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in
violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an
illegal discharge will no longer occur, the person may request county approval
to reconnect.
      (2)   The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at
the responsible person's expense.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The
county may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when
the suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to
the health or welfare of persons or to the MS4 or other watercourses. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or other watercourses or to minimize danger to
persons.
   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have his or her MS4
access suspended if the suspension would, in the judgement of the authorized
enforcement agency, abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized
enforcement agency will notify the violator of the proposed suspension of his
or her MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency
for a post-termination hearing regarding the suspension of access. The hearing
shall be conducted in accordance with rules promulgated by the authorized
enforcement agency. A person commits a violation of this chapter if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to the section, without
the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.10 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of the permit.
Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
county prior to or as a condition of a subdivision, site plan, building permit
or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any
enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.11 ACCESS AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The county has the authority to periodically inspect the storm
drainage system, whether publicly or privately owned, to detect and eliminate
illicit connections and discharges into the system. The inspection may include
a screening of discharges from outfalls connected to the system to determine if
prohibited flows are being conveyed into the storm drainage system. It could
also include spot testing of waters contained in the storm drainage system
itself to detect the introduction of pollutants into the system by means other
than a defined outfall, such as dumping or contaminated sheet runoff.
   (B)   Whenever the county has cause to believe that there exists, or
potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a
violation of this chapter, the county or its agent shall have the right to
enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the discharger is
complying with all requirements of this chapter. The county or its agent shall
be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
If the facility has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the person in
control of the premises shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. In the event that the
owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been made, the
county is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of competent
jurisdiction in obtaining the entry. If a discharge is observed which
represents an immediate hazard to public health or safety, or aquatic life, the
county; a department of law enforcement; a department of fire and rescue
services; and any other agent of the county, may enter any property or
structure, except a dwelling, as necessary to prevent or stop the hazard.
   (C)   The county shall have the right to set up on the property of any
discharger to the MS4 the devices that are necessary to conduct an
investigation of the discharges. The investigation may include, but is not
limited to, the following: sampling of any discharge and/or process waters, the
taking of photographs, interviewing staff on alleged violations and access to
any and all facilities or areas within the premises that may have any effect on
the discharge.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.12 REQUIREMENT TO REMEDIATE.
   Whenever the county finds a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has
occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the
storm drain system or other watercourses, the county may require, by written
notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person, that the
pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified
time pursuant to the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.13 REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE.
   The county may require, by written notice of requirement, that any person
engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause
or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges and/or non stormwater
discharges to the storm drain system or other watercourses, to undertake at the
person's expense the monitoring and analyses and furnish the reports to the
county as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 53.14 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses
through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for premises, which are, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's expense, additional
structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) or stormwater management plan (SWMP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.15 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   (A)   Any person who operates, controls, or maintains a facility, premises,
or property from which a spill occurs is responsible for notifying emergency
response agencies and taking all necessary steps to ensure the discover,
containment, and cleanup of such release. This section is in addition to the
procedures and requirements identified in the Indiana Spill Rule, 327 I.A.C. 2-
6.1. any discharger who accidentally discharges in the MS4 or a waterbody any
substance other than stormwater or an exempted discharge shall immediately
inform the authorized enforcement agency concerning the discharge. A written
report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the authorized enforcement
agency, by the dischargers, within five days. The written report shall specify:
      (1)   The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
      (2)   The date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
      (3)   All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all
measures proposed to be taken to prevent any recurrence; and
      (4)   The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and
the name and telephone number of a person who may be contacted for additional
information on the matter.
   (B)   A properly reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative
defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a
discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal
action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs, or to
obtain other relief because of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge
shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all
the requirements of this section and the Indiana Spill Rule (327 I.A.C. 2-6.1).
This requirement does not relieve the discharger from notifying other entities
as required by state or federal regulations.
   (C)   Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the county at: Bartholomew County MS4
Coordinator, Soil and Water Conservation District, 785 S. Marr Rd, Columbus,
Indiana 47201, (812) 378-1280, within five calendar days of the phone or in
person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of the
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. The records shall be retained for
at least three years.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.16 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to one or more of the
enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any violation or threatened
violation may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.
   (B)   In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public
health or public safety, the county or its appointed agent is authorized to
enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take
any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The county or its appointed agent is authorized to seek costs of
abatement as outlined in division (B)(5) below.
      (1)   Compliance directive. In addition to any other remedy available to
the county, inspectors may issue compliance directives at the time of
inspection to require a person to implement actions that will correct any
violation of this chapter.
      (2)   Notice of violation.
         (a)   Whenever the county finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the county may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. The
notice may require without limitation:
            1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
            2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
            3.   Violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
            4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
            5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
            6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
         (b)   If abatement of a violation or the restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which the
remediation or restoration must be completed. The notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to complete the remediation or restoration
within the established deadline, the work may be done by the county or its
designee and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
      (3)   Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of
violation may appeal the determination of the county. The notice of appeal must
be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing
on the appeal before the Board of County Commissioners or its designee shall
take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the Board or its designee shall be final.
      (4)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or,
in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the Board, then
representatives of the county and its designees are authorized to enter upon
the subject property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary
to abate the violation and restore the affected property. It shall be unlawful
for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse
to allow the representatives or designees of the county to enter upon the
premises for the purposes set forth above.
      (5)   Cost of abatement of the violation. If the county abates a
violation, then, within 15 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The notice shall be given by personal delivery or by mail
to the last known address of the owner as shown in the records of the County
Auditor. The notice shall be effective upon the date of mailing or personal
delivery. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount
of the assessment within ten days of the effective date of the notice. If no
protest is filed, then the charges shall become due and payable on the date set
forth in the notice, which date shall be after the expiration of the time in
which to file an appeal and the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount
of the assessment. In the event a protest is filed, a hearing on the protest
shall be held before the Board of County Commissioners or its designee within
15 days from the date of receipt of the written protest. If any charges are
upheld upon completion of the hearing, then the charges shall become due and
payable ten days after the issuance of the order upon the protest and if not
timely paid, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
The charges may also be recovered in a civil action against the owner or other
person in control of the premises for which the charges were incurred and any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the
county for all costs, fees, charges and expenses, including, but not limited
to, administrative costs and legal fees and costs, by reason of violation.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the
remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to
secure the violations described therein within ten days, or a greater period as
the county shall deem appropriate, after the county has taken one or more of
the actions described in this chapter, the county may impose a penalty not to
exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the
violation remains unremedied after the receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   Criminal penalties; enforcement costs. Any person who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the
fullest extent of the law and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $500
per violation per day. The county may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs
and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.
   (C)   Injunctive relief. The county may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining any person from undertaking any activity which
would result in a violation or continued violation of this chapter and may seek
mandatory injunctive relief compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of any violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and
remedies authorized by this chapter, the county, and its option, may impose
upon a violator alternative compensatory action, such as storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup and the like.
   (E)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement
processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to
public health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a nuisance and may be
summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, or may be the subject
of a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of the
nuisance.
   (F)   Remedies not exclusive. Except as expressly provided above, the
remedies in this section are cumulative and the exercise of any one or more
remedies shall not prejudice any other remedies that may otherwise be pursued
for a violation of this chapter. The remedies listed in this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state
or local law and it is within the discretion of the county to seek cumulative
remedies.
(Ord. 2008-08, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-06, passed 6-3-2024)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   SNOWMOBILES
      
72.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   County’s power to regulate traffic
   
70.03   Load limits on county bridges
   
70.04   No-passing zones
   
70.05   Speed limits
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 9-21-1-2
   Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, see I.C. 9-21-1-1 et seq.
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions set forth in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
shall govern in the interpretation of this traffic code.
(Prior Code, § 7-1)
Statutory reference:
   Motor vehicle definitions, see I.C. 9-13-2-1 through I.C. 9-13-2-198.7
§ 70.02 COUNTY’S POWER TO REGULATE TRAFFIC.
   The county may adopt, by ordinance, traffic regulations with respect to
streets and highways under its jurisdiction. Fines assessed for violations of
traffic ordinances adopted by the county may be deposited into the General Fund
of the county.
(Prior Code, § 7-2)
§ 70.03 LOAD LIMITS ON COUNTY BRIDGES.
   (A)   The maximum weight load which may be carried on each bridge in the
county shall be the inventory weight rating established for each bridge in the
then most current Bridge Reinspection Study and Report, received by the Board
of Commissioners of the county.
(Prior Code, § 7-5)
   (B)   Whenever the maximum weight load for a bridge shall be less than the
maximum weight load prescribed in I.C. 9-20-7-1 et seq., or subsequent
applicable provisions, signs indicating the maximum weight load allowed on the
bridge shall be posted in accord with the provisions of I.C. 9-20-7-3 or
subsequent applicable provisions.
(Prior Code, § 7-6)
(Res. passed 2-17-1981)
§ 70.04 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of County Commissioners may determine, by an
engineering and traffic investigation, those portions of any road or street,
including bridges, under its jurisdiction where overtaking and passing or
driving to the left of the roadway would be especially hazardous.
      (2)   Upon making that determination, the Board may, by ordinance,
designate no-passing zones by appropriate signs or marks on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 7-18)
   (B)   The County Highway Supervisor shall maintain, in his or her office, a
current listing of no-passing zones designated by appropriate ordinance, which
shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 7-19)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes the county to designate no-passing zones and one-lane bridges,
see I.C. 9-21-4-13 and I.C. 9-21-4-14
§ 70.05 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   A person may not drive a vehicle on a street, roadway or alley
located in the unincorporated areas of the county in excess of the following
maximum limits:
         (a)   Fifty-five mph, except as provided in divisions (A)(2) and (3)
below and division (A)(2)(b) below;
         (b)   Thirty mph in an urban district or on an interior street located
within a platted subdivision, except as provided in division (A)(2)(a) below;
and
         (c)   Fifteen mph in an alley, except as provided in division (A)(2)
(c) below.
      (2)   Based upon the Summary of Speed Studies for the county consisting
of, and compiled from, engineering and traffic investigation and a map of
roadways, streets and alleys within the unincorporated areas of the county, the
County Commissioners hereby determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum
limit on the roadways, streets and alleys to be as follows:
         (a)   Thirty mph on roadways and streets within urban districts and
interior streets within platted subdivisions, except where a higher or lower
maximum speed has been designated in the Summary of Speed Studies and
subsequent amendments thereto and on the map of roadways, streets and alleys
and by signage placed along the roadway, street or alley designating a higher
or a lower maximum speed, in which case the maximum limit shall be the speed so
designated;
         (b)   Fifty-five mph on other roadways and streets within the
unincorporated area within the county, except where a lower maximum speed has
been designated in the Summary of Speed Studies and subsequent amendments
thereto and on the map of roadways, streets and alleys and by signage placed
along roadway, street or alley, designating a higher or lower maximum speed, in
which case the maximum limit shall be the speed so designated;
         (c)   Fifteen mph in an alley except where a lower maximum speed has
been designated in the Summary of Speed Studies and subsequent amendments
thereto and on the map of roadways, streets and alleys and by signage placed
along roadway, street or alley designating a higher or lower maximum speed, in
which case the maximum limit shall be the speed so designated; and
(Prior Code, § 7-23)
         (d)   Forty-five mph on that portion of Sawin Drive located in the
county from the intersection of Sawin Drive and Talley Road in the city of
Columbus, Indiana.
         (e)   Forty-five mph on that portion of County Road 150 West located
in the county from its intersection with County Road 200 South, to its
intersection with Deaver Road.
   (B)   The prima facie speed limits set out above in division (A) shall be
effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are posted on the roads,
streets or highways or upon the approaches thereto.
(Prior Code, § 7-24)
(Ord. 1-1959, passed 8-3-1959; Ord. 2005-01, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 2010-07,
passed 10-4-2010; Ord. 2011-01, passed 6-6-2011) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §
70.03 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 per instance.
      (2)   Each violation of §
70.03 shall constitute a separate offense.
      (3)   Violators may also be subject to the provision of §
10.99 and the provisions of I.C. 9-20-18-11 and I.C. 9-20-18-12.
(Prior Code, § 7-7)
   (C)   (1)   Every driver of a vehicle must obey the markings or signs posted
pursuant to §
70.04.
      (2)   Violations of §
70.04 shall be treated as Class C infractions.
(Prior Code, § 7-20)
   (D)   Any person found to have violated a provision of §
70.05 shall be guilty of a Class C infraction.
(Prior Code, § 7-23)
(Res. passed 2-17-1981; Ord. 2005-01, passed 4-11-2005)
CHAPTER 71: SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
71.01   Where operated
   
71.02   Snowmobile to yield right-of-way
   
71.03   Single file formations required
   
71.04   Lights required
   
71.05   Loading and unloading
   
71.06   County immune from liability
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes the county to regulate the operation of snowmobiles, see I.C. 14-
16-1-22
§ 71.01 WHERE OPERATED.
   Snowmobiles may be operated on all roads or portions thereof in the county,
except as follows:
   (A)   All roads and streets within incorporated or unincorporated cities and
towns in the county;
   (B)   All roads and streets within subdivisions located in the county; and
   (C)   All roads and streets which the County Highway Department shall, from
time to time, designate as being closed to snowmobile operation.
(Prior Code, § 6-120) (Ord. 1980-02, passed 3-24-1980) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 SNOWMOBILE TO YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   All snowmobiles shall be operated on the right shoulder of all roads, if
possible, or, if not possible, shall ride with the normal flow of traffic on
the roadway. Snowmobile traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicular
traffic at all times and in all directions.
(Prior Code, § 6-121) (Ord. 1980-02, passed 3-24-1980) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 SINGLE FILE FORMATIONS REQUIRED.
   Where more than one snowmobile is present, they shall ride in single file.
(Prior Code, § 6-122) (Ord. 1980-02, passed 3-24-1980) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   All snowmobiles shall be operated with headlights and taillights switched on
at all times.
(Prior Code, § 6-123) (Ord. 1980-02, passed 3-24-1980) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   No snowmobiles shall be loaded or unloaded from a stopped or standing motor
vehicle on any traveled portion of any road or street within the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-124) (Ord. 1980-02, passed 3-24-1980) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 COUNTY IMMUNE FROM LIABILITY.
   The county makes no representations as to the safety or suitability of its
roads and streets for use for snowmobiling purposes, and expressly adopts the
provisions of I.C. 14-16, which establishes that all snowmobiling is done at
the risk of the operator and his or her passengers.
(Prior Code, § 6-125) (Ord. 1980-02, passed 3-24-1980)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 14-16 was repealed by P.L. 1-1995, Sec. 91
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Weight restrictions on roads and highways
      
II.   Stop intersections
      
III.   Through streets
      
IV.   Oakcrest Subdivision
SCHEDULE I. WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON ROADS AND HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Role of County Highway Engineer. The County Highway Engineer shall
have the power and authority to post county roads from time to time and place
to place with weight limits for vehicles using the roads as conditions may
warrant.
(Prior Code, § 7-10)
   (B)   Posting of weight limits.
      (1)   Weight limits shall be posted on signs set on or along the
restricted roads. Signs shall have white backgrounds with black letters.
      (2)   Weight limits may be stated as a gross vehicular weight limit or
axle weight limit or both. When axle limit is used, the wheel group on either
end of an axle shall not exceed one-half the axle limit.
(Prior Code, § 7-11)
   (C)   Penalties. Any person found operating a vehicle in violation of
provisions of this schedule or posted weight limit shall be guilty of a Class C
infraction and shall be punished in accordance with terms of I.C. 9-20-4-3.
(Prior Code, § 7-12)
   (D)   Listing of roads with restricted weight limits.
      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 9-20-1-3, the Board of County Commissioners may,
after appropriate engineering and traffic investigations have been made, make
the determination to limit the weight of vehicles traveling on certain county
roads.
      (2)   All roads designated to have traffic restricted by gross vehicle
weight shall be properly determined by appropriate ordinance of the Board of
County Commissioners.
      (3)   The County Highway Engineer shall maintain, in his or her office, a
copy of all roads designated to have weight restrictions, which shall be
available for public inspection during regular business hours.
      (4)   There are imposed the following regulations on vehicular traffic on
C.R. 450 S and C.R. 400 S located in the county:
         The portion of C.R. 450 S, beginning at its intersection with S.R. 11
and extending east to the point that C.R. 450 S becomes C.R. 400 S and ending
at the intersection of C.R. 400 S and U.S. 31 shall be closed to thru semi-
trucks exceeding 14 tons gross weight
      (5)   After the roadway has been posted with signs designating the weight
restriction, any person violating this division (D) shall be guilty of a Class
C infraction for each violation.
      (6)   Fines resulting from violations of this division (D) shall be
deposited into the General Fund of the county.
(Prior Code, § 7-13)
(Ord. 5, passed 6-5-1978; Ord. 1995-11, passed 10-9-1995)
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes the County Attorney to bring a civil action against the owner and
operator of the vehicle to recover the damages sustained, see I.C. 9-20-18-11
   Weight limits, see I.C. 9-20-4-3
SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   After the roadway has been posted with signs, any person violating any
portion of this schedule shall be guilty of a Class C infraction for each
violation.
   (B)   Fines resulting from violations of this schedule shall be deposited
into the General Fund of the county.
 
Location                                  Type  Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection of C.R. 300 S and C.R. 550 W 4-way 7-73       (R)      5-19-1980
Intersection of C.R. 400 S and C.R. 250 E 4-way 7-74       1995-11  10-9-1995
Intersection of C.R. 550 N and C.R. 25 E  3-way 7-72       1983-8   8-8-1983
Intersection of C.R. 650 N and C.R. 200 W 3-way 7-71       4-30-79A 4-30-1979
in Taylorsville, German Township
Intersection of Marr and Rocky Ford Roads 4-way 7-70       4-30-79A 4-30-1979
in Columbus Township
 
Statutory reference:
   Addresses the duty to obey stop signs at intersections, see I.C. 9-21-8-32
SCHEDULE III. THROUGH STREETS.
   Anyone found in violation of any provisions of this schedule shall be fined
not less than $25 per violation, nor more than $2,500, as provided in §
10.99.
 
Street     Location          Special Provisions Prior Code Ord. No. Date Passed
                             Every driver of a
                             vehicle
                             approaching C.R.
                             325 W on Carlos
                             Folger Road shall
                             stop before
                             entering or
                             proceeding through
                             the intersection
           Intersection with and shall yield
C.R. 325 W Carlos Folger     the right-of-way   7-80       1984-7   9-17-1984
           Road              to other vehicles
                             which have entered
                             the intersection
                             from C.R. 325 W or
                             which are
                             approaching so
                             closely on C.R.
                             325 W as to
                             constitute an
                             immediate hazard
                             Every driver of a
                             vehicle
                             approaching C.R.
                             550 N on C.R. 50 W
                             shall stop before
                             entering or
                             proceeding through
                             the intersection
                             and shall yield
C.R. 550 N Intersection with the right-of-way   7-81       1983-11  12-5-1983
           C.R. 50 W         to other vehicles
                             which have entered
                             the intersection
                             from C.R. 550 N or
                             which are
                             approaching so
                             closely on C.R.
                             550 N as to
                             constitute an
                             immediate hazard
                             Every driver of a
                             vehicle
                             approaching C.R.
                             550 N on C.R. 25 E
                             shall stop before
                             entering or
                             proceeding through
                             the intersection
                             and shall yield
C.R. 550 N Intersection with the right-of-way   7-82       1983-12  12-5-1983
           C.R. 25 E         to other vehicles
                             which have entered
                             the intersection
                             from C.R. 550 N or
                             which are
                             approaching so
                             closely on C.R.
                             550 N as to
                             constitute an
                             immediate hazard
 
SCHEDULE IV. OAKCREST SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   One-way street designations. Every driver of a vehicle on the portions
of the streets described below shall proceed only in the direction shown on the
drawing on file in the County Highway Engineer’s office.
 
Street          Location
Cul-de-sac      At the east end of Oak Manor Drive
El Mina Drive   From its west intersection with C.R. 50 W to its east
                intersection with Oak Manor Drive
Hickory Lane    From its west intersection with Julia Drive to its east
                intersection with Julia Drive
Julia Drive     From its east intersection with Hickory Lane to its west
                intersection with Hickory Lane
Oak Manor Drive From its east intersection with El Mina Drive to its west
                intersection with C.R. 50 W
 
(Prior Code, § 7-90)
   (B)   Stop intersection designated. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop at
all entrances to the intersection described below.
 
Location                                          Type
Intersection of El Mina Drive and Oak Manor Drive 3-way
 
(Prior Code, § 7-91)
   (C)   Times when regulations in effect. The one-way street and three-way
stop designations set forth in this schedule shall be effective only during the
hours from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 7-93)
   (D)   Signage. The County Highway Superintendent is authorized and directed
to cause appropriate traffic signs and stop signs to applicable standards to be
erected and installed on the streets and roads described herein during the
hours and on the date described in division (C) above.
(Prior Code, § 7-94)
(Ord. 1992-06, passed 6-8-1992)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Prohibited parking
      
II.   Oakcrest Subdivision
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
   All fines assessed for violation of provisions of this schedule shall be
deposited into the General Fund of the county.
(Prior Code, § 7-61)
 
Street                                Location
C.R. 1140 E or its adjacent right-of- From its intersection with C.R. 200 N to
way                                   its intersection with C.R. 1100 E
 
(Prior Code, § 7-60)
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-14-1983) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. OAKCREST SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   No-parking designations.
 
Street      Side   Location
C.R. 50 W   East   Between its north intersection with Oak Manor Drive and its
                   south intersection with C.R. 650 N
Julia Drive Either From its west intersection with C.R. 50 W to its west
                   intersection with Hickory Lane
 
(Prior Code, § 7-92)
   (B)   Times when regulations in effect. The no-parking restrictions set
forth above shall be effective only during the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
(Prior Code, § 7-93)
   (C)   Signage. The County Highway Superintendent is authorized and directed
to cause appropriate no-parking signs to applicable standards to be erected and
installed on the streets and roads described herein during the hours described
in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 7-94)
(Ord. 1992-06, passed 6-8-1992) Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY GENERALLY; AUTHORITY
      
91.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; SMOKING AND BURNING
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   VECTOR ABATEMENT
      
94.   WEEDS AND VEGETATION
      
95.   BURGLAR ALARMS
      
96.   LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY
      
97.   FAIR HOUSING
      
98.   UNLICENSED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
      
99.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
100.   PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
CHAPTER 90: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY GENERALLY; AUTHORITY
Section
   
90.01   County's authority to regulate
   
90.02   Preservation of public peace and order
   
90.03   Authority to regulate air and sound
   
90.04   Authority to regulate public gatherings
   
90.05   Authority to establish fire prevention systems
   
90.06   Authority to regulate animals
   
90.07   Authority to establish hospitals
   
90.08   Authority to regulate businesses
   
90.09   Offenses against public health, order and decency
   
90.10   Resisting official action
Statutory reference:
   Air and sound regulation, see I.C. 36-8-2-8
   Authority, see I.C. 36-8-2-10
   Authorizes a unit to control animals and to establish, operate and maintain
animal shelters, see I.C. 36-2-6
   Establishment of a firefighting system, see I.C. 36-8-2-3
   Offenses, see I.C. 35-45-1-1 et seq.
   Preservation of the public peace and order, see I.C. 36-8-2-2
   Providing medical care or other health and community services; and to
establish, aid, maintain and operate hospitals, see I.C. 36-8-2-5
   Public gatherings, see I.C. 36-2-9
   Regulation of conduct and property for reasons of public health, safety and
welfare, see I.C. 36-8-2-4
§ 90.01 COUNTY'S AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
   The county may regulate the conduct or use or possession of property which
might endanger the public health, safety or welfare of its citizens.
(Prior Code, § 6-1)
§ 90.02 PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER.
   The county may establish, maintain and operate a police and law enforcement
system to preserve public peace and order and may provide facilities and
equipment for that system.
(Prior Code, § 6-2)
§ 90.03 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE AIR AND SOUND.
   The county may regulate the introduction of any substance or odor into the
air or any generation of sound.
(Prior Code, § 6-3)
§ 90.04 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE PUBLIC GATHERINGS.
   The county may regulate public gatherings, such as shows, demonstrations,
fairs, conventions, sporting events and exhibitions.
(Prior Code, § 6-4)
§ 90.05 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH FIRE PREVENTION SYSTEMS.
   The county may establish, maintain and operate a firefighting and fire
prevention system and may provide facilities and equipments for that system.
(Prior Code, § 6-5)
§ 90.06 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE ANIMALS.
   The county may regulate the control of animals and may establish animal
shelters.
(Prior Code, § 6-6)
§ 90.07 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH HOSPITALS.
   The county may establish, aid, maintain and operate hospitals and impose
restrictions upon persons or animals regarding injury or disease.
(Prior Code, § 6-7)
§ 90.08 AUTHORITY TO REGULATE BUSINESSES.
   The county may regulate the operation of businesses, crafts, professions and
occupations.
(Prior Code, § 6-8)
§ 90.09 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, ORDER AND DECENCY.
   All offenses against public health, order or decency not addressed by this
code shall be governed by applicable state statute.
(Prior Code, § 6-9)
§ 90.10 RESISTING OFFICIAL ACTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly or intentionally
interfere or attempt to impede or interfere with any county official or
employee in the performance of their official duties.
(Prior Code, § 6-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; SMOKING AND BURNING
Section
Non-Smoking Policies
   
91.01   Prohibited in all public buildings owned or occupied by county
   
91.02   Definition
   
91.03   Signage
   
91.04   Violations; removal from building
Fire Prevention Bureau
   
91.15   Duties of Bureau
   
91.16   Definitions
   
91.17   Inspections of buildings and premises
   
91.18   Orders to eliminate hazardous conditions
   
91.19   Monthly fire drills
   
91.20   Semi-annual fire inspections of commercial/industrial uses
   
91.21   Modifications to the State Fire Marshal
   
91.22   Appeals
Outdoor Burning
   
91.35   Purpose
   
91.36   Definition
   
91.37   Prohibition against unregulated outdoor burning
   
91.38   Rules
   
91.39   Authorization from Director of Division of Environmental Health
Smoke Detectors
   
91.50   Definitions
   
91.51   General requirements
   
91.52   Location and installation
   
91.53   Maintenance
   
91.54   Duty of property owner, manager or agent
   
91.55   Duty of tenant
   
91.56   Certificates of compliance
   
91.57   Lack of operating smoke detector; complaint; investigation by Code
Enforcement Department or Fire Official
   
91.58   Transfer of dwelling unit without smoke detector prohibited
   
91.59   Certain persons not liable for damages resulting from mechanical
failure of smoke detector
   
91.60   Violations not to affect insurance claims
   
91.61   Compliance with other laws and ordinances
 
   
91.99   Penalty
NON-SMOKING POLICIES
§ 91.01 PROHIBITED IN ALL PUBLIC BUILDINGS OWNED OR OCCUPIED BY COUNTY.
   It is ordered and declared that, from and after the date of adoption of this
subchapter, smoking shall be prohibited in all public buildings owned by, or
occupied for the use of, the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-15) (Res. 1992-02, passed 3-2-1992) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 DEFINITION.
   As used in this subchapter, SMOKING means the carrying or holding of a
lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment or the
inhalation or exhalation of smoke from any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or
any other lighted smoking equipment.
(Prior Code, § 6-16) (Res. 1992-02, passed 3-2-1992)
§ 91.03 SIGNAGE.
   The official or officials in charge of each public building, office or
offices located therein shall post conspicuous signs in each building, office
or offices located therein that read "SMOKING IS PROHIBITED IN THIS BUILDING"
or other similar language.
(Prior Code, § 6-17) (Res. 1992-02, passed 3-2-1992)
§ 91.04 VIOLATIONS; REMOVAL FROM BUILDING.
   The official or officials shall request all persons who are smoking in
violation hereof to refrain from smoking and shall remove any person who is
smoking in violation hereof and fails to refrain from smoking after being
requested to do so.
(Prior Code, § 6-18) (Res. 1992-02, passed 3-2-1992)
FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU
§ 91.15 DUTIES OF BUREAU.
   (A)   There is established the County Fire Prevention Bureau, with the
consent and approval of the participating fire chiefs of the rural fire
departments in the county. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall enforce the State
Fire Prevention Code (as hereinafter defined) in the county under the
supervision of the County Chief Code Enforcement Officer of the County
Department of Technical Code Enforcement. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall be
composed of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Inspector, described
below, acting as the designated representatives of the responsible area fire
chiefs.
   (B)   Applications for the position of Fire Inspector, from time to time,
shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners of the county and reviewed by
participating fire chiefs of the rural fire departments in the county. The
final selection shall be made by the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   The Fire Prevention Bureau shall be accountable to the Board of
Commissioners. A report of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be made monthly and
transmitted to the Board of Commissioners and area fire chiefs; the report
shall contain a record of all proceedings under this subchapter, including data
and statistics as the Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall determine or which
may be requested by the Board of Commissioners and/or area fire chiefs.
(Prior Code, § 6-90) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention Bureau; administration and establishment, see §§ 34.205
through 34.215
§ 91.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Chief Code Enforcement Officer of the Department of
Technical Code Enforcement.
   CODE or UNIFORM BUILDING CODE. The State Building Code adopted by the State
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission and all codes amendatory thereof
or supplemental thereto.
   MUNICIPALITY. Unincorporated areas of the county and incorporated towns
within the county, when authorized by the town boards of the respective
incorporated towns.
(Prior Code, § 6-91) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
§ 91.17 INSPECTIONS OF BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer or the Fire Inspector shall inspect all
buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private
dwellings (as defined in the code), for the purposes of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violation of
any statute or ordinance relating to the fire hazard or to the prevention of
fires.
   (B)   This inspection shall be made periodically in all of the territory
served by the Fire Prevention Bureau, as the Board of County Commissioners may
direct. Written reports of the inspections shall be made by the Fire Inspector
and kept on file in the office of the Code Enforcement Officer. A report of
each inspection shall be submitted to the State Fire Marshal and to the area
fire chief having jurisdiction of the territory in which the inspection is
made. The reports shall contain the following information concerning the
inspections:
      (1)   The total number of inspections made;
      (2)   The total number of defects found and classified as required by the
Fire Marshal;
      (3)   The total number of orders issued for the correction of each class
of defects; and
      (4)   The total number of the orders complied with.
(Prior Code, § 6-92) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
§ 91.18 ORDERS TO ELIMINATE HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
   When the Code Enforcement Officer or the Fire Inspector shall find any
building or premises to be in a dangerous or hazardous condition, and in
violation of any applicable federal or state law, or any rule or regulation
issued pursuant thereto, or county law, then, in the event, a written order
shall be issued and sent to the alleged violator and a copy thereof sent to the
area fire chief in whose territory the dangerous or hazardous condition exists,
to correct the dangerous or hazardous condition or to remove the dangerous or
hazardous materials in any manner (complying with state and federal laws)
specified by the Fire Prevention Bureau or area fire department.
(Prior Code, § 6-93) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
§ 91.19 MONTHLY FIRE DRILLS.
   Fire drills shall be held at least once a month in all buildings used for
educational purposes (as defined in the Code) where the use constitutes the
major use of the building. A complete record of all fire drills shall be kept
and persons in charge of buildings used for educational purposes shall file a
written report at least quarterly with the Fire Prevention Bureau, giving the
time and date of each drill held. These fire drills shall be conducted in the
presence of the Fire Inspector at least once during each school year.
(Prior Code, § 6-94) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
§ 91.20 SEMI-ANNUAL FIRE INSPECTIONS OF COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USES.
   Although not limited thereto, fire inspections shall be made not less
frequently than each six months in all buildings and premises used for
industrial and/or commercial purposes, where the materials described below are
kept or maintained:
   (A)   Storage of blasting agents;
   (B)   Gasoline bulk plants and dispensing equipment;
   (C)   Compressed gas storage facilities;
   (D)   Storage of flammable liquids and hazardous chemicals;
   (E)   Acetylene storage facilities; and
   (F)   Grain elevators (or any other facility where there is an accumulation
of dust).
(Prior Code, § 6-95) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
§ 91.21 MODIFICATIONS TO THE STATE FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   No substances, material or devices not approved by the Code shall be
stored, handled or used in any construction alterations or additions unless the
owner thereof or his or her duly authorized representative submits application
for approval thereof to the State Fire Marshal in accordance with state general
administrative rules (675 I.A.C. 21.1) and all rules amendatory thereof and
supplemental thereto.
   (B)   If the owner thereof or his or her duly authorized representative is
of the opinion that there are practical difficulties in complying with the
strict requirements of the Code, but that the spirit of the Code shall be
complied with, public safety secured and substantial justice done, he or she
may submit an application for variance therefrom to the State Fire Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 6-96) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
Statutory reference:
   Office of the State Fire Marshal and the Board of Firefighting Personnel
Standards and Education, see I.C. 22-14-2-2 through I.C. 22-14-2-11
§ 91.22 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer within 30 days from the date of the
decision, by requesting a hearing on the matter before the State Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission by written petition requesting a
hearing on the matter before the State Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission by written petition requesting the hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Commission may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, § 6-97) (Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982)
OUTDOOR BURNING
§ 91.35 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate and control the outdoor
burning of materials in residential developments in the unincorporated areas of
the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-110) (Ord. 1985-6, passed 7-22-1985)
§ 91.36 DEFINITION.
   A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT shall be any two or more adjoining parcels of real
estate, used or intended for residential purposes, whether platted or
unplatted, neither or none of which exceeds three acres in size. It shall also
include any parcel or parcels of real estate containing an apartment complex or
used as a mobile home park.
(Prior Code, § 6-111) (Ord. 1985-6, passed 7-22-1985)
§ 91.37 PROHIBITION AGAINST UNREGULATED OUTDOOR BURNING.
   It shall be unlawful to burn or cause to be burned in the outdoors any
material on any real estate in a residential development in the unincorporated
areas of the county, unless the burning complies with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-112) (Ord. 1985-6, passed 7-22-1985) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.38 RULES.
   (A)   The following types of outdoor burning and fires shall be permitted
outdoors:
      (1)   The burning of residential refuse and trash, all of which must be
completely combustible, in a noncombustible container with enclosed sides, a
bottom and a mesh covering with openings no larger than one-quarter inch
square;
      (2)   The burning of organic vegetation, such as leaves and grass;
      (3)   Campfires; and
      (4)   Cooking fires.
   (B)   Except as noted, all types of outdoor burning and fires permitted
under division (A) above shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely extinguished.
      (2)   Except in the case of campfires and cooking fires, all burning
shall occur during daylight hours and all burning material must be consumed by
sunset or the fire must be extinguished at sunset. No fire shall be permitted
to smolder after sunset.
      (3)   Except in the case of cooking fires, all burning must take place at
least 25 feet from any structure.
      (4)   No burning shall take place on any public road, street or alley on
any public right-of-way.
      (5)   No burning shall take place during unfavorable meteorological
conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds, air stagnation and the
like.
      (6)   No highly explosive or other highly volatile materials or
substances shall be burned.
      (7)   No material or substance shall be burned which would create an air
pollution problem, including, but not limited to, toxic materials and
substances, hazardous wastes, rubber tires and petroleum products and
derivatives.
      (8)   No burning shall take place which creates an air pollution problem,
a public nuisance or a fire hazard. Any fire which becomes an air pollution
problem, a public nuisance or a fire hazard shall be immediately extinguished.
   (C)   Except as permitted under division (A) above or §
91.39, all other types of outdoor burning and fires on any real estate in a
residential development in the unincorporated areas of the county are
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 6-113) (Ord. 1985-6, passed 7-22-1985) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.39 AUTHORIZATION FROM DIRECTOR OF DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH.
   Any type of outdoor burning or fire which is otherwise prohibited under this
subchapter may take place upon the prior written approval of the Director of
the Division of Environmental Health of the County Health Department or his or
her designated agent. Any person seeking the approval shall submit a written
request in advance stating the nature of the burning or fire for which approval
is sought, the location and date on which it will occur, the safety precautions
which will be observed and the reasons why the request should be granted. The
Director of the Division of Environmental Health shall consider the request and
shall promptly approve or disapprove the request on the basis of demonstrated
need and a determination of whether the approval of the request would endanger
the public health safety or welfare or violate any other federal, state or
local law or ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 6-114) (Ord. 1985-6, passed 7-22-1985)
SMOKE DETECTORS
§ 91.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof which contains three or
more dwellings and included residential condominiums.
   AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION. The County Code Enforcement Department and
the County Fire Prevention Bureau. The entities shall have the enforcement
authority and responsibility for this subchapter.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which contains not more than two
units.
   DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation
for not more than one family, but shall not include single-family residences
occupied solely by the owner of the residence and/or the owner's family.
   LANDLORD. The owner, lessor or sublessor of the rental dwelling unit or
guest room in the building of which it is a part.
   LODGING HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof containing not more than five
guest rooms where rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise.
   MOBILE HOME RENTAL. Any mobile home or manufactured home occupied by or
offered for occupancy to an individual as a residence on a rental basis.
   SMOKE DETECTOR. A device which senses visible or invisible particles of
combustion and conforms to the minimum standards for type, components and
maintenance prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA).
   TENANT. A person entitled to occupy a dwelling unit on a rental or lease
basis.
(Prior Code, § 6-245) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 91.51 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Every dwelling unit, dwelling, apartment house, lodging house or mobile home
rental shall contain approved and properly functioning smoke detectors
installed in accordance with §
91.52.
(Prior Code, § 6-246) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Smoke detectors in all hotels, motels and dwellings, see I.C. 22-11-18
§ 91.52 LOCATION AND INSTALLATION.
   Smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally
located in a corridor or area giving access to the rooms for sleeping purposes.
Where a common hallway is used, smoke detectors shall be placed not more than
25 feet apart in a hallway. All smoke detectors shall be located either on the
ceiling not less than four inches nor more than 12 inches from the wall, or on
a wall not less than four inches nor more than 12 inches from the ceiling, or
as per manufacturer guidelines. At least one smoke detector must be placed
within 15 feet of any room used for sleeping purposes. No smoke detector shall
be recessed into the ceiling.
(Prior Code, § 6-247) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.53 MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove any working
smoke detector, except when it is necessary for maintenance or inspection
purposes. Any smoke detector removed for repair or replacement shall be
reinstalled or replaced so that it is in place during normal sleeping hours.
(Prior Code, § 6-248) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.54 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER, MANAGER OR AGENT.
   At every change of tenant in every rental dwelling unit or mobile home
rental, smoke detectors shall be tested to see that they are in operable
condition. Every owner, manager or agent of any rental dwelling unit or mobile
home rental shall be responsible for the installation and replacement of
defective smote detectors at any time. This requirement applies to smoke
detectors required by any state or federal law as well as those required by
this section.
(Prior Code, § 6-249) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.55 DUTY OF TENANT.
   The tenant in any dwelling unit, apartment house, lodging house or mobile
home rental shall be responsible for the on-going maintenance of smoke
detectors. Tenants shall immediately notify the owner, manager or agent when a
smoke detector is defective or in need of replacement. The notification shall
be in writing and dated; and shall be delivered to the owner, manager or agent
either in person or by first class mail.
(Prior Code, § 6-250) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.56 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
   Each owner, manager or agent of any rental dwelling unit or mobile home
rental in which a smoke detector has been installed shall provide documentation
upon request to the Fire Prevention Bureau of the county that the required
installation has been performed in the owner's units and that the detectors are
in good working condition. Each owner, manager or agent shall certify, in
writing, to each new occupant of any rental dwelling unit or mobile home rental
covered by this subchapter that all smoke detectors required have been
installed and are in proper working condition.
(Prior Code, § 6-251) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.57 LACK OF OPERATING SMOKE DETECTOR; COMPLAINT; INVESTIGATION BY CODE
ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT OR FIRE OFFICIAL.
   (A)   If a rental dwelling unit or mobile home rental is not equipped with
the required smoke detector at the time a new occupant moves into the unit,
occupancy shall not be allowed. If the required smoke detectors do not exist,
the tenant should give written notice to the County Code Enforcement Department
or the Fire Prevention Bureau of the county starting the deficiency. Upon
receipt of a complaint filed, the County Code Enforcement Department or the
Fire Prevention Bureau shall investigate the alleged violations. If the County
Code Enforcement Department or the Fire Prevention Bureau finds that the owner
or owner's authorized agent has failed to install a properly operating smoke
detector in the unit under investigation, the owner or owner's authorized agent
shall be given written notice of the deficiency and shall have five calendar
days to bring the unit into compliance. If the owner or owner's agent fails to
comply within the time provided, the County Code Enforcement Department or the
Fire Prevention Bureau may issue a citation to the owner or owner's agent.
   (B)   (1)   In the absence of a complaint from the tenant, the County Code
Enforcement Department or the Fire Prevention Bureau may investigate the
alleged violation. If the County Code Enforcement Department or the Fire
Prevention Bureau finds that the owner or the owner's authorized agent has
failed to install a properly operating smoke detector in the unit under
investigation, the County Code Enforcement Department or the Fire Prevention
Bureau may initiate the citation process by presenting the owner or the owner's
agent with a written notice of the deficiency specifying that the owner or
owner's agent has five calendar days to bring the unit within compliance. If
the County Code Enforcement Department or the Fire Prevention Bureau finds that
the owner or owner's authorized agent has complied with §§
91.53 and
91.54, but that the tenant has failed to maintain the smoke detector in a
proper working condition, the County Code Enforcement Department or the Fire
Prevention Bureau may initiate the citation process.
      (2)   The tenant shall be given written notice of the deficiency and
shall have five calendar days to bring the unit within compliance.
      (3)   If the tenant fails to comply within the time provided, the County
Code Enforcement Department or the Fire Prevention Bureau may issue a citation
to the tenant.
(Prior Code, § 6-252) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.58 TRANSFER OF DWELLING UNIT WITHOUT SMOKE DETECTOR PROHIBITED.
   No person shall convey fee title to any real property which includes a
dwelling unit or transfer possession of any dwelling unit or mobile home rental
pursuant to a land sale contract, unless there is installed in the dwelling
unit or mobile home rental an approved and properly operating smoke detector
installed in accordance with the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-253) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.59 CERTAIN PERSONS NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM MECHANICAL
FAILURE OF SMOKE DETECTOR.
   The owner, owner's authorized agent or tenant of a dwelling unit shall not
be held liable in any civil action for death or injury to persons or property
resulting from the mechanical failure of a smoke detector required under this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-254) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 91.60 VIOLATIONS NOT TO AFFECT INSURANCE CLAIMS.
   A violation of this subchapter does not constitute grounds for a reduction
or denial of a claim under an insurance policy, even if the policy contains
terms to the contrary.
(Prior Code, § 6-255) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 91.61 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS AND ORDINANCES.
   Compliance with this subchapter does not relieve the owner from the
requirements of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 6-256) (Ord. 1995-05, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.22 or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the
State Fire Prevention and Building Safety or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every
violation and noncompliance respectively, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $25, nor more than $500. The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all persons shall
be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties prescribed by division (B)(1) above,
the Board of Commissioners of the county may seek equitable mandatory or
injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance
with the terms of §§
91.15 through
91.22 and/or to enforce removal of conditions described herein which are
prohibited by the terms of §§
91.15 through
91.22.
(Prior Code, § 6-98)
   (C)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
91.35 through 91.29 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25, nor more than $500 for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-115)
(Ord. 1982-11, passed - -1982; Ord. 1985-6, passed 7-22-1985)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Animal Control Commission
   
92.03   Licensing of dogs and cats
   
92.04   Restraint
   
92.05   Animal care regulations
   
92.06   Rabies control
   
92.07   Impoundment
   
92.08   Enforcement
   
92.09   Applicability
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes the county to impose restrictions on animals, see I.C. 36-8-2-5
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. The voluntary relinquishment of possession by the owner with
the intention of terminating his or her ownership, but without vesting
possession in any other person. The failure to make adequate provision for
food, water and shelter shall be prima facie evidence of ABANDONMENT.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person who has been employed as such by the
Board of Commissioners.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility operated by a humane society or municipal
agency, or its authorized agents or operated under contract or agreement with
the Board of Commissioners for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals
held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner while not under the control of the
owner or other person by leash, cord, chain or other device of actual physical
restraint or under the control of and accompanying the owner or other person
who has the ability to control the dog or cat by voice command.
   BREEDER. Any person, or other entity that breeds dogs or cats for purposes
of sale of the offspring of the animal(s). In no event shall a breeder operate
more than ten unaltered female dogs or cats that are more than 12 months old.
   DOG, CAT and ANIMAL. Includes both the male and female thereof.
   IDENTIFIED COMPLAINT. A complaint in which the identity of the complainant
is known to the Animal Control Officer or Police Department or Health
Department of the county and whose identity is made a matter of public record
or released to any person desiring the same.
   KENNEL. Any facility wherein any person engages in the business of boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling dogs or cats;
or any household or noncommercial animal establishment harboring four or more
animals.
   NUISANCE. Any one or more of the following conditions:
      (1)   A condition which arises by a dog barking consistently or at
intervals chasing bicycles or automobiles on the streets or sidewalks of the
county.
      (2)   A condition which arises by a dog, cat or other animal destroying,
defacing or damaging shrubbery, lawns or flowers which results in the general
discomfort of citizens in the neighborhood where the dog, cat or other animal
is harbored.
      (3)   A condition which arises by a dog barking consistently so as to
disturb the peace of the neighborhood.
      (4)   A condition which arises from the accumulation of animal excreta on
the property of the owner, public or any other citizen so as to cause an
obnoxious odor, create a situation which could draw or breed insects, attract
vermin or cause a health nuisance.
   OFFICIAL WARNING. A written notice or warning based upon an identified
complaint and given to the owner of a dog, cat or other animal by the Animal
Control Officer, Sheriff or other member of the County Sheriff’s Department or
by an employee of the County Health Department.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog, cat or other animal.
   PET SHOP. Any person, partnership or corporation, other than a licensed
kennel, that buys or sells any species of animal.
   RUNNING IN PACK. Three or more dogs, cats or other animals at large
together, which by repeated or continual presence constitute a physical danger
to a neighborhood, livestock, or personal or real property.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that is known to have bitten or otherwise
physically molested or inflicted a personal injury upon a human being without
provocation; or, an animal that promiscuously attacks other animals.
   WARM-BLOODED ANIMAL. Any animal that maintains a constant body temperature;
all mammals including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, rats, squirrels,
raccoons, skunks, foxes and the like.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey, raccoon, skunk, fox, poisonous snake, leopard,
panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal which can normally
be found in the wild state.
(Prior Code, § 3-5) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1987-16, passed
10-26-1987; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021)
§ 92.02 ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION.
   (A)   An Animal Control Commission is established which shall consist of
five members.
   (B)   The members of the Animal Control Commission shall be appointed by the
Board of Commissioners and shall consist of the following: one representative
from the County Council, one representative from the County Humane Society and
three citizens of the county. The members of the Animal Control Commission
shall serve at the discretion of the Board of Commissioners. The members of the
Animal Control Commission shall serve without compensation.
   (C)   The Commission shall elect its own Chairperson and enact rules as may
be necessary in order to organize and conduct its business.
   (D)   The Animal Control Commission shall have the following powers, duties
and responsibilities:
      (1)   To make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners and the
County Health Department concerning rules and regulations for the care and
control of animals within the scope of this chapter and concerning facilities
and personnel necessary to carry out the terms of this chapter;
      (2)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, to enter
into leases, contracts and agreements with persons, firms, public agencies,
municipal governmental units or corporations (private or not-for-profit) to
provide animal control services and facilities which may be necessary to carry
out the terms of this chapter;
      (3)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, to employ an
Animal Control Officer and other persons as may be necessary to carry out and
enforce the terms of this chapter and to make recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners concerning the qualifications and conditions of employment. The
Animal Control Officer and other employees shall report to and be supervised by
the Board of Commissioners;
      (4)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, to purchase
or lease any equipment, including vehicles, which may be necessary to carry out
the terms of this chapter;
      (5)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, to perform
all acts necessary to enforce the terms of this chapter, to provide the animal
control services and facilities required herein and to carry out the duties,
powers and responsibilities of the Animal Control Commission;
      (6)   To make an annual report to the Board of Commissioners concerning
the animal control program within the county; and
      (7)   To prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner as other
departments of county government.
(Prior Code, § 3-6) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1997-14, passed
12-15-1997)
§ 92.03 LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS.
   Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of a dog or cat must
obtain a license as required by state law, I.C. 15-20.
(Prior Code, § 3-7) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 RESTRAINT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or person having the custody or
control of any dog or cat to allow the dog or cat to repeatedly run at large
throughout the county so as to create a public nuisance, provided that this
requirement shall not apply to working farm dogs used for tending purposes.
   (B)   All owners or persons having custody or control shall confine within a
completely enclosed building or secure enclosure with no means of escape every
vicious dog or any dog, cat or other animal when in heat or rutting as required
by I.C. 15-5-8-2 et seq.
   (C)   Every vicious animal shall be confined by its owner or person having
its custody or control within a completely enclosed building or secure
enclosure with no means of escape and shall be securely muzzled or caged
whenever off the premises of its owner.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the
county an animal that creates a nuisance, or which by loud and frequent or
habitual barking, howling or yelping causes annoyance or disturbance to the
neighborhood.
   (E)   All owners shall confine within a completely enclosed building or
secure enclosure with no means of escape, or as otherwise directed by the
Environmental Health Division of the County Health Department, any warm-blooded
animal which has bitten, scratched or caused an abrasion of the skin of any
human being or any warm-blooded animal that is known or suspected of being
rabid, in accordance with the provision of §
92.06.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody or control
of any dog, cat or other animal to allow the dog, cat or other animal to enter
upon the private property of another person without consent.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody or control
of any dog, cat or other animal to allow the dog, cat or other animal to
scratch, bite or otherwise injure any person or other animal or to cause any
damage or injury to the property of another person.
   (H)   Any animal kept for sentry or attack purposes at a place of public
business, either wholesale, retail or service business, shall be registered
with the County Animal Control Department. Registration of the sentry or attack
animal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal. The name,
address and telephone number of the owner of the animal shall be filed with the
County Animal Control Department.
(Prior Code, § 3-8) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1980-7, passed 11-
20-1980; Ord. 1987-16, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021)
Penalty, see §
92.99
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 15-5 was repealed by P.L. 2-2008, Sec. 83
§ 92.05 ANIMAL CARE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide his or her animal with sufficient and
wholesome food and water, protection from the weather, and reasonable care,
including veterinary treatment as may be necessary to prevent suffering. This
section shall also apply to animals kept at animal shelters operated by the
county, by the Humane Society or by anyone acting on behalf of the county.
   (B)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork
or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate or permit dogfight, cockfight,
bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog, cat or other animal to
abandon the same within the county. However, nothing contained herein shall
prohibit an animal shelter or any organization contracted with or sanctioned by
the county to provide humane animal care from returning any feral cat that has
been trapped and spayed or neutered to the location from which the cat had
previously been removed.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously
torment, torture, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog
used by the Sheriff’s Department, whether the dog is on-duty or off-duty or,
further, to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by the
Department or any officer or member thereof.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any poisonous
substance in any of the roads, parks, common yards or other places, whether
public or private, within the county so that the same shall be liable to be
consumed by an animal; provided that, it shall not be unlawful for a person to
expose on his or her own property common rat poison mixed only with the
vegetable substances.
   (F)   Any person who shall become apprised to the death of any animal owned
by him or her shall, within 12 hours thereafter, cause the same to be removed
from the county, provided that when such animal is killed by any person other
than the owner, if know, the owner shall not be compelled to remove it, but it
shall be removed by the person so killing.
   (G)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet
except as permitted by the Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer
is empowered to issue a temporary permit for the keeping and protection of an
infant animal native to the county, which is deemed to be harmless.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a breeder or any other person or entity to
keep more than ten unaltered female dogs or cats that are more than 12 months
old, for purposes of breeding the dogs or cats for the purpose of selling the
offspring.
   (I)   If a person kills an animal that has bitten someone and requests that
the animal be tested for rabies, the person is responsible for the costs of
removal of the head of the animal and the transportation of the head.
(Prior Code, § 3-9) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1980-7, passed 11-
20-1980; Ord. 1987-16, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 RABIES CONTROL.
   (A)   Every person, including veterinarians, who knows, learns or suspects
that a warm- blooded animal has bitten, scratched or caused an abrasion of the
skin of any human being shall immediately report that fact to the County Health
Department. All reports must be submitted on a form approved by the County
Health Department entitled “Animal Bite Report”. Upon receipt of an “Animal
Bite Report”, the Environmental Health Division of the County Health Department
shall contact the owner of the animal and determine whether or not the animal
is being confined as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Every person, including veterinarians who discovers or suspects that a
warm-blooded animal has rabies shall immediately report the fact to the County
Health Department giving the name and address of the owner of the animal and
the license number, if any, of the animal.
   (C)   Any warm-blooded animal which has bitten, scratched or caused an
abrasion of the skin of any human being and any warm-blooded animal that is
known or suspected of being rabid shall be confined for a period of not less
than ten days. All animals which are required to be confined shall be confined
in a completely enclosed building or secure enclosure with no means of escape.
If the owner cannot confine the animal in a completely enclosed building or
secure enclosure with no means of escape, then the owner must confine the
animal at a place which is approved by the Environmental Health Division of the
County Health Department. The cost of confinement is the owner’s
responsibility.
   (D)   If a warm-blooded animal has bitten a human being or is known or
suspected of being rabid and its owner is unknown or refuses to confine the
animal as required herein, then the animal shall be confined in the County
Animal Shelter. The owner of any animal so confined shall be responsible for
the costs of confinement.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any warm-blooded animal, when
notified that the animal has bitten, scratched or caused an abrasion of the
skin of any human being or when notified by any person that the animal is
suspected of being rabid, to sell, give away or allow the animal to escape or
be taken beyond the limits of the county, but it shall be the duty of the owner
upon receiving the notice to confine the animal for at least ten days as set
forth herein.
   (F)   After the expiration of at least ten days of confinement and prior to
release from confinement, the animal must be examined by a licensed doctor of
medicine or veterinarian who shall certify that the animal is not rabid. The
certification which states that the animal is not rabid must be presented to
the Environmental Health Division of the County Health Department within four
days of the examination. If the Environmental Health Division of the County
Health Department determines that the animal is no longer suspected of being
rabid, the animal may be released from confinement. The owner of the animal is
responsible for certification. If the owner is unknown or refuses to pay these
costs, the person, firm, agency or corporation which has contracted with the
Board of Commissioners or Animal Control Commission to provide the animal
control services shall be responsible for the cost of certification.
   (G)   If it should be determined that an animal is rabid, then it shall be
killed by a licensed veterinarian. The head of the animal shall be removed and
transported to the State Board of Health. The cost of the removal of the head
and transportation of the head shall be the responsibility of the owner. If the
owner of the animal is unknown or refuses to pay the cost of removal of the
head and transportation of the head, and the animal is a dog, then the township
trustee shall be responsible for these costs. If the animal is not a dog, the
person, firm, agency or corporation which has contracted with the Board of
Commissioners to provide animal control services shall be responsible for these
costs.
   (H)   If any animal shall die while being confined as required by this
section, the head of the animal shall be removed by a veterinarian and
transported to the State Board of Health. The cost of removal of the head and
transportation of the head shall be the responsibility of the owner. If the
owner of the animal is unknown or refuses to pay the cost of removal of the
head, and the animal is a dog, then the township trustee shall be responsible
for these costs. If the animal is not a dog, the person, firm, agency or
corporation which has contracted with the Board of Commissioners to provide
animal control services shall be responsible for these costs.
(Prior Code, § 3-10) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1980-7, passed
11-20-1980; Ord. 1987-16, passed 10-26-1987; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners shall arrange for an animal pound or
shelter, as provided in Indiana law, which shall be located at some convenient
place within the county.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or any member of
the Sheriff’s Department to apprehend and impound in such animal shelter any
dog, cat or any other animal found doing any of the following acts or being
kept or maintained in any of the following conditions, unless otherwise
provided herein, to-wit:
      (1)   Running at large not conforming to §
92.04(A).
      (2)   Not confined, as provided in §§
92.04(B), (C) or (E).
      (3)   Kept in violation of §§
92.04(D),
92.05(A), (B) or (G).
      (4)   Abandoned, as provided in §
92.05(C).
      (5)   Entering private property or causing injury to person or property
in violation of §§
92.04(F) or (G).
      (6)   Not registered, licensed and tagged as provided in this chapter or
Indiana law.
      (7)   Upon the verified written complaint made to the Animal Control
Officer, the County Health Department or Sheriff’s Department of a violation of
this chapter.
      (8)   Upon order of the court following a conviction of any person for
violating any provision of this chapter.
   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above notwithstanding, in lieu of
impounding any animal under division (B) above, the Animal Control Officer, an
employee of the County Health Department or any member of the Sheriff’s
Department may issue an official warning to the owner of such dog, cat or other
animal in accord with the provision of § 92.10.
   (D)   Not later than 24 hours after the impounding of any dog, cat or other
animal, except if such impoundment is by reason of division (B)(8) above, the
caretaker of the animal shelter shall notify the owner, if known, by ordinary
United States mail or by telephone of such impoundment and the reason
therefore. In the event that the owner is unknown, it shall not be necessary
for notice to be given; however, in such event, notice may be given by
publishing the same one time in a newspaper of general circulation within the
county.
   (E)   At the time of giving notice to the owner of an impounded dog, cat or
other animal as required by division (D) above, such owner shall also be
notified whether such dog, cat or other animal may be reclaimed and redeemed.
The decision as to whether an impounded dog, cat or other animal may be
redeemed shall be made by the Animal Control Officer, in such officer’s sole
discretion giving due consideration to the reason for the impounding.
   (F)   An owner of an impounded dog, cat or other animal, who has been
notified that such dog, cat or other animal may be reclaimed and redeemed, may
reclaim and redeem the same upon the payment of the following fees and upon the
fulfillment of the following obligations:
      (1)   If the dog, cat or other animal has been picked up or captured by a
county employee, policeperson, or other authorized agent of the county, the
owner shall pay a redemption fee of $10, except for the case in which the
impounded animal is a female in heat that has not been restrained in accordance
with §
92.04(B), in which case the owner shall pay a redemption fee as provided by
Indiana law.
      (2)   In addition to the payment required in division (F)(1) above, any
person, firm, agency or corporation operating such animal shelter under
contract or agreement with the Board of Commissioners or Animal Control
Commission may charge a boarding fee not greater than the prevailing fees
charged by the local veterinarians for each day or part thereof that the animal
shall be impounded and an impoundment fee to help defray costs of handling and
record keeping.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for an owner of an impounded dog, cat or other
animal, who has been notified that such dog, cat or other animal may be
reclaimed and redeemed, to fail to reclaim and redeem the same on or before the
last day of impoundment before the disposition of such dog, cat or other animal
under division (H) below.
   (H)   All dogs, cats or other animals impounded under this chapter and not
registered, licensed, tagged and redeemed shall be disposed of in a humane
manner after the expiration of the following time periods:
      (1)   Three days after notice is given to the owner as required under
division (D) above;
      (2)   Five days after impoundment when the owner is unknown; or
      (3)   At the time fixed by the court under division (B)(8) above.
Provided, however, that any dog, cat or other animal which appears to be
suffering from hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or contagious disease,
except rabies, may be disposed of immediately upon impoundment. Any animal
destroyed which is believed to be suffering from hydrophobia, mange or other
infectious disease shall be forthwith reported by the Animal Control Officer to
the County Board of Health, unless otherwise provided by Indiana law. All
animals believed to be suffering from rabies shall be handled in the manner
specified in §
92.08.
   (I)   Whenever the Animal Control Officer or Sheriff’s Department shall find
any dogs, cats or other animals running in packs, vicious or in such condition
as to be too dangerous to capture, then the Animal Control Officer or Sheriff’s
Department is authorized to dispose of the animal where it may be found.
   (J)   No impounded animal shall be sold or given to any person, procurer or
agent for the purpose of experimentation.
(Prior Code, § 3-10) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1980-7, passed
11-20-1980; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Animal Control Officer shall keep a record of all dogs, cats or
other animals impounded in the County Animal Shelter, which record shall show
the date of impoundment, the reason therefor, the person bringing the animal to
the pound and the kind, sex, color, breed, and any identifying collars, tags,
tattoos or marks of the animal impounded.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with the Animal
Control Officer, an employee of the County Board of Health or any member of the
Sheriff’s Department in the performance of his or her duties hereunder.
   (C)   Upon information sufficient to establish a violation of the provisions
of this chapter, the Animal Control Officer, an employee of the County Health
Department or any member of the Sheriff’s Department may issue to the person
committing the violation or to the owner or person having custody or control of
any animal involved in the violation either:
      (1)   An official warning; or
      (2)   A notice of ordinance violation.
   (D)   An official warning shall state the name of the person to whom the
warning is being issued, the nature of the violation, the date of the violation
and any other pertinent information concerning the violation. The official
warning shall also state that it is only a warning and is neither a notice of
ordinance violation nor a notice to appear to answer to any such violation. A
notice of ordinance violation shall state the name of the person to whom the
notice is being issued, the nature of the violation, the specific section of
this chapter which has been violated, the date of the violation, the fine
imposed for the violation in accordance herewith, any other information which
is pertinent to the violation and necessary for a thorough understanding of the
circumstances surrounding the violation. The notice of ordinance violation
shall instruct the person to whom the warning is being issued that he or she
shall appear at the County Auditor’s office to answer to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 3-12) (Ord. 12-13-79A, passed 12-13-1979; Ord. 1980-7, passed
11-20-1980; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 APPLICABILITY.
   Except for the provisions of §
92.05, which provisions shall apply throughout the county, the provisions of
this chapter shall not apply within the corporate limits of any incorporated
city, village or town within the county which by law has been given express
authority to regulate and license animals. If, however, any city, town or
village shall request the county to enforce the provisions of this chapter
within the corporate limits of the city, town or village, then the provisions
of this chapter shall apply within the area and the city, town or village shall
make arrangements with the county for the enforcement and administration and
for reimbursement to the county through collection of license fees as may be
deemed advisable.
(Prior Code, § 3-14) (Ord. 1980-7, passed 11-20-1980; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-
30-2021)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter and if such
violator appears at the County Treasurer’s office within five days of the date
of the notice of violation, such violator shall pay a fine as follows:
Violation Fine Amount
Violation      Fine Amount
At large       $100
Confinement    $100
Vicious animal $100
Noise          $100
Confinement    $100
Trespass       $100
Bites/injuries $100
Food, shelter  $100
Ill treatment  $100
Abandonment    $100
Beating        $100
Poison         $100
Death          $100
Wild animal    $100
Rabies         $100
Impoundment    $100
 
   (B)   If a violator fails to appear at the County Treasurer’s office within
five days of the date of notice of ordinance violation, the violation may be
filed with the County Court or any successor court, and the violator may be
summoned to appear before the court.
   (C)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, other than the
licensing provisions of §
92.03, upon conviction or a plea of guilty in the County Court, or any
successor court, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
by a fine of not less than the amount shown in division (A) above for the
respective ordinance violation nor more than $500. If any violation be
continuing, each day’s violation shall be deemed a separate violation, unless
otherwise provided by Indiana law.
   (D)   In addition to the fines set forth herein, any person who violates the
provisions of §
92.04(G) shall make full restitution for any damage or injury to persons or
property as a result of the violation, including, but not limited to, medical
expenses, the value of any property which has been destroyed and the cost of
repairing any damage to property.
(Prior Code, § 3-13) (Ord. 1980-7, passed 11-20-1980; Ord. 1987-16, passed 10-
26-1987; Ord. 2019-04, passed 7-15-2019; Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-30-2021)
CHAPTER 93: VECTOR ABATEMENT
Section
   
93.01   Establishment of program
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Executive officer to issue orders
   
93.04   Duties of executive officer
   
93.05   Financial support of program
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Vector abatement, see I.C. 16-41-33-1 through 16-41-33-9
§ 93.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.
   A vector abatement program is established. The vector abatement program
shall be under the direction of the executive officer of the County Health
Department.
(Prior Code, § 6-45) (Ord. 11-7-77, passed 11-7-1977)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, municipal corporation, city,
school city, town, school town, school district, school corporation, county,
any consolidated unit of government, political subdivision or any other legal
entity.
   PEST. Any arthropod, vertebrate or microorganisms of health significance to
humans.
   VECTOR. Any arthropod or feral animal responsible for the transmission of
pathogens from a host to another animal or human.
(Prior Code, § 6-46) (Ord. 11-7-77, passed 11-7-1977)
§ 93.03 EXECUTIVE OFFICER TO ISSUE ORDERS.
   (A)   The executive officer of the County Health Department is authorized,
as part of his or her duties, to issue an order in writing to any person
requiring the person to take all necessary, proper and reasonable steps to
control or abate vectors or breeding places which have adverse health
significance to humans or domestic animals and livestock.
   (B)   The order may specify the actions that shall be taken to control or
abate and the time available for accomplishing the control or abatement.
(Prior Code, § 6-47) (Ord. 11-7-77, passed 11-7-1977)
§ 93.04 DUTIES OF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.
   The duties of the executive officer or his or her authorized representative
of County Health Department, with respect to vector control, are:
   (A)   To take all necessary and proper steps to control vectors which have
adverse health significance to humans or domestic animals and livestock;
   (B)   To enter upon land, public or private, at any reasonable time to
inspect for or to abate or require abatement of all pest and vector breeding
grounds which have adverse health significance to humans or domestic animals;
   (C)   To purchase supplies, material and equipment pursuant to approved
local procedures;
   (D)   To recommend to the County Board of Commissioners or other appropriate
authority the building, constructing, maintaining or repairing of necessary
levees, cuts, canals, channels or other structures upon any land within
jurisdiction of County Health Department after obtaining the necessary local
and Department of Natural Resources approvals;
   (E)   To make contracts;
   (F)    To conduct control in a manner consistent with recommendations of the
State Cooperative Extension Service, the Pesticide Review Board, the State
Board of Health, the Office of the State Chemist, the State Department of
Health, and the State Department of Environmental Management;
   (G)   To be able to enter into cooperative agreements with appropriate
organizations for the purpose of assuring technical assistance in developing
and carrying out specific duties; and
   (H)   To identify problems determined to be of importance to the public
welfare and developing control programs appropriate to each situation.
(Prior Code, § 6-48) (Ord. 11-7-77, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 2018-05, passed 6-
25-2018)
§ 93.05 FINANCIAL SUPPORT OF PROGRAM.
   The County Council or the Board of Trustees of a health and hospital
corporation shall make an annual appropriation specifically for the purpose of
vector control to be used by the Health Department solely for that purpose and
shall levy a tax not more than $0.02 on each $100 of assessed value of taxable
property in the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-51) (Ord. 11-7-77, passed 11-7-1977)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person found to be interfering with the duties of the executive
officer of the County Health Department shall be guilty of an infraction. On
conviction, the violator shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of
not more than $500; for the second and each subsequent offense, by a fine of
not more than $1,500. Each day after the expiration of the time limit for
abating the unsanitary conditions and completing the improvements to abate such
conditions as ordered by the County Health Department shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-49)
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of an infraction. On conviction, the violator shall be punished for a
first offense by a fine of not more than $500; for the second and each
subsequent offense, by a fine of not more than $1,500. Each day after the
expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary conditions and completing
improvements to abate such conditions as ordered by the County Health
Department shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-50)
(Ord. 11-7-77, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 2018-05, passed 6-25-2018)
CHAPTER 94: WEEDS AND VEGETATION
Section
   
94.01   Title
   
94.02   Purpose of regulating the cutting/removal of weeds
   
94.03   Declaration of public nuisance
   
94.04   Definition
   
94.05   Cutting and removal required
   
94.06   Order to remove
   
94.07   Service of notice
   
94.08   Cutting and removal by county
   
94.09   Collection of costs
Statutory reference:
   Weeds and rank vegetation, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-1 et seq.
§ 94.01 TITLE.
   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto shall be
known as the "Weed and Vegetation Control Ordinance".
(Prior Code, § 6-58) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.02 PURPOSE OF REGULATING THE CUTTING/REMOVAL OF WEEDS.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the growth and
require the cutting and removal of weeds or other rank vegetation on all
parcels of real estate in unincorporated residential areas of the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-59) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.03 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All weeds or other rank vegetation (not including trees, ornamental shrubs
and bushes, cultivated flowers and garden crops) growing on parcels of real
estate in unincorporated residential areas of the county, when allowed to grow
in excess of 12 inches in height, are declared to be a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 6-60) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.04 DEFINITION.
   A RESIDENTIAL AREA shall be any two or more adjoining parcels of real
estate, used or intended for residential purposes, whether platted or
unplatted, neither or none of which exceeds three acres in size.
(Prior Code, § 6-61) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.05 CUTTING AND REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   All landowners of parcels of real estate in unincorporated residential areas
of the county defined above are required to cut and remove from the real estate
all weeds or other rank vegetation when the same exceed the limitations
provided in §
94.03.
(Prior Code, § 6-62) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.06 ORDER TO REMOVE.
   (A)   If weeds or other rank vegetation are found to be growing in violation
of the provisions of this chapter by the Board of Commissioners, the Board of
Commissioners shall direct the County Auditor to give written notice to the
landowner upon whose property the weeds or other rank vegetation are growing,
stating that the landowner is required to cut and remove the weeds or other
rank vegetation growing on the property within five days from the date of
service of the notice.
   (B)   The notice shall refer to this chapter and shall also state that if
the landowner does not comply with the requirements of the notice, the Board of
Commissioners may cause the weeds or other rank vegetation to be cut and
removed and the actual cost thereof incurred by the county shall be paid by the
landowner, and shall further state that if not paid within ten days after the
landowner has been served with a statement of the cost thereof, the County
Auditor shall place the amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the
property affected by the work and the amount shall be collected as taxes are
collected.
(Prior Code, § 6-63) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.07 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   The notice required to be given under §
94.06 shall be served upon the landowner by a law enforcement officer of the
county if the landowner is a resident of the property, or if the landowner is a
nonresident thereof then by registered mail addressed to his or her last known
address, as currently shown on the property tax records of the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-64) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.08 CUTTING AND REMOVAL BY COUNTY.
   If the landowner has been notified under the provisions of §§
94.06 and
94.07, but has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter within
the time specified, the Board of Commissioners may cause the weeds or other
rank vegetation to be cut and removed.
(Prior Code, § 6-65) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 94.09 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   (A)   The County Auditor shall make a certified statement of the actual cost
incurred by the county for the cutting and removal of the weeds or other rank
vegetation under the provisions of §
94.08.
   (B)   The statement shall be delivered to the landowner by a law enforcement
officer of the county, or by registered mail, and the landowner shall pay the
amount to the County Auditor.
   (C)   If the landowner fails to pay the amount within ten days after service
being served with the statement, a certified copy of the statement shall be
filed in the office of the County Auditor and the County Auditor shall place
the amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the property affected by the
work and the amount shall be collected as taxes are collected and shall be
disbursed to the General Fund of the county.
(Prior Code, § 6-66) (Ord. 1989-04, passed 4-3-1989)
CHAPTER 95: BURGLAR ALARMS
Section
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Automatic voice dealers prohibited
   
95.04   Automatic shut-off required
   
95.05   Permit required for all connections to central answering point
   
95.06   Equipment to meet American National Standards Institute requirements
   
95.07   Connection and maintenance fees
   
95.08   Testing of equipment
   
95.09   Disconnection and reconnection from the central answering point
   
95.10   False alarm service charge
   
95.11   Misuse of alarm system
   
95.12   Reservation of rights
   
95.13   Enforcement
   
95.14   Fees and charges to Burglar Alarm System Fund
   
95.15   Rules of interpretation
   
95.16   Appeals to County Commissioners
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   The name of this chapter is "Burglar Alarm Systems".
(Prior Code, § 6-70) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM AGENT. The business, firm, corporation or partnership designated and
employed by the Alarm Board on behalf of the County Sheriff's Department to
maintain, service, alter, repair, replace, move or connect any burglar or other
alarm to the monitoring equipment and related paraphernalia to be maintained by
the County Sheriff's Department at the central answering point.
   ALARM BOARD. The Board which performs the duties herein set out. The members
of the Board shall consist of five persons, including the Bartholomew County
Sheriff, the President of the Sheriff's Merit Board and the three members of
the Board of Commissioners of the county, the Chairperson of whom, shall also
be the Chairperson of the Alarm Board. The ALARM BOARD shall meet at the time
as the Chairperson thereof shall designate and shall perform the following
duties.
      (1)   The Alarm Board shall make recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners of the county to enter into a contractual agreement with an alarm
agent.
      (2)   The Alarm Board shall acquire information to determine the
effectiveness of this chapter.
      (3)   The Board of Commissioners of the county may contract for the
acquisition, installation and maintenance of appropriate equipment and related
paraphernalia to upgrade the response by the County Sheriff's Department to
burglar alarms.
      (4)   The Alarm Board may promulgate the rules and regulations as are
necessary to implement and carry out the intent of this chapter.
      (5)   The County Sheriff's Department shall perform other activities as
may be required by the Alarm Board to carry out, improve and implement the
intent of this chapter.
   ALARM DEVICE. The portion of the alarm system located within or upon the
premises of the alarm holder to detect entry into the premises by an
unauthorized intruder.
   ALARM HOLDER. The owner, lessee or person responsible for the existence of
an alarm device within or upon his or her premises.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices designed to signal, or
transmit a signal to monitoring equipment maintained at the central answering
point, the presence of a hazard at the premises of the alarm holder requiring
urgent attention and to which County Sheriff's personnel are expected to
respond. Such an ALARM SYSTEM may include, "burglar", "hold-up" or "robbery"
warning devices. Included in the ALARM SYSTEM are alarm devices emitting
sounds, flashing lights or beacon signals to warn persons outside the premises
of the existence of a hazard at the premises.
   AUTOMATIC DIALER. An alarm system which automatically sends over regular
telephone lines (as distinguished from dedicated telephone lines) a prerecorded
voice message or coded signal, indicating the existence of an emergency
situation at the premises of an alarm holder.
   BURGLAR ALARM. An alarm device activated automatically signaling the entry
or attempted entry of an unauthorized intruder in, or upon, the premises of an
alarm holder, of which the activation is to signal a robbery, attempted
robbery, hold-up, attempted hold-up, burglary or attempted burglary at the
premises.
   CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT. An office or place maintained by the County
Sheriff's Department to which burglar alarms are connected and where County
Sheriff's personnel supervise or monitor burglar alarm signals through the use
of monitoring equipment.
   COUNTY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT, COUNTY SHERIFF'S PERSONNEL, THE BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS OF BARTHOLOMEW COUNTY or the COUNTY OF BARTHOLOMEW. The
Department, personnel, Board or county respectively, located in Bartholomew
County, Indiana.
   DEDICATED TELEPHONE LINE. A telephone line which has, as its sole use, the
transmission of an alarm signal from an alarm device to monitoring equipment.
   DIRECT CONNECTION. The method of using a telephone line, or other
transmission line, which line has as its sole use the transmission of a burglar
alarm signal from an alarm device to the monitoring equipment maintained at the
central answering point.
   FALSE ALARM. A burglar alarm signal received at the central answering point
from an alarm device from causes aside from burglary, attempted burglary,
severe weather conditions or timely and proper telephone call to the central
answering point cancelling any response by County Sheriff's personnel to the
alarm signal. Aside causes are generated from human error; improper
maintenance; improper installation; faulty equipment; electrical or mechanical
malfunction; or excessive sensitivity.
   FEES. Monies paid by an alarm holder to continue to have his alarm device
connected to the central answering point.
   LOCAL ALARM. Alarm equipment which when activated causes an audible and/or
visual signal in or on the premises. The type of alarm equipment may or may not
be a part of the alarm system.
   MONITORING EQUIPMENT. An assembly of equipment and devices maintained at the
central answering point which is part of the alarm system which registers the
activation of an alarm device and, in response to the activation, County
Sheriff's personnel are expected to respond.
   SERVICE CHARGE. An assessment by the Alarm Board against an alarm holder for
a false alarm.
   TESTING OF ALARM DEVICE. An alarm holder, in the first 30 days of the
installation of an alarm device, shall be authorized to test the alarm device
without the imposition of any false alarm service charge or without the risk of
disconnection, subject to the alarm holder filing a written statement with the
County Sheriff's Department stating the testing procedure to be utilized and
the name of the alarm holder's delegate performing the testing procedure. The
TESTING PROCEDURE will be as follows:
      (1)   In the event the testing procedure is an on-site test designed to
simulate conditions to induce an alarm signal to be generated, then the alarm
holder, or his or her delegate, shall timely and properly inform the County
Sheriff's Department of the testing and the County Sheriff's personnel will
telephone the alarm holder, or his or her delegate, each time an alarm signal
is received at the central answering point, but the County Sheriff's personnel
will not otherwise respond to the alarm signal;
      (2)   If the testing procedure utilized is to allow an alarm signal to be
generated without simulating conditions to induce an alarm signal, the County
Sheriff's personnel will respond to each alarm signal generated, but the alarm
holder, or his or her delegate, shall file with the Alarm Board within 48 hours
of the general alarm signal, a written statement of each false alarm created,
the cause of the false alarm and the procedure utilized to eliminate further
false alarms; and
      (3)   Both of the foregoing testing procedures.
   TROUBLE INDICATION. A transmittal signal, different from a burglar alarm
signal, which indicates a mechanical or electrical problem within the alarm
system.
(Prior Code, § 6-71) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.03 AUTOMATIC VOICE DEALERS PROHIBITED.
   The installation hereafter of any automatic voice dialer to the central
answering point is prohibited. Alarm holders who, at the time of the enactment
of Ord. 1988-70, have been granted permission to have an automatic voice dialer
connected to the central answering point shall be allowed to retain the
connection for a period of no more than 90 days after the effective date of
Ord. 1988-70.
(Prior Code, § 6-72) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 AUTOMATIC SHUT-OFF REQUIRED.
   (A)   All alarm devices and local alarms shall have an automatic shut-off
which will deactivate the sound, light or beacon signal of an alarm device or
local alarm within one-half hour after the commencement of the sound, light or
beacon signal.
   (B)   The County Sheriff's personnel may enter the premises to deactivate
the sound, light or beacon signal which has not been shut off within one-half
hour of activation of same and which disturbs surrounding residents or
premises.
   (C)   The deactivation by County Sheriff's personnel shall be taken only
after reasonable efforts have been made by them to contact the owner of the
local alarm or alarm holder, or his or her delegate, as the case may be.
   (D)   Neither the County Sheriff's personnel, the Alarm Board nor the county
shall be liable for any damages resulting from the deactivation.
(Prior Code, § 6-73) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.05 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ALL CONNECTIONS TO CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT.
   All connections to the central answering point shall be subject to the
following.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter be authorized to have a
direct connection to the central answering point for a burglar alarm within the
county, without first obtaining a permit from the County Sheriff's Department.
   (B)   The permit application shall be on a form prescribed by the Alarm
Board.
   (C)   All applicants for the aforesaid permit shall agree as follows.
      (1)   The applicant, and his or her delegate, are solely responsible for
the alarm device of the alarm holder including any liability, directly or
indirectly, connected with the use or non-use of all the alarm devices of the
alarm holder.
      (2)   The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold free and harmless
the county, the County Sheriff's personnel, the Alarm Board and the alarm agent
from any and all claims, demands, judgments, liabilities, costs or expenses
that may arise, directly or indirectly, as a result of any connection to the
central answering point.
      (3)   Neither the county, the Alarm Board, the County Sheriff's
Department, nor alarm agent are liable for any costs or expenses of
installation, lease, maintenance, service or any other charges or fees for any
alarm device or equipment leased or owned by the applicant.
      (4)   The applicant's portion of the alarm system is under a 24-hour
basis maintenance agreement, with a qualified alarm installer or supplier.
(Prior Code, § 6-74) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 EQUIPMENT TO MEET AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE REQUIREMENTS.
   All alarm devices hereafter connected to the monitoring equipment shall be
compatible with the monitoring equipment and shall conform to the most recent
specifications of the American National Standards Institute or equivalent
specifications of an approved rating bureau.
(Prior Code, § 6-75) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 CONNECTION AND MAINTENANCE FEES.
   The following connection fees shall be chargeable against an alarm holder.
   (A)   An initial fee of $90 for each direct connection shall be paid by the
alarm holder to the alarm agent at the time of connection to the central
answering point. An alarm holder having more than one type of alarm device
shall require a separate connection to the central answering point for each
alarm device that is to be so connected and, accordingly, shall require
separate permits.
   (B)   A monthly maintenance fee shall be paid by the alarm holder to the
alarm agent in the amount of $9, as long as the alarm holder has an alarm
device connected to the central answering point.
   (C)   A fee of $10 shall be paid by the applicant to the county with each
application made for connection of an alarm device to the central answering
point.
(Prior Code, § 6-76) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.08 TESTING OF EQUIPMENT.
   No alarm device connected to the central answering point shall be tested or
demonstrated without first having obtained permission from the County Sheriff's
Department or its delegate.
(Prior Code, § 6-77) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.09 DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION FROM THE CENTRAL ANSWERING POINT.
   (A)   Disconnection. Causes for disconnection from the central answering
point are as hereinafter set out. The alarm holder shall be liable and
responsible for all costs, charges and fees arising from a disconnection from
the central answering point. Aforesaid causes are as follows:
      (1)   Failure to pay any fees or charges required herein;
      (2)   Twelve false alarms from an alarm device of the alarm holder,
transmitted to the monitoring equipment, within any 12-month period;
      (3)   Three or more trouble indications from an alarm device of the alarm
holder, transmitted to the monitoring equipment, within any 12-month period;
      (4)   A continuous transmission to the monitoring equipment of trouble
indication from an alarm device of the alarm holder for a period of more than
48 hours;
      (5)   Failure of the alarm holder to have his or her portion of the alarm
system under a 24-hour basis maintenance agreement with a qualified alarm
installer or supplier; and
      (6)   Violation of §
95.06.
   (B)   Reconnection. In the event an alarm holder has had his or her alarm
device disconnected from the central answering point for causes set out in
division (A) above, the alarm device can be reconnected to the central
answering point, based on the following.
      (1)   If an alarm system has been disconnected by reason of division (A)
(1) above, then, upon payment in full of all outstanding fees and charges, the
alarm system may be reconnected to the central answering point.
      (2)   If an alarm system has been disconnected by reason of divisions (A)
(2) or (3) above, then the alarm holder must submit a written statement to the
Alarm Board indicating that repairs have been made to correct the problem in
the appropriate alarm device, and its related paraphernalia. After
verification, on behalf of the alarm holder, that the alarm system is properly
functioning, the alarm holder may have his or her alarm device reconnected to
the central answering point.
      (3)   If an alarm device has been disconnected from the central answering
point by reason of division (A)(4) above, then the alarm holder must submit a
written statement to the Alarm Board indicating the reasons for the false
alarms and stating what measures have been taken to prevent or minimize future
false alarms. After review of aforesaid statements, by the Alarm Board, the
alarm device may, in the sole discretion of the Alarm Board, be reconnected to
the central answering point.
      (4)   If an alarm device has been disconnected from the central answering
point by reason of division (A)(5) above, then, upon proof submitted to the
Alarm Board by the alarm holder of the acquisition of an appropriate
maintenance agreement by the alarm holder, the alarm device of the alarm holder
can be reconnected to the central answering point.
      (5)   The alarm holder shall be responsible for any cost or charge
arising from the reconnection.
(Prior Code, § 6-78) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.10 FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGE.
   A service charge for false alarms received at the central answering point
shall be payable as follows: four false alarms shall be allowed each alarm
device in any 12-month period. A service charge of $25 shall be paid by the
alarm holder to the county for each of the fifth and sixth false alarms
received at the central answering point from the alarm holder's each and
separate alarm device during any 12-month period, and a service charge of $50
shall be paid for each false alarm in excess of six false alarms received at
the central answering point from the alarm holder's each and separate alarm
device during any 12-month period.
(Prior Code, § 6-79) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.11 MISUSE OF ALARM SYSTEM.
   It is unlawful for any person to activate an alarm system for any purpose
other than what the alarm system was originally designed to detect.
(Prior Code, § 6-80) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.12 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   The Alarm Board reserves the right, at any time, to discontinue the service
of providing monitoring of any and all alarm systems after 90 days' written
notice to the alarm holder. The Alarm Board is under no obligation to supply
this special type of service described in this chapter to any person, firm or
corporation.
(Prior Code, § 6-81) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Alarm Board shall have the responsibility for enforcement of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6-82) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.14 FEES AND CHARGES TO BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM FUND.
   Fees paid to file an application for the permit described herein and all
charges relative to false alarms shall be paid directly to the County Sheriff.
The County Sheriff, upon receipt of same, shall transmit the fees and charges
each month to the County Auditor on Form 362 entitled "Report of Collections",
as prescribed by the State Board of Accounts. All other fees shall he paid to
the alarm agent. All fees paid direct to the County Auditor, shall be
dedicated, cumulatively, for the perpetuation, improvement and upgrading of
communications in the county. The office of the County Auditor shall maintain,
in its records, a dedicated fund to be known as the "Burglar Alarm Systems
Fund" on a cumulative basis and payments therefrom may be made without
appropriation therefor. The Alarm Board shall be entitled to require
expenditures from the dedicated fund as are necessary to implement and carry
out the intent of this section. Section 35.018 of this code references the
Burglar Alarm System Fund as No. 512 for accounting purposes.
(Prior Code, § 6-84) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.15 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Wherever necessary in this chapter and the context requires, the
singular and the related pronoun shall include the plural and vice versa.
Wherever necessary in this chapter and the context requires, a masculine
pronoun shall include the feminine or neuter gender and vice versa.
   (B)   Wherever necessary in this chapter and the context requires the term
person shall include firm, business, partnership, corporation or individual.
(Prior Code, § 6-85) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.16 APPEALS TO COUNTY COMMISSIONERS.
   Any final decision issued by the County Sheriff's Department or Alarm Board
may be appealed by the alarm holder, or his or her delegate, to the Board of
Commissioners of the county within 30 days after the issuance of the final
decision.
(Prior Code, § 6-86) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$25 or more than $300 for each and every offense and each day that the offense
continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 6-83) (Ord. 1988-10, passed 7-11-1988)
CHAPTER 96: LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY
Section
   
96.01   Declaration of local disaster emergency
   
96.02   Effect of declaration
   
96.03   Determination of need for declaration
Cross-reference:
   Office of Emergency Preparedness, see § 34.054
§ 96.01 DECLARATION OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY.
   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of the county is authorized to
declare a local disaster emergency in accordance with the terms of I.C. 10-14-
3-29.
(Prior Code, § 6-105) (Ord. 1985-4, passed 5-28-1985)
§ 96.02 EFFECT OF DECLARATION.
   Upon the declaration of a local disaster emergency, the Board of
Commissioners of the county and its Chairperson shall exercise all powers and
authority granted to a local political subdivision and its principal executive
officer under the provisions of I.C. 10-14-3.
(Prior Code, § 6-106) (Ord. 1985-4, passed 5-28-1985)
§ 96.03 DETERMINATION OF NEED FOR DECLARATION.
   In times of natural disaster and/or civil emergencies, the Chairperson of
the Board of Commissioners of the county is authorized to activate the county
emergency operations command post and to designate a Chief Fire Officer. The
Chief Fire Officer and the County Sheriff, the County Health Officer, the
Emergency Services Coordinator and the Emergency Preparedness Coordinator, or
their designated representatives, shall assist the Chairperson in evaluating
the need for the declaration of a local disaster emergency.
(Prior Code, § 6-107) (Ord. 1985-4, passed 5-28-1985)
CHAPTER 97: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
97.01   Policy statement
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Unlawful practice
   
97.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
97.05   Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions
   
97.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
97.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
97.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
97.09   Exemptions
   
97.10   Administrative enforcement
§ 97.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of Bartholomew County to provide, within
constitutional limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as
provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the
federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-
9.5-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 6-260) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION (I.C. 22-9.5-2-3). The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created
pursuant to I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.
   COMPLAINANT (I.C. 22-9.5-2-4). A person, including the Commission, who files
a complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§ 97.04
through 97.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that
is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).
   FAMILIAL STATUS. 
      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years
being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual or the written permission of such parent or other person.
      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18
years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined herein under FAMILIAL STATUS. Also, pursuant
to 24 CFR Part 5, the definition of FAMILY is revised to include families
regardless of the actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity, or
marital status of its members.
   HANDICAP.  
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person's major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment; or
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990;
         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C. 22-9.5-2-10.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21 of
the United States Code (I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(b)); nor does the term HANDICAP
include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite (I.C.
22-9.5-2-10(c).
   PERSON (I.C. 22-9.5-2-11). Includes one or more individuals, corporations,
partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations,
trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code,
receivers, and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT (I.C. 22-9.5-2-13). Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and
otherwise to grant for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned
by the occupant.
(Prior Code, § 6-261) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
Editor’s note:
   I.C 22-9.5-2-10 was repealed by P.L. 99-2007, Sec. 224
§ 97.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
97.09 and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 97.04 shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and I.C. 22-
9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
97.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
97.04(C), but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or
rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Prior Code, § 6-262) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   As made applicable by §
97.03 and except as exempted by §§
97.03 and
97.09, it shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status or national origin.
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (F)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
      (1)   That buyer or renter;
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with that person.
   (G)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
      (1)   That person; or
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with that person.
   (H)   For purposes of this division, discrimination includes:
      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13,1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
         (a)   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
         (c)   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
            1.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
            2.   Light, switches, electrical outlets , thermostats, and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
            3.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (I)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings
and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1) suffices to satisfy the requirements of
division (H)(3)(c)3. above.
   (J)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health of
safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Prior Code, § 6-263) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term residential real estate-related
transaction means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status.
(Prior Code, § 6-264) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the
terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
(Prior Code, § 6-265) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in
the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by §§
97.03 through
97.06.
(Prior Code, § 6-266) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status, or national origin and because he is or has been selling,
purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for
the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or
applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility
relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Any person because he is or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate; or
   (C)   Any citizen because he is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons
to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in any of the activities,
services, organizations or facilities described in division (A) above, or
participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of
the opportunity to participate shall be fined according to local, state and
federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000
or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be
subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.
(Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-29-2012)
§ 97.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section HOUSING FOR OLDER
PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly person (as defined in the state or federal program) or;
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Prior Code, § 6-267) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 97.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) below shall be vested in the chief elected official of
Bartholomew County, Indiana.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, Bartholomew County,
Indiana, because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
articles of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission
for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the chief
elected official of Bartholomew County, Indiana, shall refer all said
complaints to the Commission as provided for under division (A) above to said
Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as
provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of Bartholomew County, Indiana
shall administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing
and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the Commission
to further such purposes.
   (D)   The chief elected official of Bartholomew County, Indiana, or the
chief elected official's designee, shall provide information on remedies
available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.
(Prior Code, § 6-268) (Ord. 1996-14, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2012-11, passed 10-
29-2012)
CHAPTER 98: UNLICENSED, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
98.01   Purpose
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Parking and storage prohibited
   
98.04   Effective date
 
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to monitor, control or prohibit the keeping
of motor vehicles without current license plates and which are in an inoperable
condition on private or public property and to provide penalties for the
violation thereof.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-1-2004)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any officer or agent of the County Department of
Technical Code Enforcement.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle from which there has been removed the
engine, transmission or differential, or that is otherwise partially dismantled
or mechanically inoperable.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE. A vehicle which does not have a current valid license
plate.
   VEHICLE. Any land vehicles which can be used for towing or transporting
people or materials, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses,
motor homes, motorized campers, motorcycles, trailers or dune-buggies.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-1-2004)
§ 98.03 PARKING AND STORAGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person to keep, park or
store any unlicensed and inoperable vehicles or parts thereof on private or
public property within the unincorporated areas of the county, except in a
garage or other enclosure so as not to be exposed to public view, except as
herein provided.
   (B)   (1)   Any salvage yard or junkyard, properly zoned as such, or
operating as a lawful nonconforming use, and not in violation of any zoning
ordinance, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. The salvage
yard or junkyard shall be enclosed by a fence at least six feet in height so
that vehicles or parts stored there shall not be readily visible to the public.
      (2)   Any person engaged in the business of the repair of vehicles may
store vehicles to be repaired on his or her property provided he or she is not
in violation of any zoning ordinance.
   (C)   Upon the hand-delivered receipt of a written complaint containing the
name, address and verified identification of the person making the complaint,
the Enforcement Officer shall investigate the complaint and if, in the opinion
of the Enforcement Officer, a violation of this chapter exists, the Enforcement
Officer is authorized to issue a warning or written demand to the owner,
occupant, agent or person holding a substantial interest in the premises on
which any unlicensed and inoperable vehicle(s) in violation of this chapter is/
are kept. The warning or written demand shall notify the person to remove the
vehicle(s) from the premises within 30 days from the receipt of the notice.
Upon the failure or refusal of the person to remove the vehicle(s) within the
time period specified, a citation will then be issued requiring the individual
to remove the vehicle(s) within ten days or be subject to further penalties as
provided herein.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-1-2004) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on 7-1-2004.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-1-2004)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any section of this chapter by causing or
permitting the accumulation of unlicensed and inoperable vehicle(s) or parts
thereof on private or public property or who fails to comply with any of its
requirements, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction,
shall be fined a sum not less than $25, nor more than $300, for each day's
violation.
   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, any person who violates any
section of this chapter can be ordered to remove the vehicle(s) within ten
days. In the event the vehicle(s) are not removed within the ten-day period, a
court of competent jurisdiction may order that the vehicle(s) be removed and
assess the cost of the removal and storage to the person. In the event any
vehicle(s) would be removed and stored, in the event that the vehicle(s) would
not be claimed by the owner from the storage location within 15 days from its
removal by paying the actual cost of the removal and storage, the vehicle may
be sold and disposed of as provided in I.C. 9-22-1 et seq.
   (C)   In the event it becomes necessary for the Enforcement Officer or
county to take any action to compel compliance with the terms and conditions of
this chapter, the expenses incurred shall constitute a lien pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-1-6-2, against the real property upon which the
unlicensed and inoperable vehicle(s) is/are located.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-1-2004)
CHAPTER 99: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Authority to operate
   
99.02   Department of Parks and Recreation
   
99.03   Board of Parks and Recreation
   
99.04   Promotion and publicity
Rules and Regulations
   
99.15   Hours or operation of facilities
   
99.16   Speed limits
   
99.17   Parking restrictions
   
99.18   Board approval of amplifiers
   
99.19   Unlawful to damage park property
   
99.20   Board approval for sale of items
   
99.21   Snowmobiles prohibited in parks
   
99.22   Motorized and non-motorized vehicle regulations
   
99.23   Campfire regulations
   
99.24   Firearms and arrows prohibited
Facilities
   
99.35   Kenneth O. Dunn Stadium
   
99.36   Anderson Falls Park
   
99.37   Heflen Memorial Park
   
99.38   Petersville Park
   
99.39   Wayne Township Park
   
99.40   Owens Bend Park
   
99.41   Grammar Park
 
   
99.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes a county to establish, aid, maintain and operate public parks,
playground and recreation facilities and programs, see I.C. 36-10-2-2
   Park and Recreation Law, see I.C. 36-10-3-1 through I.C. 36-10-3-39
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 AUTHORITY TO OPERATE.
   The county may establish, aid, maintain and operate public parks,
playgrounds and recreation facilities of programs it deems are in the best
interests of the community.
(Prior Code, § 4-1)
§ 99.02 DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   Section
34.02 of this code sets forth the enabling legislation which created the County
Department of Parks and Recreation.
(Prior Code, § 4-2)
§ 99.03 BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   Section
34.02 of this code sets forth the enabling legislation which created the County
Board of Parks and Recreation.
Chapter 34 of this code sets forth governing provisions of the Board of Parks
and Recreation.
(Prior Code, § 4-3)
§ 99.04 PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY.
   The County Park Department is authorized, subject to annual appropriation
therefor, to expend money each calendar year in a total amount not to exceed
the sum of $500 for publicity and to promote the public's use of the parks and
recreation facilities of the county and the public's participation in the
programs established therefor.
(Prior Code, § 4-4) (Ord. 1991-05, passed 5-6-1991)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 99.15 HOURS OR OPERATION OF FACILITIES.
   All playgrounds, parks and recreational centers of the county shall be open
to the public from sunrise to 9:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted.
(Prior Code, § 4-10) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987)
§ 99.16 SPEED LIMITS.
   A posted speed limit of 15 mph is imposed on all roads in and around
playgrounds, parks and recreational centers of the county.
(Prior Code, § 4-11) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987)
§ 99.17 PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
   Parking shall be prohibited in all areas of playgrounds, parks and
recreational centers of the county marked with "NO PARKING" and "NO PARKING ON
THE GRASS" signs.
(Prior Code, § 4-12) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.18 BOARD APPROVAL OF AMPLIFIERS.
   Musical groups or other persons using amplifiers shall not be permitted in
playgrounds, parks or recreational centers of the county without prior approval
of the County Park Board.
(Prior Code, § 4-13) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of sound, see I.C. 36-8-2-8
§ 99.19 UNLAWFUL TO DAMAGE PARK PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to deface, damage, harm or vandalize flora, fauna,
structures, facilities or property in the park system of the county.
(Prior Code, § 4-14) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.20 BOARD APPROVAL FOR SALE OF ITEMS.
   It shall be unlawful to provide any article, product, service or
entertainment for sale within a playground, park or recreational center of the
county without prior consent of the County Park Board.
(Prior Code, § 4-15) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.21 SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED IN PARKS.
   Use of snowmobiles shall be prohibited in all playgrounds, parks and
recreational centers of the county.
(Prior Code, § 4-16) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.22 MOTORIZED AND NON-MOTORIZED VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   Use of motorized or non-motorized vehicles on playfields and playgrounds
shall be prohibited without prior approval of the County Park Board.
(Prior Code, § 4-17) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.23 CAMPFIRE REGULATIONS.
   Campfires shall be prohibited in all playgrounds, parks and recreational
centers of the county, except those playgrounds, parks and recreational centers
that allow camping. Campfires shall be located only in areas designated for
camping.
(Prior Code, § 4-18) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.24 FIREARMS AND ARROWS PROHIBITED.
   The discharge of a firearm or the shooting of arrows is prohibited in all
county parks and recreation facilities.
(Prior Code, § 4-20) (Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987) Penalty, see §
99.99
FACILITIES
§ 99.35 KENNETH O. DUNN STADIUM.
   (A)   The first recreational area opened by the Department of Parks and
Recreation was Kenneth O. Dunn Stadium.
   (B)   Kenneth O. Dunn Stadium is located three miles south of Columbus,
Indiana, on S.R. 11.
(Prior Code, § 4-30)
§ 99.36 ANDERSON FALLS PARK.
   Anderson Falls Park is a 44-acre park located east of the City of Columbus,
Indiana, between Newbern and Hartsville, two miles south of S.R. 46. The park
was donated to the county in 1981 by the Nature Conservancy.
(Prior Code, § 4-31)
§ 99.37 HEFLEN MEMORIAL PARK.
   (A)   Carl and Laura Heflen donated to the county 27 acres in 1970 in memory
of William Heflen. An additional eight and one-half acres were purchased in
1983, bringing the total acres to 35-1/2. This park is located west of the
Taylorsville exit of I-65.
   (B)   Heflen Memorial Park, nestled in a wooded area and flanked by the
Driftwood River, opens on Memorial Day weekend and closes in mid-October each
year.
(Prior Code, § 4-32)
§ 99.38 PETERSVILLE PARK.
   (A)   Petersville Park is located east of the City of Columbus, Indiana,
just north of S.R. 46 on C.R. 500 E.
   (B)   It was donated to the county in 1984 by the Bartholomew Consolidated
School Corporation.
(Prior Code, § 4-33)
§ 99.39 WAYNE TOWNSHIP PARK.
   (A)   In 1985, Mr. and Mrs. Robert Butler donated six and one-half acres of
land, plus the old school building to the county. In 1986, the Park Department
purchased five acres from Ralph Pruitt.
   (B)   The 11-1/2 acre park is located on S.R. 11 and C.R. 500 S, four miles
south of Columbus.
(Prior Code, § 4-34)
§ 99.40 OWENS BEND PARK.
   In 1988, Contractors United, Inc., donated seven acres and Donald King
donated seven acres to the county to establish this new 14-acre park. It is
located two miles north of Columbus on C.R. 550 N.
(Prior Code, § 4-35)
§ 99.41 GRAMMAR PARK.
   (A)   In 1989, the Bartholomew Consolidated School Corporation donated four
acres of land, plus the school building to the county.
   (B)   This park is located in Grammar, approximately ten miles southeast of
Columbus.
(Prior Code, § 4-36)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
99.15 through
99.23 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1, nor
more than $500. If any violation be continuing, each day's violation shall be
deemed a separate violation, unless otherwise provided by law.
      (2)   In addition to the fines set forth herein, any person who violates
the provisions of §
99.19 shall make full restitution for any damage or injury to property as a
result of the violation including, but not limited to, the value of any
property which has been destroyed and the cost of repairing any damage to
property.
(Prior Code, § 4-19)
(Ord. 1987-08, passed 6-29-1987)
Statutory reference:
   Identifies violations as Class B misdemeanors, see I.C. 36-10-3-39
CHAPTER 100: PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   License
   
100.03   Construction
   
100.04   Operation
   
100.05   Inspection
   
100.06   Appeal procedures
 
   
100.99   Penalties
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
   BATHER. Any person using the facility and adjoining area for the purpose of
therapy, relaxation, recreation, or related activities.
   DIVING POOL. Any pool that is designed and constructed primarily for diving
and does not have a shallow end.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The duly appointed Health Officer of Bartholomew County,
Indiana, or his/her authorized agent or representative of the Environmental
Health Division of the Bartholomew County Health Department.
   INTERACTIVE WATER FOUNTAIN. Any wet deck, splash pad, spray pad, or spray
parks or water fountains provided for water recreation that lack standing
water. These may recirculate water or drain direct to sanitary sewer.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, or municipality, or its legal representative or agent.
   PLUNGE POOL. A pool located at the exit end of a waterslide flume that is
intended and designed to receive sliders emerging from the flume.
   POOL FACILITY. As used in the remaining sections of this chapter, public
swimming pool, plunge pool, zero depth pool, wave pool, diving pool, wading
pool, water slide, splash pad, spa and semi-public pool unless otherwise
specifically indicated.
   PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any swimming or wading pools beaches, recreational
water slide flumes, spa or hot tub located on private property and under
control of a home-owner, the use of which is restricted to members of the
family or their invited guests.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. Any pool, other than those pools defined as semi-
public pool, which is intended to be used for swimming or bathing and is
operated by a concessionaire, owner, lessee, operator, or licensee, regardless
of whether a fee is charged for use.
   PUBLIC WADING POOL. A small pool for use by children for bathing which:
      (1)   Is designed and constructed for a turnover rate of at least one
turnover per hour;
      (2)   Has a maximum depth of two feet;
      (3)   Has operational functions similar to a swimming pool; and
      (4)   Is operated by a concessionaire, owner, lessee, operator or
licensee irrespective of whether a fee is charged for use.
   SEMI-PUBLIC POOL. Any pool facility that is intended to be used for swimming
or bathing and is operated solely for and in conjunction with:
      (1)   Schools, universities, and colleges;
      (2)   Hotels, motels, apartments, condominiums, bed and breakfasts, or
similar lodgings;
      (3)   Camps or mobile home parks; or
      (4)   Membership clubs or associations.
   SPA. A pool designed for recreational and/or therapeutic use, which is not
drained, cleaned, and refilled after each use. The term may include, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Hydro-jet circulation;
      (2)   Hot water;
      (3)   Cold water;
      (4)   Mineral baths;
      (5)   Air induction systems; or
      (6)   Any combination thereof.
   SWIMMING POOL SLIDE. Any device used to enter a pool by sliding down an
inclined plane or equipment similar to a playground slide.
   WADING POOL. A pool used for bathing that has a maximum depth of two feet.
   WATER SLIDE. A recreational device designed to provide a descending ride
into a splash down pool at the base for the slide. Low friction on the slide
bed or flume is achieved in all designs by providing a flowing waterstream.
   WAVE POOL. Any pool having a bottom sloped upward from the deep end to the
surface at the shallow end with equipment installed at the deep end to create
wave motions in the water.
   ZERO DEPTH POOL. Any pool with a bottom sloped upward from the deep end to
the surface level at the shallow end.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 100.02 LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool facility in
Bartholomew County who does not possess a valid license from the health
officer. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises of
such pool facility. Only persons who comply with the applicable requirements of
this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. Such
licenses are non-negotiable and not transferable. Application for and pertinent
fees shall be submitted to the health officer prior to the opening of the pool
facility. Licenses shall be issued for the calendar year, when in the judgment
of the health officer, the pool facility is in full compliance with all
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   No license or renewal thereof shall be denied or revoked on arbitrary
or capricious grounds.
   (C)   License fees to persons who operate a pool facility shall be charged
in accordance with the fee schedule established by the Bartholomew County Board
of Health and approved by the Board of Commissioners of Bartholomew County and
may be modified or changed from time to time. Tax supported units of government
shall be exempt from the payment of fees. Fees shall include both a
registration fee and a yearly charge for a calendar year or part thereof that
the pool facility is open. This is to be established at the time of
application, due and payable at the time of issuance of the license.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.03 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The requirements of the Indiana Swimming Pool Code of the Indiana
Homeland Security Division of Fire and Building Safety are hereby incorporated
by reference as part of this chapter and all pool facilities shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the terms and provisions of such
code.
   (B)   Plans and specifications for pool facilities and the location of same
must be approved by Indiana Homeland Security Division of Fire and Building
Safety and the Environmental Health Division. Such plans and specification
submitted for approval shall have been prepared by or under the supervision of
a professional engineer or architect legally registered in the State of Indiana
or certified by him/her, and bear his/her official seal.
   (C)   Pool facilities operating at the time this chapter becomes effective,
which are not in compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter, will
be allowed reasonable opportunity and time to bring the operation up to
standards within a time determined by the health officer.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.04 OPERATION.
   (A)   All pool facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements
specified by the Indiana State Department of Health as now provided in Rule 410
I.A.C. 6-2 or as the same may be hereafter changed or amended. Such regulations
and any changes and amendments thereto which may be hereafter adopted or
promulgated are by reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof, two
copies of which are on file in the office of the Auditor of Bartholomew County
for public inspection.
   (B)   All pool facilities must have at least one person knowledgeable in
pool operation and safety practices and responsible for the daily operation of
the pool facility. Such person(s) shall be responsible for seeing that all
personnel and bathers comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Operators of pool facilities shall arrange for the collection of
bacteriological sample of the water in the pool facility prior to operation for
the season for outdoor pools or within the first 30 days of the calendar year
for indoor pools. Results of such examination shall be reported to the
Environmental Health Division of the Bartholomew County Health Department.
Failure to meet these requirements shall constitute grounds for license
suspensions.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.05 INSPECTION.
   (A)   During each operating season, a thorough inspection shall be conducted
by the health officer to determine compliance with this chapter. More frequent
inspections may be made when the health officer deems it necessary. The person
operating the pool facility shall, upon the request of the health officer,
permit such health officer access to all parts of such pool facility and shall
permit the health officer to collect samples, evidence, and/or exhibits and to
copy any or all records relative to the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   A written or electronic copy of the inspection report shall be
provided to the pool operator at the time of inspection.
   (C)   If, during the inspection of any pool facility, the health officer
discovers violations of the requirements of this chapter, he/she shall issue a
written notice to the operator, or in his/her absence, to the registered person
on duty, listing such violations and fixing a time within which the said
violations shall be abated or remedied except as noted in division (H) of this
section. A copy of the written notice shall be filed with the records of the
health officer.
   (D)   If upon a second inspection the health officer finds that the
provisions of this chapter which were in violation on the previous inspection
and for which a written notice was issued have not been satisfactorily
corrected, the health officer may promptly issue a written order to the
licensee of such pool facility to appear at a certain time not later than ten
days from the date of the final inspection and at a place fixed in said order
to show cause why the license issued under the provision of § 100.02 should not
be suspended or revoked.
   (E)   The health officer upon such hearing if the licensee should fail to
show cause, shall revoke said license and promptly give written notice of such
action to the licensee.
   (F)   (1)   Any license issued under this chapter may be temporarily
suspended by the health officer without notice or hearing for a period not to
exceed 30 days for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Unsanitary, unsafe, or other conditions which in the health
officer's judgement endanger the public's health;
         (b)   Conditions which in the health officer's judgement pollute the
environment;
         (c)   Interference with the health officer in the performance of his/
her duties.
      (2)   Provided, however, that upon written application from the licensee
served upon the health officer within 15 days after such suspension, the health
officer shall conduct a hearing upon the matter after giving at least five days
written notice of the time, place, and purpose thereof the suspended license;
provided further that any such suspension order shall be issued by the health
officer in writing and served upon the licensee by leaving a copy at his/her
pool facility or by delivering of Registered or Certified Mail to such address.
   (G)   Any person whose license has been suspended may at any time make
application to the health officer for the reinstatement of his/her license.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.06 APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   If an applicant is denied a license, the health officer shall grant a
hearing on the matter, provided that such applicant shall file in the office of
the health officer, within ten days after receiving notice the license has been
denied, a brief statement of the grounds therefore. Upon receipt of such
petition, the health officer shall arrange a time and place for such hearing
and shall give the applicant written notice thereof.
   (B)   After such hearing the health officer shall sustain, modify, or
reverse the decision to deny the license, depending upon his/her findings as to
the compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the health officer shall
sustain, modify or reverse the decision to deny the permit, it shall be deemed
to be an order.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 100.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person found to be interfering with the duties of the executive
officer of the County Health Department shall be guilty of an infraction. On
conviction, the violator shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of
not more than $500; for the second and each subsequent offense by a fine of not
more than $1,500. Each day after the expiration of such time limiting for
compliance as ordered by the County Health Department, shall constitute a
distinct separate offense.
   (B)   Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction. On conviction, the violator shall be punished for the first
offense by a fine of not more than $500; for the second and each subsequent
offense by a fine of not more than $1,500. Each day after the expiration of
such time limiting for compliance as ordered by the County Health Department,
shall constitute a distinct separate offense.
(Ord. 2020-02, passed 5-18-2020)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   FOOD SERVICE AND MARKET ESTABLISHMENTS
      
111.   NON-EXCLUSIVE TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
      
112.   TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: FOOD SERVICE AND MARKET ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Communicable or infectious disease control
   
110.04   Minimum requirements
   
110.05   Sale, examination, condemnation of unwholesome, adulterated,
misbranded food
   
110.06   Inspections
   
110.07   Approval of plans
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes a local health board or local health officer to enforce its
orders by action in Circuit or Superior Court, see I.C. 16-20-1-19
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULTERATED. The meaning as provided in I.C. 16-42-1 et seq., known as the
Indiana Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
   CLOSED. Fitted together snugly leaving no openings large enough to permit
the entrance of vermin.
   CORROSION-RESISTANT MATERIAL. A material which maintains its original
surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food, cleaning
compounds and sanitizing solutions which may contact it.
   EASILY CLEANABLE. Readily accessible and of a material and finish and so
fabricated that residue may be completely removed by normal cleaning methods.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person working in a food service establishment or food market
who transports food or food containers; who engages in food preparation or
service; who comes in contact with any food, food utensils or equipment; or who
is employed in a room or place in which food is stored, prepared, processed,
displayed or sold.
   EQUIPMENT. All stoves, ranges, hoods, tables, counters, food and utensil
carts, refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables and similar
items, other than utensils, used in the operation of a food service
establishment.
   FOOD. All articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether
simple, mixed or compound, and all substances or ingredients used in the
preparation thereof, in addition to any raw, cooked or processed edible
substances, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in
whole or in part for human consumption.
   FOOD-CONTACT SURFACES. Those surfaces of equipment and utensils with which
food normally comes in contact and those surfaces which may drain back into
food or onto surfaces normally in contact with food.
   FOOD MARKET. Retail grocery, meat market, poultry market, fish market,
delicatessen, confectionery, retail bakery store or any other establishment
where potentially hazardous food intended for human consumption is
manufactured, produced, prepared, processed, handled, transported, sold or
offered for sale at retail.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Any food service establishment, restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria,
short-order café, luncheonette, grill, tea room, sandwich shop, soda fountain,
tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, industrial feeding establishment,
private, public or institution routinely serving food, a catering kitchen, a
commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for
service on the premises or elsewhere, and any other eating or drinking
establishment or operation where food is served or provided for human
consumption with or without charge.
      (2)   The term FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT, however, shall not include a
food establishment licensed by the State Department of Health or one that is
known as a food market or vending machine.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer or his or her duly authorized
representative.
   KITCHENWARE. All multi-use utensils other than tableware used in the
storage, preparation, conveying or serving of food.
   MISBRANDED. The meaning as provided in I.C. 16-42-1 et seq., known as the
Indiana Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment which is
self-contained and does not have a fixed location.
   PERISHABLE FOOD. Any food of a type or in a condition as may spoil.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, municipality or
his or her or its legal representative or agent.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. Any food which consists in whole or in part of
milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish or other food
capable of supporting growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
   SAFE TEMPERATURES. As applied to potentially hazardous food, food
temperatures of 45°F or below for cold foods, 140°F or above for hot foods, 0°F
or below for frozen foods.
   SANITIZE. Effective bactericidal treatment of clean surfaces of equipment
and utensils by a process which has been approved by the Health Officer as
being effective in destroying microorganisms, including pathogens.
   SEALED. Free of cracks or other openings which permit the entry or passage
of moisture.
   SINGLE-SERVICE ARTICLES. Cups, containers, lids or closures, plates, knives,
forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, place mats, napkins, doilies,
wrapping materials and all similar articles which are constructed wholly or in
part from paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, plastic, synthetic or
other readily destructible materials, and which are intended by the
manufacturer and generally recognized by the public as for one usage only and
then to be discarded/recycled.
   TABLEWARE. All multi-use eating and drinking utensils including flatware
(knives, forks and spoons).
   TEMPORARY FARMERS MARKET FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service
establishment which operates for a maximum of one day per week per calendar
year.
   TEMPORARY FOOD MARKET. Any food market which operates for a temporary period
of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days in connection with a fair, carnival,
circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.
   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any food service establishment which
operates for a temporary period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar
transitory gathering.
   UTENSIL. All containers or equipment of any kind or nature with which food
comes in contact as well as any tableware and kitchenware used in the storage,
preparation, conveying, processing, display or serving of food.
   WHOLESOME. In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration and otherwise
suitable for use as human food.
(Prior Code, § 3-35) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992; Ord. 2008-10, passed 6-9-
2008)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service
establishment or food market in the county who does not possess a valid license
from the Health Officer. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
the food service establishment or food market. Only persons who comply with the
applicable requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain
a license. The license for a food service establishment, a mobile food service
establishment and a food market shall be for a term of one year, beginning
January 1 and expiring December 31 of the same year and shall be renewed
annually. The license for a temporary food service establishment and a
temporary food market shall be for the term of one continuous operation. Any
license issued by the Health Officer shall contain the name and address of the
person to whom the license is granted, the address of the premises for which
the same is issued and other pertinent data as may be required by the Health
Officer.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each food service
establishment and food market operated or to be operated by any person. A
permit issued under this section is not transferable.
   (C)   A license shall be issued to any person after inspection and approval
by the Health Officer provided that the food service establishment or food
market complies with all the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   No license or renewal thereof shall be denied or revoked on arbitrary
or capricious grounds.
   (E)   All license fees shall be established by the County Board of Health
and approved by the Board of Commissioners of the county and may be modified or
changed from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 3-36) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 COMMUNICABLE OR INFECTIOUS DISEASE CONTROL.
   (A)   Any person who has or is known to have a communicable or infectious
disease shall not work or be permitted to work in a food service establishment
or food market until free of the communicable or infectious disease.
   (B)   All food service establishments must employ at least one full-time
person per shift who is certified in food sanitation practices. The person(s)
shall be responsible at all times for seeing that all personnel comply with the
food sanitation practices established by the State Department of Health. The
Environmental Health Division of the County Health Department shall conduct
instructional programs on the principles of food sanitation and food-borne
disease prevention and see that all interested persons have an opportunity to
receive a certificate in food sanitation practices. Upon completion of the
program and demonstration of knowledge and understanding of the principles of
food sanitation and food-borne disease prevention, the person shall be issued a
certificate by the Environmental Health Division. Certificates must be renewed
every two years and a certified person shall be recertified by the
Environmental Health Division only after the person has again demonstrated
knowledge and understanding of the principles of food sanitation of food-borne
disease prevention.
   (C)   The County Health Department shall not issue a license to any food
service establishment that does not employ a person certified in food
sanitation practices. All food service establishments shall have on display in
full view of its customers the certificates(s) of those persons certified in
food sanitation practices.
(Prior Code, § 3-37) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   All food service establishments and food markets shall comply with the
minimum requirements specified by the State Department of Health as now
provided in 410 I.A.C. 7-15.1 and 410 I.A.C. 7-16-1-1 or as the same may be
hereafter changed or amended. The regulations and any changes and amendments
thereto which may be hereafter adopted or promulgated are by reference
incorporated herein and made a part hereof, two copies of which are on file in
the office of the Auditor of the county for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 3-38) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 SALE, EXAMINATION, CONDEMNATION OF UNWHOLESOME, ADULTERATED,
MISBRANDED FOOD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell through a food service
establishment or food market any food which is unwholesome, adulterated or
misbranded.
   (B)   Samples of food may be taken and examined by the Health Officer as
often as may be necessary to determine freedom from contamination, adulteration
or misbranding. The Health Officer may on written notice to the owner or
operator impound and forbid the sale of any food which is unwholesome,
adulterated, misbranded or which he or she has probable cause to believe is
unfit for human consumption, unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded; provided
that, in the case of misbranding, which can be corrected by proper labeling,
the food may be released to the operator for correct labeling under the
supervision of the Health Officer. The Health Officer may also cause to be
removed or destroyed any dairy product, seafood, poultry, poultry product,
meat, meat product, confectionery, bakery product, vegetable, fruit or other
perishable article which, in his or her opinion, is unsound or contains any
filthy, decomposed or putrid substance or that may be poisonous or deleterious
to health or is otherwise unsafe.
(Prior Code, § 3-39) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Frequency of inspection. At least twice in a 12-month period,
the Health Officer shall inspect each food service establishment and food
market for which a license is required under provisions of this chapter. More
frequent inspections may be made when the Health Officer deems necessary.
      (2)   Procedure when violations noted. If, during the inspection of any
food service establishment or food market, the Health Officer discovers the
violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, he or she shall issue a
written order listing the violations to the proprietor or, in his or her
absence, to the person in charge and fixing a time within which the proprietor
of the food service establishment or food market shall abate and remedy the
violations. A copy of the written order shall be filed with the records of the
Health Department.
      (3)   Authority to inspect and copy records. The person operating the
food service establishment or food market shall upon the request of the Health
Officer, permit the Health Officer or his or her authorized representative
access to all parts of the food service establishment or food market and shall
permit the Health Officer or his or her authorized representative to collect
evidence and/or exhibit and to copy any or all records relative to the
enforcement of this chapter.
      (4)   Final inspection/prosecution or hearing for violators. If, upon a
second and final inspection, the Health Officer finds that the food service
establishment, food market, person or employee is violating any of the
provisions of this chapter which were in violation on the previous inspection
and for which a written order was issued, the Health Officer shall furnish
evidence of the violation to the County Attorney who shall pursue all persons
violating the provisions of this chapter; or the Health Officer may promptly
issue a written order to the licensee of the food service establishment to
appear at a certain time no later than ten days from the date of final
inspection and at a place fixed in the order to show cause why the license
issued under the provision of §
110.02 should not be revoked.
      (5)   Revocation of license. The Health Officer upon the hearing if the
licensee should fail to show cause, shall revoke the license and promptly give
written notice of the action to the licensee. The Health Officer shall maintain
a permanent record of his or her proceedings filed in the office of the Health
Department.
      (6)   Suspension of license. Any license issued under this chapter may be
temporarily suspended by the Health Officer without notice or hearing for a
period not to exceed 30 days for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Unsanitary or other conditions which, in the Health Officer's
opinion, endanger the public's health; or
         (b)   Interference with the Health Officer or any of his or her
authorized representatives in the performance of their duties; provided,
however, that, upon written application from the licensee, served upon the
Health Officer within 15 days after the suspension, the Health Officer shall
conduct a hearing upon the matter after giving at least five days written
notice of the time, place and purpose thereof to the suspended licensee;
provided further that, any suspension order shall be issued by the Health
Officer in writing and served upon the licensee by leaving a copy at his or her
usual place of business or by delivery of registered or certified mail to the
address.
      (7)   Reinstatement of permit. Any person whose license has been
suspended may, at any time, make application to the Health Officer for the
reinstatement of his or her license.
(Prior Code, § 3-40)
   (B)   (1)   Procedure to follow when any violation noted. If, during the
inspection of any temporary food service establishment or temporary food
market, the Health Officer discovers the violation of any of the requirements
of this chapter, he or she shall order the immediate correction of the
violation.
      (2)   Authority to inspect and to copy records. The person operating the
temporary food service establishment or temporary food market shall, upon the
request of the Health Officer, permit the Health Officer access to all parts of
the temporary food service establishment or temporary food market and permit
collection of evidence and/or exhibits and copying of any or all records
relative to the enforcement of this chapter.
      (3)   Revocation of permit and penalties for continued operation. Upon
failure of any person maintaining or operating a temporary food service
establishment or temporary food market to comply with any order of the Health
Officer, it shall be the duty of the Health Officer summarily to revoke the
license of the person, establishment or market and to forbid the further sale
or serving of food therein. Any person continuing to sell or serve food in the
temporary food service establishment, or temporary food market, the license of
which has been revoked, shall be subject to the penalties in §
110.99.
(Prior Code, § 3-41)
(Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   All food service establishments and food markets which are hereafter
constructed or altered shall conform with the applicable requirements set forth
in §
110.04. Properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted to and
approved by the Health Officer as may be required before starting any
construction work.
(Prior Code, § 3-42) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. On conviction, the violator shall be punished
for the first offense by a fine of not more than $500; for the second offense
by a fine of not more than $1,000 to which may be added imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 90 days. Each day of operation of a food service
establishment or food market in violation of §
110.01 or after the expiration of the time limit for abating unsanitary
conditions and completing improvement to abate the conditions as ordered by the
Health Officer shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 3-43) (Ord. 1992-10, passed 7-27-1992)
CHAPTER 111: NON-EXCLUSIVE TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
Section
Rates for Basic Cable Service
   
111.01   Scope and applicability
   
111.02   Delegation of authority of Telecommunications Commission
   
111.03   Filing and review of rates
   
111.04   Rate orders generally
   
111.05   Franchisee's duties
   
111.06   Duties of Telecommunications Chair and staff
   
111.07   Proprietary information
   
111.08   Petition for change in status
   
111.09   Filing and prosecuting complaints concerning cable programming
services and equipment
Cable Procedures; Implementation
   
111.20   Role of Chairperson of Board of Commissioners
   
111.21   Filing and notification requirements
   
111.22   Complaints
   
111.23   Reservation of rights
Statutory reference:
   Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, see 47
U.S.C. § 543(b)
RATES FOR BASIC CABLE SERVICE
§ 111.01 SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter governs the regulation of rates for basic service and
equipment and cable programming services and equipment within the county for
any franchisee which has been notified that:
      (1)   The county has been certified to regulate its basic service and
equipment rates; and
      (2)   The county has adopted regulations governing regulation of basic
service and equipment rates. The provisions set forth below are intended to be
consistent with all Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") regulations
governing the regulation of basic service rates and equipment, and the rules
set forth below will be interpreted, and rates will be regulated, in a manner
consistent with FCC regulations, as if those regulations were set forth in full
herein; a cable franchisee is prohibited from engaging in any activity it is
prohibited from engaging in under FCC rules, as if those rules were set forth
in full herein.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASIC SERVICE or BASIC CABLE SERVICE. The same meaning as the term "basic
service" at 47 C.F.R. § 76.901.
      COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of the County of
Bartholomew.
      EQUIPMENT. All equipment and services subject to regulation under 47
C.F.R. § 76.923.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The Bartholomew/Columbus
Telecommunications Commission established by Ord. 1982-1 and as thereafter
amended.
(Prior Code, § 3-98) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.02 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.
   (A)   The County Commissioners hereby delegate authority to the
Telecommunications Commission to regulate cable rates as provided in this
chapter and consistent with FCC regulations, subject to ratification by the
County Commissioners of any order of the Telecommunications Commission
approving or denying a rate.
   (B)   The County Commissioners further authorize Telecommunications
Commission to adopt additional rules, regulations and procedures for regulating
rates as are consistent with this chapter and FCC regulations.
(Prior Code, § 3-99) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.03 FILING AND REVIEW OF RATES.
   (A)   Initial filings by franchisees.
      (1)   Filings; when made. A franchisee that is notified that its basic
service and equipment rates are subject to regulation must file a submission
("the rate filing") within 30 days of the notification, justifying its then-
existing basic service and equipment rates. All rates, for all customer
classifications, must be justified. Once a franchisee has been so notified by
the county that its rates are subject to regulation, it may not thereafter
increase its rates for basic service or equipment without the prior approval of
the Telecommunications Commission. This requirement applies in all cases,
including with respect to increases in rates announced prior to the date the
operator was notified its rates were subject to regulation where the increases
were not implemented prior to the date of notice. A franchisee must submit a
rate filing to justify any increase in basic service or equipment rates or any
new basic service or equipment rate (collectively referred to herein as rate
increases). An "increase" occurs when there is an increase in rates or a
decrease in program or customer services. Rate filings proposing and supporting
rate increases must be filed for review at least 30 days in advance of the
proposed effective date of the increase. This requirement does not alter or
eliminate any other notice requirement.
      (2)   Filings; where made. Every rate filing must be submitted to the
Telecommunications Commission. A rate filing shall be considered filed for
review on the date the rate filing and all required copies are received by the
Telecommunications Commission. Five copies of each rate filing (including all
supporting materials) must be submitted.
      (3)   Filings; contents. Subject to any FCC regulations governing the
burden of proof, a rate filing submitted by a franchisee must show that the
rates the franchisee proposes to charge for basic service and equipment are
reasonable. Except as inconsistent with FCC rules:
         (a)   Every rate filing must clearly state in a covering letter
whether it justifies existing rates; or proposes an increase in rates. The
covering letter must also identify any rate that is derived in whole or in part
based upon cost of service and identify any pages of the rate filing that
contain information that the franchisee claims is proprietary. It must state
whether any part of the proposed increase is based on an inflation adjustment
or an alleged increase in external costs. The cover letter should also contain
a brief, narrative description of any proposed changes in rates or in service;
         (b)   The pages of each rate filing must be numbered sequentially;
         (c)   The rate filing must contain all applicable FCC forms and these
forms must be correctly completed; and
         (d)   If different rates are proposed for basic service for different
classes of customers, the filing must show that the classifications and the
differences in the rate charged are reasonable and consistent with federal law.
      (4)   Reasonable cost recovery. If the franchisee seeks to support a rate
based upon a cost of service, the Telecommunications Commission will establish
a rate that provides the franchisee an opportunity to recover the reasonable
costs associated with providing basic cable service, including a reasonable
profit. An expense or investment is not presumed reasonable merely because the
franchisee has incurred or made it. A franchisee is not entitled to recover
monopoly rents in any form.
      (5)   Complete analysis. In addition to information the
Telecommunications Commission requires the franchisee to provide, and unless
the Telecommunications Commission grants a waiver of this provision, a
franchisee who seeks to justify all or any part of its rates based upon its
cost of service must submit a complete analysis that shows all expenses it
incurs and all revenues derived from the system, directly or indirectly by the
franchisee or any person that constitutes a cable operator of the system within
the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 522(4). The cost of service must identify the
accounting level (as that term is used in the FCC's regulations) at which each
expense or revenue identified was aggregated and show clearly how the expense
or revenue was allocated. The franchisee may not include costs at an accounting
level unless it also includes all revenues from that same level attributable to
the system or to a group of systems of which the system serving the county is a
part. The replacement cost of a comparable system must be identified and
supported. The franchisee must identify the name and address of any entity with
which it has a contract, other than a programmer, which derives revenues from
the system, and must state whether and how the revenues of that entity were
included in the cost of service. In addition, the cost of service shall clearly
show the derivation of a proposed charge per channel and the application of
that charge to yield a basic service rate. It must also show and support the
derivation and allocation of any amounts included in the derivation of the rate
for:
         (a)   Operation and maintenance expenses;
         (b)   Administrative and general expenses;
         (c)   Programming expenses (identifying retransmission consent costs
and copyright fees separately);
         (d)   Costs for PEG access and any institutional network;
         (e)   Franchise fee expense;
         (f)   Investment in the system and associated depreciation;
         (g)   Other expenses, including federal, state and local taxes,
itemized; and
         (h)   The proposed return on equity and actual interest expense paid
by the franchisee.
      (6)   Applicable forms. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a franchisee is
not required to submit the cost of service specified herein for equipment
rates, and instead initially shall complete, submit and support the costs of
equipment using applicable FCC forms. Any cost-of-service filing submitted to
justify basic service rates must show that the cost of service does not include
equipment costs.
   (B)   Initial Telecommunications Commission review.
      (1)   After receiving a rate filing, the Telecommunications Commission
shall promptly cause to be published a notice that a filing has been received
and that, except for those parts which may be withheld as proprietary, it is
available for public review. The notice shall state that interested parties may
comment on the filing and shall provide interested parties seven days to submit
written comments on the filing to the Telecommunications Commission. Any
comments received and any recommendations for action by the Telecommunications
Commission staff shall be made available for public inspection no later than 20
days after the filing. The franchisee may submit a response to public comments
or staff recommendations, but must do so no later than three business days
after the staff recommendations are made available for public inspection. The
response shall be filed with the Telecommunications Commission.
      (2)   Within 30 days of the date of the filing, the Telecommunications
Commission shall issue a written order, which may be in any lawful form,
approving the proposed rate in whole or in part; denying the proposed rate in
whole or in part; or tolling the proposed rate in whole or part. If the
Telecommunications Commission tolls the rate in whole or in part, its written
order shall explain that it requires additional time to review the rate filing,
identify generally any then-known deficiencies in the franchisee's filing and
state that the franchisee may cure any deficiency in its filing by submitting a
supplementary filing as provided herein. With respect to existing rates,
TOLLING means the rates may remain in effect, subject to refund; with respect
to rate changes, tolling means the portion of the rate change that is tolled
may not go into effect.
   (C)   Supplementary filings.
      (1)   If a proposed rate is tolled in whole or in part, the franchisee
shall submit a supplementary filing 20 days from the date the tolling order
issues, containing corrections, if any, to its filing (including any required
supplement to its cost of service filing) and any response to information filed
by interested parties or to the recommendations of the Telecommunications
Commission staff, or any additional information necessary to support the
proposed rate. Supplementary filings must be filed in accordance with division
(A)(2) above.
      (2)   A supplementary filing also must contain information as the
Telecommunications Commission directs the franchisee to provide.
      (3)   In addition to information the Telecommunications Commission
requires the franchisee to provide, and unless the Telecommunications
Commission grants a waiver of this provision, a franchisee who claims that it
is entitled to a rate in whole or in part based upon the adjustments for
inflation and external costs contemplated by 47 C.F.R. § 76.922(d)(1) and (2)
must submit the following:
         (a)   A calculation showing how each part of the adjustment was
derived;
         (b)   A statement itemizing each external cost (as defined by FCC
regulations), the amount of that external costs for the two calendar years
prior to the date of the filing and the year-to-date in which the filing is
made; and the projected amount of the external cost for the remainder of the
year in which the filing is made and for the following calendar year. The
statement must specifically show any increases in revenues from programming
services. REVENUES include all revenues, in whatever form received;
         (c)   If the increase is attributable to any increase in programming
service costs, the contract for each programming service whose cost has
increased; a sworn statement identifying each programming service whose costs
increased where the programmer is an affiliate of the franchisee (as defined by
FCC regulations); and, for any contract that has been in effect less than 12
months, the prior contract for the service; and
         (d)   A sworn statement by the franchisee's chief financial officer or
an independent, certified accountant stating that he or she has examined all
external costs (including all programming costs) and has offset against any
increase claimed, the amount of any decreases in external costs, and the amount
by which any increase in external costs was below the GNP-PI, as required by 47
C.F.R. § 76.922(d)(2); affirming that the franchisee has only sought to recover
any external cost to the extent that cost exceeded the GNP-PI; and affirming
that the franchisee has not attempted to recover any increase in the cost of
programming purchased by an affiliate except as provided in 47 C.F.R. § 76.922
(d)(2)(vi).
      (4)   Upon receiving the supplementary filing, the Telecommunications
Commission shall promptly cause to be published a notice that a filing has been
received and that it is available for public review (except those parts which
may be withheld as proprietary). The notice shall state that interested parties
may comment on the filing, and shall provide interested parties 20 days to
submit written comments on the filing to the Telecommunications Commission. Any
comments received and any recommendations for action by the Telecommunications
Commission staff shall be made available for public inspection no later than 30
days prior to the date the Telecommunications Commission must act under
division (C)(6) below. The franchisee may submit a response to public comments
or the Telecommunications Commission staff's recommendations, but must do so no
later than ten days after those recommendations are made available for public
inspection. The response shall be filed with the Telecommunications Commission.
      (5)   The Telecommunications Commission shall issue a written order,
which may be in any lawful form, approving the proposed rate in whole or in
part; denying the proposed rate in whole or in part; or allowing the rate to go
into effect in whole or in part, subject to refund. If the Telecommunications
Commission issues an order allowing the rates to go into effect subject to
refund, it shall also direct the franchisee to maintain an accounting in
accordance with 47 C.F.R. § 76.933.
      (6)   The order specified in division (C)(5) above shall be issued 90
days after the tolling order for any rate the franchisee justifies based on the
FCC benchmark. The order shall be issued within 150 days of the tolling order
for any rate the franchisee justified with a cost-of-service showing.
(Prior Code, § 3-100) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.04 RATE ORDERS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Any rate order of the Telecommunications Commission shall be effective
upon ratification thereof by the County Commissioners. Each rate order shall be
released to the public and the franchisee. In any case where the
Telecommunications Commission approves, denies or tolls a rate, orders that a
rate may go into effect subject to refund; or orders refunds or establishes
rates, the Telecommunications Commission shall cause a public notice to be
published stating that the order has issued and is available for review. Any
order shall be in writing.
   (B)   The Telecommunications Commission may take any steps that it is not
prohibited from taking by federal law to protect the public interest as part of
any rate order or by any other means. By way of illustration and not
limitation, it may require refunds, set rates and enforce refund orders. Any
order prescribing a rate must explain why the franchisee's proposed rate was
unreasonable and why the prescribed rate is reasonable. However, before
prescribing ordering a refund to subscribers, the Telecommunications Commission
shall ensure the franchisee has had notice and opportunity to comment on the
proposed rate or refunds. If the recommendations of the Telecommunications
Commission staff propose a refund or a rate, then mailing a copy of the
recommendation to the franchisee at the time they are made available for public
inspection shall be deemed to provide the franchisee this notice and the
franchisee must comment on the refund or rate in its response to the
recommendations.
   (C)   No order approving or setting a rate using the FCC benchmarks shall be
interpreted to establish the just and reasonable rate to subscribers. Every
rate approved or established shall be subject to further reduction and refund
to the extent permitted under applicable laws and regulations, as the same may
be amended from time to time. By way of illustration and not limitation, should
the FCC reduce the benchmarks, the Telecommunications Commission shall have the
right to reduce a franchisee's rates and to require the franchisee to refund
any amounts collected above the benchmark, except to the extent prohibited by
federal law.
(Prior Code, § 3-101) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.05 FRANCHISEE'S DUTIES.
   (A)   A franchisee must implement remedial requirements, including
prospective rate reductions and refunds, within 60 days of the date the
Telecommunications Commission issues an order mandating a remedy.
   (B)   Within 90 days of the date an order mandating a remedy is issued, a
franchisee must file a certification, signed by an authorized representative of
the cable company, stating:
      (1)   Whether the franchisee has complied fully with all provisions of
the Telecommunications Commission's order;
      (2)   Describing in detail the precise measures taken to implement the
Telecommunications Commission's order; and
      (3)   Showing how refunds (including interest) were calculated and
distributed.
   (C)   It is each franchisee's responsibility to keep accurate and adequate
books and records of account so that it can properly and accurately refund any
amounts owed to subscribers.
   (D)   It is each franchisee's duty to submit as complete and accurate a
filing as possible, and knowingly withholding information or making a filing
that is incomplete or inaccurate under applicable law shall be treated as an
evasion of this chapter.
   (E)   (1)   A franchisee and any other entity that has records of revenues
or expenses that are allocated to the franchisee's system must respond to
requests for information from the Telecommunications Commission by deadlines
established by the Telecommunications Commission. A franchisee is responsible
for ensuring that other entity responds to the Telecommunications Commission's
requests.
      (2)   Because federal law limits the time available for an initial
response to a filing by a franchisee, before the order contemplated hereby
issues, the franchisee must be prepared to respond to requests for information
regarding its filing within five days of the date an information request is
mailed to it. The information may include the information the franchisee would
be required to provide as part of any supplementary filing.
(Prior Code, § 3-102) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.06 DUTIES OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CHAIR AND STAFF.
   (A)   The Telecommunications Commission may delegate certain
responsibilities, other than decisions required by §
111.03(B)(2) and (C)(5), to the Chair of the Telecommunications Commission or
to staff. Staff may include consultants.
   (B)   Without limitation and by way of illustration:
      (1)   The Chair or staff shall ensure notices are given to the public and
each franchisee as required herein and by FCC regulations;
      (2)   The Chair or staff may submit requests for information to the
franchisee and establish deadlines for response to them, as provided in §
111.05;
      (3)   For good cause, the Chair may waive any provision herein or extend
any deadline for filing or response except as to matters as are mandatory under
FCC regulations; and
      (4)   The Chair or staff shall prepare any recommendations to the
Telecommunications Commission contemplated hereby. If the Chair or staff
recommends that any proposed rate increase be denied in whole or in part, he or
she shall:
         (a)   Recommend a rate and explain the basis for that recommendation
(the Chair or staff may also recommend that rates remain at existing levels);
and
         (b)   Recommend whether and on what basis refunds should issue; and
         (c)   Notify the franchisee of his or her recommendations at the time
they are submitted to the Telecommunications Commission.
(Prior Code, § 3-103) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.07 PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   (1)   If these provisions, or any request for information, requires
the production of proprietary information, the franchisee must produce the
information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is
submitted, a franchisee may request that specific, identified portions of its
response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The
request must identify specifically what portions of the information are
requested to receive confidential treatment; must state the reason why the
franchisee believes the information should be treated as proprietary; and must
set forth the facts (and legal argument where appropriate) that support those
reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the
Telecommunications Commission determines that the preponderance of the evidence
shows that non-disclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552, The Telecommunications Commission shall place
in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being
withheld. If the franchisee requests confidentiality and the request is denied:
         (a)   Where the franchisee is proposing a rate increase, it may
withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will
be returned to it; or
         (b)   The franchisee may seek review within five working days of the
denial in any appropriate forum.
      (2)   Release of the information will be stayed pending review.
   (B)   Any interested party may file with the Telecommunications Commission a
request to inspect material withheld as proprietary. The Telecommunications
Commission shall weigh the policy considerations favoring non-disclosure
against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of
the particular case. The Telecommunications Commission will then promptly
notify the requesting entity and the cable franchisee that submitted the
information as to the disposition of the request. The Telecommunications
Commission may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the
franchisee may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any
appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal.
(Prior Code, § 3-104) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.08 PETITION FOR CHANGE IN STATUS.
   Any franchisee may petition for a change in status in accordance with Title
47 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the Telecommunications Commission
shall consider that petition in accordance with Title 47 of the Code of Federal
Regulations. The petition and five copies must be filed with the
Telecommunications Commission.
(Prior Code, § 3-105) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
§ 111.09 FILING AND PROSECUTING COMPLAINTS CONCERNING CABLE PROGRAMMING
SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT.
   The Telecommunications Commission is authorized to file complaints at the
FCC regarding the rates charged by cable franchisees for services and equipment
associated with cable programming services. The Telecommunications Commission
may take additional steps as may be appropriate to ensure that a reasonable
rate is established for cable programming services.
(Prior Code, § 3-106) (Ord. 1993-15, passed 11-1-1993)
Cross-reference:
   Telecommunications Committee, see § 34.037
CABLE PROCEDURES; IMPLEMENTATION
§ 111.20 ROLE OF CHAIRPERSON OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of the county is
authorized to sign and file the necessary forms with the Federal Communications
Commission ("FCC") so that the county is certified to regulate the rates
charged by cable franchisees in the county for basic cable service and
equipment.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners is authorized to take
all steps appropriate to complete the forms, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Affirming that the county will adopt and administer regulations
consistent with the FCC's rules governing regulation of the basic tier;
      (2)   Affirming that the county has the legal authority to adopt
regulations and the personnel to administer those regulations;
      (3)   Affirming that the regulations adopted will provide a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties; and
      (4)   Affirming that the county has reason to believe the FCC's
presumption that cable systems do not face effective competition is correct in
the county, and no reason to believe it is incorrect.
(Prior Code, § 3-106) (Res. 1993-13, passed 10-4-1993)
§ 111.21 FILING AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners shall file and serve the
certification forms at the FCC and upon cable franchisees as required by FCC
rules. The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners is authorized to notify
cable franchisees when certification has been granted and applicable
regulations adopted. The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners is further
authorized to take other actions as may be appropriate so that the county may
regulate basic service and equipment rates, and so that the county can respond
to challenges to certification. This includes the authority, in consultation
with the attorney for the Bartholomew/Columbus Telecommunications Commission,
to make filings at the FCC or in court on behalf of the county.
(Prior Code, § 3-111) (Res. 1993-13, passed 10-4-1993)
§ 111.22 COMPLAINTS.
   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners is authorized to file
complaints at the FCC regarding the rates charged by cable franchisees for
services and equipment associated with cable programming services. The
Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners may take additional steps as may be
appropriate to ensure that a reasonable rate is established for cable
programming services.
(Prior Code, § 3-112) (Res. 1993-13, passed 10-4-1993)
§ 111.23 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   The Board of Commissioners reserves the right, by ordinance or through any
other lawful means, to delegate responsibility for rate regulation, in whole or
in part, to the Bartholomew/Columbus Telecommunications Commission, including,
without limitation, any responsibilities assigned to the Chairperson of the
Board of Commissioners herein.
(Prior Code, § 3-113) (Res. 1993-13, passed 10-4-1993)
CHAPTER 112: TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING BUSINESSES
Section
   
112.01   Purpose
   
112.02   State law adopted
   
112.03   Application
   
112.04   Definitions
   
112.05   General provisions
   
112.06   Work environment
   
112.07   Equipment and jewelry
   
112.08   Artist license and licensing fees
   
112.09   Facility permits
   
112.10   Prohibited acts
   
112.11   Inspections
   
112.12   Facility permit suspension and revocation
   
112.13   Artist license suspension and revocation
   
112.14   Appeal
   
112.15   Approval of plans
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to define a tattoo parlor and body piercing
facility, to require permits and permit fees for the operation of a tattoo and
body piercing business, to prohibit the application of a tattoo or body
piercing to a minor, to regulate the inspection of a tattoo business, to
provide for the enforcement of this chapter, and to affix penalties in
accordance with 410 I.A.C. 1-5: Sanitary Operation of Tattoo and Body Piercing
Facilities.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.02 STATE LAW ADOPTED.
   All of the terms and conditions of 410 I.A.C. 1-5 and any amendments thereto
regarding the licensing and operation of a tattoo and/or body piercing facility
are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.03 APPLICATION.
   All places, individuals, and business that offer to affix any type of
pennanent tattoo or body piercing to a person shall be regulated by the above-
named code as well as the requirements specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOOD. Human blood.
   BLOOD-BORNE PATHOGENS. Pathogenic microorganisms that are present in human
blood and can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not
limited to, the following: HBV, HCV, and HIV.
   BODY PIERCER. Any person who performs body piercing on an individual.
   BODY PIERCING. The perforation of any human body part, other than the ear
lobe, for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration, or for some
other nonmedical purpose.
   CLEANED. The removal of all visible dust, soil, or any foreign material.
   CONTAMINATED. The presence or reasonably anticipated presence of blood or
OPIM on an item or surface.
   DISINFECT. The use of directly applied chemical or physical means, or other
appropriate processes to destroy or inactivate communicable disease-causing
agents on inanimate objects.
   HBV. The Hepatitis B virus.
   HIV. The human immunodeficiency virus.
   HVC. The Hepatitis C virus.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Bartholomew County Health Officer or his/her appointed
representative.
   OPERATOR. Any person who controls, operates, manages or owns any tattoo
parlor and/or body piercing facility.
   OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIAL or OPIM. The following:
      (1)   Human body fluids as follows:
         (a)   Semen;
         (b)   Vaginal secretions;
         (c)   Cerebrospinal fluid;
         (d)   Synovial fluid;
         (e)   Pleural fluid;
         (f)   Pericardial fluid;
         (g)   Peritoneal fluid;
         (h)   Amniotic fluid;
         (i)   Saliva in dental procedures;
         (j)   Any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood; and
         (k)   All body fluids where it is difficult or impossible to
differentiate between body fluids.
      (2)   Any unfixed tissue or organ, other than intact skin, from a human,
living or dead.
      (3)   HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, and HIV- or HBV-containing
culture medium or other solutions, and blood, organs, or other tissues from
experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.
   STERILIZE. The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
   TATTOO.
      (1)   Any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol, or other mark
placed with the aid of needles or other instruments; or
      (2)   Any design, letter, scroll, figure, or symbol done by scarring upon
or under the skin.
   TATTOO ARTIST. Any person who provides a tattoo to an individual.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Tattoo parlors and body piercing facilities shall be operated in
accordance with this chapter and 410 I.A.C. 1-5, or any of its successor
provisions, and as the same is amended thereafter.
   (B)   Operators shall require all tattoo artists and/or body piercers to
show proof of having received the hepatitis-B vaccination or proof of having
declined the vaccination by signing a waiver.
   (C)   Artists and operators must:
      (1)   Ensure that the skin area, before a procedure, is cleaned with a
germicidal soap, rinsed with water, and disinfected with an antiseptic
solution.
      (2)   Protect the tattooed area after a procedure by:
         (a)   Applying germicidal solution;
         (b)   Antibacterial ointment; and
         (c)   Either a sterile non-adhesive bandage or product specifically
made for new tattoos and approved by the Health Officer.
      (3)   Provide each patron or legal guardian (if patron is less than 18
years of age), verbal and written guidelines for the aftercare of the tattoo or
body piercing. The written guidelines shall:
         (a)   Provide guidelines to the patron regarding methods for the
proper cleansing, side effects, activity restrictions, infection prevention
(such as the use of bactericidal creams and ointments, soap, and appropriate
barrier dressings where indicated);
         (b)   Advise the patron to consult a physician or dentist, as
appropriate, at any indication of infection (e.g. fever, pus-like drainage, or
pain at the site); and
         (c)   Contain the name, address and phone number of the facility from
which the tattoo or body piercing was received.
      (4)   Maintain records for each patron that are signed and dated by both
the artist and patron indicating that the written guidelines were reviewed, and
a written copy was provided to the patron.
   (D)   Artists and operators may use saran wrap to cover the tattooed area if
the artist, operator, or patron needs to take a 15 minute break.
   (E)   Artists shall keep and maintain the following records of all patrons
for two years:
      (1)   Photo identification;
      (2)   Age of patron; and
      (3)   Signed acknowledgment of receipt of written guidelines referenced
above under division (C)(3) above.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.06 WORK ENVIRONMENT.
   (A)   Restroom facilities shall be available to employees at all times the
tattoo parlor and/or body piercing facility is open for operation and be
located within the same physical structure. The restroom facilities shall be
equipped with a toilet, toilet tissue, a hand washing sink supplied with hot
and cold running water from an approved water source, soap, single use towels,
and a waste receptacle.
   (B)   All tattoo parlors and/or body piercing facilities shall have hand-
washing facilities in each tattooing and/or body piercing station. These hand
washing sinks shall be supplied with running water under pressure at a minimum
temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit, liquid antibacterial soap, single-use
paper towels, and a waste receptacle.
   (C)   All tattoo parlors and/or body piercing facilities shall be well
ventilated and provided with an artificial light source equivalent to at least
20 foot candles three feet off the floor, except that at least 70 foot candles
shall be provided at the level where the tattooing or body piercing is being
performed and where instruments and sharps are assembled.
   (D)   All walls and floors near equipment used for tattooing and body
piercing activities shall be smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable, and be
maintained in a sanitary manner at all times.
   (E)   Operators shall keep disinfection and sterilization equipment in an
area that is not accessible to the public.
   (F)   Food is not permitted in any tattooing and/or body piercing stations.
   (G)   Beverages may be allowed in a tattooing and/or body piercing station
so long as the beverage is in a closed container such that spills cannot occur
if the container is tipped over, and the container must be placed on the floor
or in a designated area that does not need to be sanitized. However, no
beverages of any kind may be kept in areas where there is a reasonably
anticipated risk of exposure to blood or other potentially infectious
materials.
   (H)   Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing facilities shall be maintained in
good repair.
   (I)   Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing facilities shall be cleaned as
often as necessary to keep them clean. If a spill and/or accident has occurred,
immediate action must be taken to clean the spill and/or accident.
   (J)   Operators shall have all disinfection and sterilization equipment
tested by an approved independent laboratory on a monthly basis. Operators
shall provide test results to the Health Officer on a monthly basis. The test
results must be submitted by the 25th day of each month.
   (K)   No live animals shall be allowed in the areas where tattooing and body
piercing is being conducted, other than the following:
      (1)   Patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers;
      (2)   Guide dogs accompanying the following:
         (a)   Blind persons;
         (b)   Partially blind persons;
         (c)   Physically disabled persons;
         (d)   Guide dog trainers; or
         (e)   Persons with impaired hearing.
      (3)   Any other animal meeting all provisions necessary to be designated
as a service animal by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.07 EQUIPMENT AND JEWELRY.
   (A)   All insertable jewelry is to be sterilized and kept in an individual,
sterile, and closed container or package.
   (B)   All jewelry placed in new piercings must be made of one of the
following:
      (1)   Solid 14K (or higher) white or yellow nickel-free gold;
      (2)   Surgical implant stainless steel, CrNMo 316LVM, ASTM F-138;
      (3)   Niobium;
      (4)   Surgical implant grades of titanium;
      (5)   Solid platinum; or
      (6)   Inert plastics.
   (C)   Jewelry must have a mirror finish and be free of nicks, scratches,
burns, and polish compounds.
   (D)   Mill certificates from the manufacturer or an independent assay must
be available to prove material compositions.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.08 ARTIST LICENSE AND LICENSING FEES.
   (A)   License fees will be charged according to the Bartholomew County Fee
Ordinance.
   (B)   Every person that desires to perform any tattoo or body piercing
activities shall, before doing so:
      (1)   Obtain a tattoo/body piercing artist license from the Bartholomew
County Health Department;
      (2)   Receive the necessary training and provide any necessary
documentation; and
      (3)   Be subject to regulations as set forth herein.
   (C)   No person, in an effort to advertise or solicit business with the
intent to perform tattooing or body piercing activities, may use or assume
title of tattoo artist or body piercer, or designate or represent themselves to
be a tattoo artist or body piercer, unless he or she has first obtained a
license from the Bartholomew County Health Department.
   (D)   The license shall be posted where the tattoos or body piercing
activities are performed and shall be clearly visible to the public.
   (E)   Licensed tattoo and body piercing artists shall only provide this
service and conduct this activity within a facility issued a facility permit by
the Bartholomew County Health Department.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.09 FACILITY PERMITS.
   (A)   Facility permit fees will be charged in accordance with the
Bartholomew County Fee Ordinance.
   (B)   No person may operate a tattoo parlor and/or body piercing facility
without first obtaining a facility permit.
   (C)   The facility permit shall provide the name and address of the owner of
the business.
   (D)   Facilities that open without first obtaining a license are subject to
a doubling of the annual permit fee.
   (E)   Facilities already in operation prior to the effective date of this
chapter shall apply for permitting, be reviewed for applicable standards, and
be given a reasonable time, not to exceed six months, to meet those standards
prior to permitting.
   (F)   Temporary or mobile tattoo parlors and/or body piercing facilities
that do not meet the standards as set forth in this chapter shall be prohibited
from obtaining a facility permit.
   (G)   A facility permit issued under this chapter may not be transferred to
another person or another location.
   (H)   A facility permit expires on December 31 of each year.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.10 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   The following activities are strictly prohibited:
   (A)   Branding, as defined as a form of extreme body modification and
scarification using a super-heated metal object, chemical, or electricity to
bum an image onto the human body;
   (B)   Cutting, as defined as a method of extreme body modification and
scarification which creates scars on the skin by using a sharp object, such as
a scalpel or knife, to cut into the skin;
   (C)   Implantation, as defined as a form of extreme body modification where
items such as shaped metal or other foreign bodies are placed under the skin to
produce the outline and texture of the desired image on the surface of the skin
or a protrusion from the surface of the body;
   (D)   Nullification, as defined as the voluntary removal of body parts
including, but not limited to, castration or amputation;
   (E)   Scarification, as defined as an extreme body modification that uses
methods or techniques to produce scars on the human body for decorative
purposes;
   (F)   Skin peeling, as defined as an extreme body modification and
scarification that consists of cutting on the human body the outline of a
design and removing the center, thereby creating a scar where the skin is
removed;
   (G)   Suspension piercing, as defined as the act of hanging the human body
from, or partially from, hooks pierced through the flesh in various places
around the body;
   (H)   Tongue bifurcation, as defined as a non-surgical process in which the
tongue is split with the use of lasers or nylon material;
   (I)   Tongue splitting, as defined as a surgical procedure in which the
tongue is cut centrally from its tip part of the tongue to its base; and
   (J)   Piercing that goes through the tongue horizontally.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.11 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Bartholomew County Health Department shall conduct a minimum of
two inspections per year of each tattoo parlor and/or body piercing facility.
Additional inspections may be conducted by the Bartholomew County Health
Department as it determines is necessary and/or in response to complaints
submitted.
   (B)   Each inspection will be conducted by an environmental health
specialist and/or a public health nurse.
   (C)   The results of the inspection shall be provided to each operator in
written form (electronic or hard copy).
   (D)   Violations noted on the inspection shall be corrected immediately or
within the time frame set forth in the inspection report. The Health Department
shall conduct follow-up inspections to determine compliance with this chapter
as deemed necessary.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.12 FACILITY PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Health Officer may order the suspension or revocation of any
permit issued for a tattoo parlor and/or body piercing facility. Such order
shall include the prohibition of any further operation for the following
reasons:
      (1)   Interference with the Health Officer in the performance of his/her
duties. Interference shall be defined as the process of obstructing, hampering,
or blocking the Health Officer in the performance of his/her duties; and/or
      (2)   Willful and/or continuous violation of any provision of this
chapter.
   (B)   Except as set forth in this chapter, no suspension or revocation shall
be ordered by the Health Officer until after a hearing held by the Health
Officer.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter; whenever the Health
Officer finds unsanitary or other conditions involving the operation of any
tattoo parlor and/or body piercing facility, which in the Health Officer's
reasonable belief constitute an immediate health hazard, the Health Officer
shall, without notice or hearing, issue and serve a written order upon the
permittee requiring the immediate closure of its operations, shall cite the
existence of said unsanitary condition and shall specify the corrective actions
to be taken.
      (1)   Such order shall be effective immediately.
      (2)   Upon written request to the Health Officer, the permittee shall be
afforded a hearing within ten business days.
      (3)   The Health Officer shall conduct a re-inspection upon the request
of the permittee at a time agreed upon by the Bartholomew County Health
Department and the permittee. When the Health Officer determines that the
necessary corrective actions have been taken, applicable reopening fees will be
assessed, and the operations may be resumed.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.13 ARTIST LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Health Officer may order the suspension or revocation of any
license issued for a tattoo and/or body piercing artist. Such order shall
include the prohibition of any further activities for the following reasons:
      (1)   Interference with the Health Officer in the performance of his/her
duties. Interference shall be defined as the process of obstructing, hampering
or blocking the Health Officer in the performance of his/her duties.
      (2)   Willful and/or continuous violation of any provision of this
chapter, or of any training or licensing requirements as set forth in 410
I.A.C. 1-5.
   (B)   Except as set forth in this chapter, no suspension or revocation shall
be ordered by the Health Officer until after a hearing held by the Health
Officer.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, whenever the Health
Officer finds unsanitary or other conditions involving the activities of any
licensed tattoo and piercing artist, which in the Health Officer's reasonable
belief constitute an immediate health hazard, the Health Officer shall, without
notice or hearing, issue and serve a written order upon the licensee requiring
the immediate cessation of service, shall cite the existence of said unsanitary
condition, and shall specify the corrective actions to be taken.
      (1)   Such order shall be effective immediately.
      (2)   Upon written request to the Health Officer, the permittee shall be
afforded a hearing within ten business days.
      (3)   The Health Officer shall conduct a re-inspection upon the request
of the licensee at a time agreed upon by the Bartholomew County Health
Department and the permittee. When the Health Officer determines that the
necessary corrective actions have been taken, applicable reopening fees will be
assessed, and the operations may be resumed.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.14 APPEAL.
   Any permittee aggrieved by any final order of the Health Officer shall be
entitled to seek judicial review.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.15 APPROVAL OF PLANS.
   All tattoo parlors and/or body piercing facilities which are hereafter
constructed or altered shall conform to the applicable requirements set forth
in this chapter. Properly prepared plans and specifications shall be submitted
to and approved by the Health Officer before starting any construction work. A
plan review fee as set forth in the Bartholomew County Fee Ordinance shall be
remitted at the time of plan submittal.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found to be interfering with the duties of the Health Officer or
found to be violating any provision of this chapter commits an infraction. Upon
being found liable of committing such an infraction, the violator shall be
punished for the first offense by a fine of not more than $500, and for the
second and each subsequent offense, by a fine of not more than $1,500. Each day
after the expiration of the time limit for abating any unsanitary conditions,
as ordered by the Bartholomew County Health Department pursuant to §
112.11(D), shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 2024-09, passed 8-12-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
[Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODE
      
151.   BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
      
152.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
      
153.   ELECTRICIANS AND ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
      
154.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
155.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
      
156.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
157.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Authority of Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer
   
150.04   Scope
   
150.05   Definitions
   
150.06   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.07   Effective date
Permit Fees
   
150.20   Residential structures
   
150.21   Commercial, industrial or multiple-family structures
   
150.22   Miscellaneous fees and charges
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.35   Permit application
   
150.36   Permit required
   
150.37   Other ordinances
   
150.38   Penalty for starting work before obtaining permit
   
150.39   Review of permit application
   
150.40   Expiration of permit
   
150.41   Inspection
   
150.42   Entry
   
150.43   Stop order
   
150.44   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.45   Workmanlike manner
   
150.46   Violations
   
150.47   Administration generally
   
150.48   Discretionary authority
   
150.49   Right of appeal to the Department of Fire and Building Services
   
150.50   Remedies
 
   
150.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   County Building Department and building standards, see I.C. 36-7-8-1 through
36-7-8-10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   (A)   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Building Code of Bartholomew County, Indiana”.
   (B)   It may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this
Building Code”.
(Prior Code, § 5-1) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Building Code is to provide for minimum standards for
the protection of life, limb, health, environment, public safety and welfare
and to provide for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.
(Prior Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.03 AUTHORITY OF CHIEF TECHNICAL CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   The Chief Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed
to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this Code.
   (B)   Whenever in this Code, it is provided that anything must be done to
the approval of or subject to the direction of the Chief Code Enforcement
Officer or any other officer of the Department of Code Enforcement, this shall
be construed to give the officer only the discretion of determining whether
this Code has been complied with; and no provision shall be construed as giving
any officer discretionary powers as to what this Code shall be, or power to
require conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce this Code in an
arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
   (C)   Any variance from adopted building rules are subject to approval under
I.C. 22-13-2-7(b).
(Prior Code, § 5-3) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of the enforcement agency, see I.C. 36-7-8-7
§ 150.04 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this Building Code shall apply to all construction in the
unincorporated areas of the county and the construction shall include, but not
be limited to, the following: construction, alteration, repair, improvements,
location, demolition, maintenance, moving, occupancy and use of buildings and
structures, other than industrialized building systems or mobile structures
certified under I.C. 22-15-4 and fences.
(Prior Code, § 5-4) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSISTANT CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Officer, other than
the Chief Code Enforcement Officer, employed by the Department.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR and LOCAL BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Chief Code Enforcement
Officer of the county.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Code Enforcement of the county.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
      (1)   The Chief Code Enforcement Officer of the county.
      (2)   The Chief Code Enforcement Officer is the Chief Administrative
Officer of the Office of the Department of Code Enforcement of the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-5) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.06 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Building rules of the Department of Fire and Building Services as set
out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administration Code
are incorporated by reference in this Code and shall include later amendments
to those articles as the same are published in the Indiana Register or the
Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein:
      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes:
         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;
         (b)   Indiana Building Code;
         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards; and
         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code.
      (2)   Article 14 - One- and Two-Family Dwelling Codes:
         (a)   Council of American Building Officials One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code;
         (b)   CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code; Amendments; and
         (c)   Standard for Permanent Installation of Manufactured Homes.
      (3)   Article 16 - Plumbing Codes: Indiana Plumbing Code;
      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes:
         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code; and
         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.
      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes; Indiana Mechanical Code;
      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes:
         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code; and
         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code.
      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Codes: Indiana Swimming Pool Code.
   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on file in
the office of Technical Code Enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 5-6) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval
by the Department of Fire Services Building Services Commission of the state,
its appropriate publication and its adoption by the Board of Commissioners of
the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-38) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
PERMIT FEES
§ 150.20 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   One-and two-family dwellings. Minimum fee is $200, plus $0.10 per
square foot of gross floor area including attached garage or carport and the
area of the basement (this fee includes all required permits).
   (B)   Additions and/or remodeling. Minimum fee is $150, plus $0.10 per
square foot of gross floor area.
   (C)   Manufactured homes. Minimum fee is $150, plus $0.10 per square foot of
gross floor area including attached garage or carport and the area of the
basement.
   (D)   Decks and patios. Minimum fee is $75, plus $0.07 per square foot of
gross floor area.
   (E)   Accessory structures to residential dwellings. Minimum fee is $100,
plus $0.10 per square foot of gross floor area.
   (F)   Swimming pools. Includes in-ground or above-ground swimming pools,
including fence-two inspections. Minimum fee is $150.
   (G)   Demolition permit. Minimum fee is $60.
   (H)   Relocation permit. Minimum fee is $150, plus $0.10 per square foot of
gross floor area.
   (I)   Electrical permits only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection, plus
$60 for each additional inspection.
   (J)   Plumbing permit only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection, plus
$60 for each additional inspection.
   (K)   Heating permit only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection, plus $60
for each additional inspection.
   (L)   Ventilation permit only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection, plus
$60 for each additional inspection.
   (M)   Air conditioning permit only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection,
plus $60 for each additional inspection.
   (N)   Heating and air conditioning, combination permit. Minimum fee is $60
for first inspection, plus $60 for each additional inspection.
   (O)   Sprinkler permit only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection, plus
$60 for each additional inspection.
   (P)   Re-inspection fee. Minimum fee is $50, $100, and $200 per inspection.
   (Q)   Roof/siding permit. Minimum fee is $60.
   (R)   Permit renewal for one year (original permit good for two years).
Minimum fee shall be 50% of the original fee.
   (S)   Mobile home permit fee. The County Treasurer is authorized to collect
a fee, which shall be in the nature of a service charge, in the amount of $10
for each permit issued pursuant to I.C. 6-1.3-7-10.
   (T)   Electrical re-connect. $30.
(Ord. 1999-12, passed 11-29-1999; Ord. 2015-10, passed 12-28-2015; Ord. 2022-
06, passed 8-22-2022)
§ 150.21 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New, construction for multi-family structures, commercial structures
or industrial structures. Minimum fee is $400, plus $0.10 per square foot of
gross floor area, including attached garage or carport and the area of the
basement with a maximum permit fee of $10,000 (this fee includes all required
permits).
   (B)   Additions or remodeling. Minimum fee is $300, plus $0.10 per square
foot of gross floor area including attached garage or carport and the area of
the basement.
   (C)   Accessory structure. Minimum fee is $200, plus $0.10 per square foot
of gross floor area.
   (D)   Relocation. Minimum fee is $150, plus $0.10 per square foot of gross
floor area.
   (E)   Demolition. Minimum fee is $50.
   (F)   Swimming pool. Minimum fee is $150.
   (G)   Under-ground or above-ground storage tanks. Minimum fee is $120.
   (H)   Electrical permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection, plus
$75 for each additional inspection.
   (I)   Plumbing permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection, plus
$75 for each additional inspection.
   (J)   Heating permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection, plus $75
for each additional inspection.
   (K)   Ventilation permit. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection, plus $75
for each additional inspection.
   (L)   Air conditioning permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection,
plus $75 for each additional inspection.
   (M)   Heating and air conditioning combination permit. Minimum fee is $75
for first inspection, plus $75 for each additional inspection.
   (N)   Sprinkler; permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection, plus
$75 for each additional inspection.
   (O)   Hood permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first inspection, plus $75
for each additional inspection.
   (P)   Fire suppression system permit only. Minimum fee is $75 for first
inspection, plus $75 for each additional inspection.
   (Q)   Sign permit only. Minimum fee is $60 for first inspection, plus $60
for each additional inspection.
   (R)   Re-inspection fee. Minimum fee is $50, $100, and $200 per inspection.
   (S)   Foundation permit. Minimum fee is $120.
   (T)   Cellular towers and control buildings. Minimum fee is $150.
   (U)   Permit renewal for one year (original permit good for two years).
Minimum fee is 50% of original fee.
(Ord. 1999-12, passed 11-29-1999; Ord. 2022-06, passed 8-22-2022)
§ 150.22 MISCELLANEOUS FEE AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Garage sales.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $3.
      (2)   General rate of $2 for permit and $1 for each day of sale.
   (B)   Penalty for starting work before obtaining permit.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $5.
      (2)   General rate double original cost of permit to have been obtained.
(Ord. 1999-12, passed 11-29-1999; Ord. 2022-06, passed 8-22-2022)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.35 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   All pertinent forms shall be provided by the Department. No permit
shall be issued for construction unless the application for the permit is
accompanied by:
      (1)   The payment of appropriate fees as described herein;
      (2)   Plans and specifications showing the construction to be
accomplished; and
      (3)   In the event of construction of a new structure, or extension to an
existing structure, a plot plan showing the location of the new structure or
the extension to existing structure, as well as all other existing improvements
and lot boundaries.
   (B)   (1)   Upon application to the Department, the applicant may request a
waiver of the aforesaid plot plan for good cause shown or undue hardship shown.
      (2)   A waiver of same may be granted and in the sole and absolute
discretion of the Chief Code Enforcement Officer; provided, the waiver is not
contrary to the rules, regulations, codes, revisions, amendments or supplements
as set out in §
150.06.
   (C)   In addition, a copy of a design release, issued by the State Building
Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3-1, shall be
provided to the Chief Code Enforcement Officer before issuance of a permit for
construction covered by the design release.
(Prior Code, § 5-7) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.36 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds $300, using
forms furnished by the Chief Code Enforcement Officer, and all fees required by
this Code shall be paid to the office of Department of Code Enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 5-8) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.37 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   All construction shall be in compliance with all other pertinent ordinances
and codes of the county. All fees prescribed in the pertinent ordinances and
codes shall be timely paid.
(Prior Code, § 5-9) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.38 PENALTY FOR STARTING WORK BEFORE OBTAINING PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Minimum fee: $5.
      (2)   General rate: one-half of original cost of permit being obtained.
(Prior Code, § 5-22)
   (B)   Where work, for which a permit is required, has been started or
proceeded with prior to the issuance of a permit for the work, the fee provided
for a permit shall be doubled. Payment of the double fees shall not relieve any
person from fully complying with the requirements of adopted codes in the
execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 5-25)
(Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988; Ord. 2022-06, passed 8-22-2022)
§ 150.39 REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit by the Department, its Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or any Assistant Code Enforcement Officer, shall:
   (A)   Review all permit applications to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Building Code;
   (B)   Review all permit applications for new construction or extensions to
existing structures to determine if proposed building site will be reasonably
safe from flooding and be in conformance with the pertinent laws, rules,
regulations and codes of the state and the county; and
   (C)   Review permit applications for construction within a flood prone area
to determine that construction provides that:
      (1)   Construction materials and utility equipment are resistant to flood
damage;
      (2)   Construction methods and practices utilized will minimize flood
damage; and
      (3)   Prefabricated, manufactured and mobile homes will have adequate
protection against flood damage, are designed or modified and anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(Prior Code, § 5-23) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.40 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   A permit issued under this Building Code from the date of issue shall be
void after six months if the work contemplated under the permit is not begun
within that time or if the work does not proceed at a reasonable rate towards
completion. However, an extension may be granted if applied for prior to the
expiration of the six-month period at the discretion of the Chief Code
Enforcement Officer. When construction work has been stopped for a period of
six months or longer, then the building permit issued for that construction
shall be void and a new building permit must be issued before the work is
resumed. Construction started, but not completed, and on which a building
permit has expired and on which a new permit is not granted, shall be subject
to condemnation.
(Prior Code, § 5-24) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.41 INSPECTION.
   After the issuance of a permit, the Department shall make or shall cause to
be made, inspection of the construction to insure full compliance with the
provisions of this Building Code and the terms of the permit. Inspections of
construction found to be incomplete are subject to assessment of reinspection
fees as set by the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-27) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.42 ENTRY.
   The Chief Code Enforcement Officer, or any Assistant Chief Code Enforcement
Officer, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter, at reasonable
times, any construction, structure or premises in the county to perform any
duty imposed by the Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-28) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.43 STOP ORDER.
   Whenever any construction is being accomplished contrary to the provisions
of this Building Code, the Department may order the work stopped by written
notice being served upon any person engaged in the accomplishment of the
construction activity. The construction activity so affected shall be stopped
forthwith and until the future time as authorization is granted by the
Department.
(Prior Code, § 5-29) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.44 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any construction, building or structure, or
premises upon which construction is to be accomplished after the adoption of
this chapter, shall be issued unless construction activity is in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-30) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.45 WORKMANLIKE MANNER.
   All construction shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in
accordance with accepted trade standards and practices.
(Prior Code, § 5-31) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.46 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, regardless of
interest in property, to commence or continue construction or occupy any
construction, building, structure or premises contrary to any provision of this
Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-32) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.47 ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.
   The Department is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce
all of the provisions of this Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-33) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.48 DISCRETIONARY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this Building Code, it is provided that an activity must
be accomplished subject to the approval of, or at the direction of the
Department, or its Chief Code Enforcement Officer or any of its Assistant Code
Enforcement Officers, the Building Code shall be construed to grant only that
discretion which is necessary to determine whether provisions of this chapter
have been fulfilled.
   (B)   The discretionary authority provided in this Building Code shall be
used as follows.
      (1)   The discretionary authority shall be utilized to determine
compliance with this Building Code.
      (2)   The discretionary authority shall not be utilized in an arbitrary,
capricious or discriminatory manner.
      (3)   The discretionary authority shall not be utilized to impose greater
restrictions than are required by this Building Code.
(Prior Code, § 5-34) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.49 RIGHT OF APPEAL TO THE DEPARTMENT OF FIRE AND BUILDING SERVICES.
   All persons shall have the right to appeal any Department interpretation of
the applicability of the terms of §
150.06(A)(1) to the Department of Fire and Building Services, in accordance
with the provisions of I.C. 22-13-2-7 and I.C. 4-21.5-3-7.
(Prior Code, § 5-35) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.50 REMEDIES.
   The Department, by its Chief Code Enforcement Officer, is hereby empowered
to bring action in courts, of appropriate jurisdiction, for mandatory and
injunctive relief in order to secure enforcement of and compliance with any
order of the Department or any provisions of this Building Code, and the action
may be joined with an action to recover the penalties and fees herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-36) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of
this Building Code or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the
Department, or its Chief Code Enforcement Officer or any of its Assistant Code
Enforcement Officers, or shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to obey any
lawful order given by the Department or its Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
any of its Assistant Code Enforcement Officers, in connection with the
provisions of this Building Code, then for each violation, failure, neglect or
refusal, or doing of a prohibited act, the person, firm or corporation shall be
fined in the sum of not less than $100, nor more than $500. Each day that
aforesaid violation, failure, neglect or refusal, or doing of a prohibited act
continues, shall be deemed and constituted as a distinct and separate offense.
Each offense shall be deemed as a Class C infraction.
(Prior Code, § 5-37) (Ord. 1988-04, passed 4-4-1988)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Technical Code Building Inspector
   
151.001   Position established
   
151.002   Quarterly meetings
   
151.003   Joint Building and Zoning Administration
Road Numbering and Naming
   
151.015   Adoption of current grid system, road numbers and names
   
151.016   Establishment of County Street and Road Renaming Committee
   
151.017   Principles for numbering and naming roads
   
151.018   Adoption of building numbering system
   
151.019   Principles for numbering buildings
   
151.020   Display of building numbers
   
151.021   Administration of building numbering system
   
151.022   Enforcement
   
151.023   Judicial review
   
151.024   Change of street names
Road Cuts
   
151.035   Title
   
151.036   Scope
   
151.037   Permit application
   
151.038   Bond provisions
   
151.039   Permit extensions
   
151.040   Excavation specifications
   
151.041   Power of Board of Commissioners
   
151.042   Enforcement
   
151.043   Time of completion
Private Entrances
   
151.065   Permits
   
151.066   Establishment of rules and regulations
   
151.067   Application for permits
   
151.068   Inspections
   
151.069   Copies of permits
   
151.070   Approval of construction
 
   
151.999   Penalty
TECHNICAL CODE BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 151.001 POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is established the position of Technical Code Building
Inspector. The Technical Code Building Inspector shall be appointed by the
Board of Commissioners of the county and shall serve at the discretion of the
Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   The duties of the County Building Inspector shall include the
enforcement of the various county and state ordinances, laws and regulations
concerning building and construction and other duties as may be designated from
time to time by the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 5-120) (Ord. 1983-6, passed 6-27-1983)
§ 151.002 QUARTERLY MEETINGS.
   In recognition of the fact that the City of Columbus and the county share
planning and zoning staffs, during the period as there is a sharing of staffs,
the Board of Commissioners of the county, the Mayor of the City of Columbus,
the Presidents of the City and County Plan Commissions, the Presidents of the
City and County Boards of Zoning Appeals, the City and County Planning
Director, the City and County Zoning Administrator and the City and County
Building Inspector shall meet at least quarterly to review the status of all
on-going work and projects and to discuss the respective goals and priorities
of each office, staff, board and commission.
(Prior Code, § 5-121) (Ord. 1983-6, passed 6-27-1983)
§ 151.003 JOINT BUILDING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The county, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-7-1 et seq., has heretofore joined
with the City of Columbus to establish the Columbus-Bartholomew Planning
Department and a joint Building and Zoning Administration which has
demonstrated their ability to provide competent administration of applicable
planning, zoning and building codes and regulations, as well as professional
staff support to the County Plan Commission and the County Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (B)   The County Building and Zoning Administration may provide professional
staff support on Building Code matters, including building inspections to towns
and other areas within its jurisdiction upon the following:
      (1)   The execution of a joint resolution executed by the Board of County
Commissioners and the Town Council approving the matters; and
      (2)   The joint resolution shall include, but not be limited to,
addressing fees for services rendered, duration of services, payment schedule
and a scope of services;
(Prior Code, § 5-122)
ROAD NUMBERING AND NAMING
§ 151.015 ADOPTION OF CURRENT GRID SYSTEM, ROAD NUMBERS AND NAMES.
   For purposes of numbering and naming the roads in the county, the Board of
Commissioners of the county hereby adopts the one mile geographical grid system
and the corresponding road numbers as well as the road names for all roads
within the county which have been accepted by the Board of Commissioners, as
shown on the “Road Map of Bartholomew County”, as approved by the Board of
Commissioners on 7-20-1960, and as revised on 10-5-1964, 1-8-1968, 9-11-1972
and 2-9-1976, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Technical Code
Enforcement Officer and available during regular business hours for public
inspections.
(Prior Code, § 5-155) (Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981)
Statutory reference:
   Requires two copies of incorporated material to be kept on file for public
inspection, see I.C. 36-1-5-4
§ 151.016 ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNTY STREET AND ROAD RENAMING COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is established a County Street and Road Renaming Committee,
consisting of the Postmaster of the City of Columbus Post Office, the Chief
Technical Code Enforcement Officer of the county, the County Plan Director, a
representative of the County Plan Commission to be appointed annually by the
County Plan Commission from among its members. Appointments by the Board of
Commissioners shall be for a term of three years.
   (B)   The Committee shall meet periodically to consider changes in the
numbering and naming of county roads. The Committee, upon determining that a
change in the number or name of a particular road is necessary, shall recommend
the change to the Board of County Commissioners for consideration.
   (C)   Upon the approval of the recommended change by the County Board of
Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners, by resolution, shall recommend the
change to the County Plan Commission for final approval.
   (D)   The recommended change shall be placed on the County Plan Commission
agenda for consideration and shall be advertised in the same manner as other
matters coming before the County Plan Commission for approval. No change in any
county road number or name shall be effective until approved by the County Plan
Commission.
   (E)   Upon approval of the recommended change by the County Plan Commission,
notification of the change shall be provided to the County Auditor in a form
acceptable to the Auditor and recorded in the County Recorder’s office.
(Prior Code, § 5-156) (Ord. 1986-5, passed 6-2-1986; Ord. 1997-05, passed 3-24-
1997)
§ 151.017 PRINCIPLES FOR NUMBERING AND NAMING ROADS.
   All roads shall be numbered in accordance with the grid system described in
§
151.015 whenever practical. Roads that run at an angle of 45 degrees or less
east or west of true north or true south shall be designated, and numbered
where appropriate, as north-south roads. Roads that run at an angle of more
than 45 degrees east or west of true north or true south shall be designated,
and numbered where appropriate, as east-west roads. Roads may be named rather
than numbered when, for reasons of length, variable direction or location, a
name designation is more appropriate and convenient for reference purposes.
Numbered roads that curve in several directions shall be numbered for the
entire length of the road based upon the major tendency of the road running
north to south or east to west. Roads which are broken in continuity shall be
numbered or named in the same manner as if they ran continuously.
(Prior Code, § 5-157) (Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981)
§ 151.018 ADOPTION OF BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   All buildings within the county whenever used for residential business,
industrial or governmental purpose, shall be numbered in accordance with the
geographical grid system described below. The county house numbering grid
system shall consist of a series of parallel lines running due east and west
and due north and south and located every 300 feet. The two base lines to be
used in locating the parallel lines and the grid system shall be a line running
due north and south and a line running due east and west, both of which shall
pass through a reference point located 1,320 feet south of and 1,370 feet east
of the northwest corner of Section 25, Township 9 North, Range 6 East, in the
county. All buildings shall be consistently and consecutively numbered from the
appropriate base line in the manner described below. Each building located on
or having an access road or driveway intersecting a road designated as a north-
south road shall be assigned a north or south number with reference to its
distance, north or south, from the base line described above running due east
and west. Each building located on or having an access road or driveway
intersecting a road designated as an east-west road shall be assigned an east
or west number with reference to its distance, east or west, from the base line
described above running due north and south. Even numbers shall be assigned to
buildings located on or having an access road or driveway intersecting the
north side of an east-west road or the west side of a north-south road. Odd
numbers shall be assigned to buildings located on or having an access road or
driveway intersecting the south side of an east-west road or the east side of a
north-south road.
(Prior Code, § 5-158) (Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981)
§ 151.019 PRINCIPLES FOR NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
   All buildings shall be numbered in a consistent manner in accordance with
rules, procedures and guidelines established and modified from time to time by
the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer of the county, in order to comply
with the terms of this subchapter. The rules, procedures and guidelines shall
be available in the Department of Technical Code Enforcement for inspection by
the general public at all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 5-159) (Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981)
§ 151.020 DISPLAY OF BUILDING NUMBERS.
   (A)   All owners or occupants of buildings within the county which have been
assigned a number shall cause to be permanently attached in some public and
conspicuous place near the outside front entrance of the building, a number
plainly indicating by appropriate figures the number assigned to the building.
Provided, however, that, if a building is not visible from a road or if a
building is 200 feet or more from a road, the assigned number shall be
displayed at the entrance to the access road or driveway to the building by
means of a separate marker or by means of a mailbox as set forth below. All
numbers attached to a building or placed on a separate marker indicating the
number assigned to the building shall be of durable, weatherproof material and
of a size not less than one and one-fourth inches by two inches. The assigned
numbers shall also be placed on each side of any mailbox serving the building.
   (B)   Where mailboxes are grouped, the numbers shall be displayed on the
front or lid of each box.
   (C)   Where a mailbox is on a different road than the building, the number
of the building and the appropriate road name or number shall also be displayed
on the mailbox.
(Prior Code, § 5-160) (Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981)
§ 151.021 ADMINISTRATION OF BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer or his or her
representative shall be responsible for assigning numbers to buildings in
accordance with the building numbering system set forth in this subchapter. At
the time of the issuance of a building permit or at a time thereafter as the
Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer shall deem appropriate, the person,
firm or corporation requesting the building permit shall provide to the Chief
Technical Code Enforcement Officer a certified site plan for the building
indicating:
      (1)   The exact location of the building or buildings;
      (2)   The exact location of any access road or driveway serving the
building or buildings; and
      (3)   The distance in feet from the center of each building to the
nearest county road.
   (B)   Upon being informed of the exact existing or proposed location of a
building, the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer shall designate and
verify to the owner, occupant or builder of any existing or proposed building
the proper number of the building. Any decision of the Chief Technical Code
Enforcement Officer concerning the numbering of a building may be appealed to
the County Plan Commission for review. In order for any appeal to be considered
by the Plan Commission, the person, firm or corporation seeking the review
shall submit a written statement setting forth in appropriate detail the reason
for the appeal. The Plan Commission shall have the authority to overturn and
change any decision of the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer concerning
the numbering of a building. No owner or occupant of a building may change the
number of the building without first obtaining the approval of Chief Technical
Code Enforcement Officer. The Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer shall
maintain a current set of reproducible maps covering all of the county showing
the numbers assigned to buildings. Copies of the maps may be made available to
persons, firms or corporations requesting the copies upon the approval of the
Board of Commissioners. In order for any request to be considered by the Board
of Commissioners, the person, firm or corporation making the request shall
submit a written statement setting forth in appropriate detail the reason for
the request. The Board of Commissioners, with the advice of the Chief Technical
Code Enforcement Officer, shall determine the fee to be charged to any person,
firm or corporation receiving copies of the maps.
(Prior Code, § 5-161) (Ord. 1986-5, passed 6-2-1986)
§ 151.022 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may institute a suit for injunction in the
courts of the county to restrain any person, firm or corporation who shall take
down, alter, deface, destroy or conceal any number assigned to or placed upon
any building in compliance with this subchapter, or who shall place or
substitute or permit to be placed or substituted upon any building an erroneous
or improper number not in compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may institute a suit for mandatory
injunction directing a person, firm or corporation to correct any violation of
the provisions of this subchapter or to bring about compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter. If the Board of Commissioners is successful in
any suit, the defendant or respondent shall bear the costs of the action,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
(Prior Code, § 5-163) (Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981)
§ 151.023 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   Any decision of the County Plan Commission under this subchapter shall
be subject to review by certiorari procedures.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the County
Plan Commission under this subchapter may present to the Circuit or Superior
Court of the county a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the decision
is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality.
   (C)   The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the
entry of the decision of the Plan Commission in question.
(Prior Code, § 5-164) (Ord. 1986-5, passed 6-2-1986)
§ 151.024 CHANGE OF STREET NAMES.
   (A)   The Plan Commission shall advertise and hold public hearing on all
proposed name changes of county roads and make its recommendation to the Board
of County Commissioners.
   (B)   The County Highway Superintendent shall maintain, in his or her
office, a list of all name changes of county roads approved by the Board of
County Commissioners.
   (C)   The list shall be available to the public for inspection during
regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 5-165)
ROAD CUTS
§ 151.035 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Bartholomew County Road Cut
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.036 SCOPE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cut, dig,
trench, excavate, grade, tunnel, bore or in any way disturb any road, street,
alley, sidewalk, roadside ditch, right-of-way or other public place for any
purpose whatsoever, or to attach or remove any wire, pipe or conduit from any
county bridge, overpass, or underpass, in any county right-of-way without first
filing with the County Highway Engineer a written application for a permit to
make such a cut or excavation provided or approved by the County Highway
Engineer, at least three days in advance of the time of beginning the work to
be done under such permit, and without first procuring such permit therefor,
executing a bond to cover all damages occasioned by such work, and restoring
the place where such work has been done in good condition, and in the manner
provided by the term of this subchapter; provided, however, that in case of an
emergency, cutting and excavation may proceed without delay on condition that
within 24 hours after the commencement of such cutting or excavation, a bond
shall be posted, notice of such work shall be given, and a permit shall be
applied for and obtained from the County Highway Engineer, all as required
under this subchapter; provided further, however, that:
      (1)   This subchapter shall not apply to excavations made under contract
with or by order of the County Board of Commissioners through its proper
officials, nor to construction of any private entrances, driveways or
approaches connecting with any highway in the county highway system.
      (2)   The provisions of this subchapter pertaining to bonds and fees
shall not apply to work being done by any city, town, municipal corporation, or
any other county, or by any agency of the state, or by any special taxing or
service district established by law, provided that such entities shall give the
County Highway Engineer at least 24 hours’ notice of any such work and shall
comply with all other applicable provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to install underground
cables, pipes or lines in a county road or right-of-way shall perform all such
installation by methods approved by the County Engineer or Engineer’s
assistant. Under no circumstances however, shall any person, firm or
corporation make any cut, dig, trench or other form of method of installation
or excavation which is parallel to, and within three feet of the edge of any
county road, street or alley. The permittee shall be responsible for cost of
repairing and restoring to good working order any tile drains or other
structures located within said road or right-of-way and damaged by such
installation.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.037 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to cut, dig, trench,
excavate, grade, tunnel, bore, or in any way disturb any road, street, alley,
sidewalk, roadside ditch, right-of-way or other public place, or to attach or
remove any wire, pipe or conduit from any county bridge shall make application
for a permit therefor, which application shall be presented to the County
Highway Engineer or the Engineer’s assistant for approval, or in their absence,
to the County Highway Superintendent who may issue such permit only with the
advice and consent of the County Board of Commissioners. Said application shall
indicate the estimated time or dates during which the cut, dig, trench,
excavate, grade, tunnel, bore or attachment or removal any wire, pipe or
conduit from any county bridge is to be made, shall describe the estimated kind
and dimension in feet and inches of the proposed work, together with the type
of road surface, the nature of the opening to be made and the exact purpose of
the proposed work; said application shall specifically describe the road,
street, alley, sidewalk, roadside ditch, right-of-way or other public place
where such work is to be done. The County Highway Engineer shall have the right
to prescribe the method of the proposed cut, dig, trench, excavate, grade,
tunnel, bore, or attachment or removal any wire, pipe or conduit from any
county bridge, and the location and the time the proposed work shall be
performed. Said applicant shall agree in connection with each and every written
application for each such permit to do at least the following:
      (1)   Maintain the road surface which has been disturbed in a smooth and
uniform condition for a period of one year after traffic is again permitted to
pass over such trench or maintain the area cut outside the pavement surface but
within the right-of-way, to a condition similar to the immediate surrounding
area for a period of one year. Such maintenance to meet the approval of the
County Highway Engineer or the Engineer’s assistant with the advice and consent
of the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   Erect and maintain all necessary barricades, detour signs, warning
signals and lights by night (in conformance with the Indiana Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices - latest edition) required to direct traffic safely
over and around the place where such work is being done, so long as the work in
any way interferes with traffic.
      (3)   Take all responsibility for any injury or damage resulting to
persons or property because of such work.
      (4)   Conspicuously display at the site of such cut, dig, trench or
excavation opening the name and address of the person to whom the permit has
been issued, so long as the cut, dig, trench or excavation is open and
barricades are in place.
      (5)   Give notice to the County Highway Engineer or the Engineer’s
assistant prior to every day that the excavations are open. If the application
is approved, a permit shall be issued by the County Highway Engineer or the
Engineer’s assistant or, in the absence of either, by the County Highway
Superintendent, with the advice and consent of the Board of Commissioners. Such
permit shall state the period of time for which the same is issued, shall be
numbered and dated, and shall specifically describe the road, street, alley,
sidewalk, roadside ditch, right-of-way or other public place where such work is
to be done and described in detail the work to be done. The County Highway
Engineer shall keep on file all such applications and a record of all permits
granted. All permits issued in compliance with the terms of this subchapter
shall be made in triplicate, the original of which shall be filed with the
County Auditor, a copy shall be retained by the County Highway Engineer (one
for permit file and the other two for working copies), a copy shall be filed
with the County Surveyor, and a copy given the applicant for said permit.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.038 BOND PROVISIONS.
   Whenever such application is approved, the applicant shall be required to
give a bond to the county, with surety to be approved by the County Highway
Engineer, the Engineer’s assistant, or, in the absence of either, by the County
Highway Superintendent, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Commissioners, which bond shall guarantee that the place where the work is to
be done shall be restored to a condition (including any drain tiles) and in the
manner provided by the provisions of this subchapter. Such bond shall be in the
sum of $5,000 for each separate cut, dig, trench, excavation, tunnel or bore,
which crosses any road, street, alley, sidewalk, roadside ditch, right-of-way
or other public place at a depth of no greater than six feet, an angle not less
than 80 degrees nor more than 100 degrees, and the sum of $20,000 per mile or
parts thereof, for each separate cut, dig, trench, excavation, tunnel or bore
which parallels or crosses any road, street, alley, sidewalk, roadside ditch,
right-of-way or other public place at a depth of greater than six feet, one
inch, an angle less than 80 degrees or more than 100 degrees and the sum of
$5,000 or $150 per foot or parts thereof, whichever is the greater amount, for
attachment of any wire, pipe or conduit to, or removal from, any county bridge,
overpass or underpass. Such bond shall provide for the surety to guarantee that
the principal of the bond shall faithfully perform all the duties imposed upon
said principal for each and every cut, dig, trench, excavate, grade, tunnel or
bore, or for each attachment of wire, pipe or conduit to, or removal from, any
county bridge, overpass or underpass, installed in any county right-of-way
according to the requirements of this subchapter. Such bond shall remain in
full force for a period of three years from the date of completion of the
permittee’s work to assure that no hidden damage to drains or other county
structures occur. No permit shall be issued until the bond has been filed with
and approved by the County Highway Engineer, the Engineer’s assistant, or, in
their absence, by the County Highway Superintendent, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Commissioners. Anything contained herein to the
contrary notwithstanding, however, a check payable to the county, in the same
sum as designated herein for such bond, or a letter of credit issued by a
financial institution approved by the County Board of Commissioners in the same
sum as designated herein for such bond, may be filed with such application in
lieu of such surety bond; provided further, however, that public utilities
whose rates are regulated by the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission, and
municipal utilities may submit an indemnifying agreement acceptable to the
County Board of Commissioners providing that the utility shall comply with all
the terms and conditions of this subchapter, in lieu of such bond, check or
letter of credit.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.039 PERMIT EXTENSIONS.
   The holder of any permit issued which grants permission to cut, dig, trench,
grade, excavate, tunnel or bore, in or under any road, street, alley, sidewalk,
roadside ditch, right-of-way or other public place, as provided by this
subchapter, shall complete the work and repair the place or places where the
work is done within 90 days from the issuance of such permit. The County
Highway Engineer or the Engineer’s assistant, however, may extend the time for
the completion of the work for which the permit was granted.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.040 EXCAVATION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All work and repair described in §
151.039 above shall be done in accordance with standards and specifications
prescribed by the County Highway Engineer. Before the pavement is replaced the
permittee shall call upon the County Highway Engineer or the Engineer’s
assistant to inspect the work already done before proceeding further.
   (B)   After inspection has been made, the permittee shall complete the work
so that the place where excavated will conform to the road, street, sidewalk or
alley where such excavation was made as originally improved. All said work
shall be done to the acceptance and satisfaction of the County Highway Engineer
or the Engineer’s assistant.
   (C)   In cases where a tile drain is cut, crushed or in any other way
disturbed so as to render the same in unsatisfactory working order, the
permittee shall cause such drain to be repaired or rerouted according to the
standards and specifications of the County Highway Engineer. Permittee shall
immediately notify the inspector or in his or her absence, the County Highway
Engineer or the Engineer’s assistant of any tile drains or structures struck
during the work.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.041 POWER OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   In addition to any other powers vested in it by law, the County Board of
Commissioners shall have the power to:
   (A)   Issue such orders or rules as may be necessary from time to time to
effectuate purposes of this subchapter and to enforce the same by all
appropriate administrative and judicial proceedings;
   (B)   Advise, consult and communicate with other local governmental units,
agencies of the state, industries, businesses, interstate or interlocal
agencies and the federal government, and with interested persons and groups;
and
   (C)   Do any and all acts which may be necessary for the successful
prosecution of the policy of this subchapter and such other acts as may be
specifically enumerated herein.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.042 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the County Board of Commissioners has reason to believe that
a violation of any provision of this subchapter, or a rule or regulation issued
pursuant thereto, has occurred, it may cause a written notice to be served upon
the alleged violator or violators. The notice shall specify the provisions of
the ordinance, rule or regulation alleged to be violated, and the facts alleged
to constitute a violation thereof, and may order that the necessary corrective
action be taken within a reasonable time. Any such order shall become final
unless, no later than five days after the date such order is served, the person
or persons warned may request in writing a hearing before such Board. In lieu
of such order the Board of Commissioners may require that the alleged violator
or violators appear before it for a hearing at a time and place specified in
the notice, to answer the charges complained of, or the Commissioners may
initiate appropriate action for the recovery of penalty pursuant to §
151.999.
   (B)   After any hearing held pursuant to division (A) above, the County
Board of Commissioners shall affirm, modify or rescind its order or issue an
appropriate order or orders for the prevention, abatement or control of the
violation involved. Such order shall prescribe the date or dates by which the
violation or violations shall cease and may prescribe timetables for necessary
action in preventing or abating the violation or violations.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the County Board of
Commissioners from making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through
warning, conference or any other appropriate means.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 151.043 TIME OF COMPLETION.
   (A)   The holder of any permit issued which grants permission to cut, dig,
trench, grade, excavate, tunnel or bore, in or under any road, street, alley,
sidewalk, roadside ditch, right-of-way or other public place as provided in
this subchapter shall complete all work including pavement repairs within 14
days after beginning work at each location.
   (B)   (1)   During the period from November 15 through March 15 of each
year, if weather conditions do not allow permanent repairs to be completed, the
permittee shall make temporary pavement repairs within the 14-day period
described in division (A) above.
      (2)   The temporary repairs shall be made with asphalt cold mix and shall
be maintained by the permittee until permanent repairs can be made.
      (3)   Permanent repairs shall be completed prior to the following April
15.
(Prior Code, § 5-186) (Ord. 1991-06, passed 5-6-1991)
PRIVATE ENTRANCES
§ 151.065 PERMITS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall construct any private entrance,
driveway or approach connecting with any highway in the County Highway System
without a written permit from the County Highway Department Supervisor, and
then only in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of
Commissioners of the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-190) (Ord. 1-4-71, passed 3-8-1971) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.066 ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of the county shall establish written rules
and regulations for the private entrances, driveways and approaches in order to
keep county ditches and drains from being blocked, provide for drainage of the
county highway system, preservation of the county highway system, and for the
safety and convenience of traffic on the county highway system.
   (B)   The rules and regulations to be established by the Board of
Commissioners of the county shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The minimum size of pipe to be installed under a driveway;
      (2)   The location of the pipe relative to the county highway; and
      (3)   Amount of surface material covering pipe.
(Prior Code, § 5-191) (Ord. 1-4-71, passed 3-8-1971)
§ 151.067 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   The County Highway Department Supervisor shall prepare application forms for
the permit which shall contain the rules and regulations adopted by the Board
of Commissioners of the county relative to the construction of private
entrances, driveways and approaches.
(Prior Code, § 5-192) (Ord. 1-4-71, passed 3-8-1971)
§ 151.068 INSPECTIONS.
   The County Highway Department Supervisor shall make an inspection of the
premises to determine whether the private entrance, driveway or approach
conforms to the provisions of this subchapter and the rules and regulations
adopted thereunder, and he or she shall either issue or deny the permit after
making the inspection and determination.
(Prior Code, § 5-193) (Ord. 1-4-71, passed 3-8-1971)
§ 151.069 COPIES OF PERMITS.
   The County Highway Department Supervisor shall transmit forthwith a
duplicate copy of every permit issued by him or her to the office of the County
Plan Commission and the office of the County Building Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 5-194) (Ord. 1-4-71, passed 3-8-1971)
§ 151.070 APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The County Plan Commission shall not approve the construction of any private
entrance, driveway or approach connecting with any highway in the county
highway system or the construction of any structure on the real estate affected
thereby and the County Building Commissioner shall not issue a building permit
for the construction of any structure on the real estate until the driveway
permit has been issued and received.
(Prior Code, § 5-195) (Ord. 1-4-71, passed 3-8-1971)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a building who
shall fail to number the building or who shall fail to maintain the number of
the building, as provided in §§
151.015 through
151.024, shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of §§
151.015 through
151.024 and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
fined a sum of not less than $25, nor more than $100, for each day’s violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-162)
   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation which violates any provision of
§§
151.035 through
151.042 or any rule or regulation pursuant thereto shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $2,500. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   Action pursuant to division (C)(1) above shall not be a bar to
enforcement of §§
151.035 through
151.042 or any rules and regulations in force pursuant thereto, and orders made
pursuant to §§
151.035 through
151.042, by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the Board of
Commissioners of the county shall have the power to institute and maintain the
same in the name of the county any and all enforcement proceedings.
      (3)   Nothing in §§
151.035 through
151.042 shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of
any person or property or to maintain any action or other appropriate
proceedings therefor.
(Prior Code, § 5-184)
(Ord. 1981-1, passed 3-6-1981; Ord. 2021-02, passed 3-8-2021)
CHAPTER 152: MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Definitions and interpretation
   
152.002   Health Officer to inspect
Basic Equipment and Facilities
   
152.015   Dwelling unit requirements
Light, Ventilation and Heating
   
152.030   Occupancy standards
   
152.031   Window or ventilation devices
   
152.032   Heating facilities
   
152.033   Electric service
   
152.034   Lighting
   
152.035   Screens
   
152.036   Basement windows
Safe and Sanitary Maintenance of Dwellings and Parts of Dwellings
   
152.050   Specific requirements
Rooming Houses
   
152.065   Rooming house requirements
   
152.066   Inspections
   
152.067   Restroom facilities
   
152.068   Sanitary maintenance
   
152.069   Hotels
Premises Maintenance and Sanitary Condition
   
152.080   Health and safety hazards prohibited
Owner and Occupant Responsibilities
   
152.095   Clean, sanitary conditions
   
152.096   Occupant responsibilities
   
152.097   Rubbish removal
   
152.098   Organic waste removal
   
152.099   Hanging of screens
   
152.100   Extermination of insects
Unfit Dwelling Designation; Legal Procedure of Condemnation
   
152.115   Unfit for human habitation
   
152.116   Condemnation
   
152.117   Placarded dwelling
   
152.118   Written approval to remove placard
   
152.119   Unlawful to deface or remove placard
   
152.120   Compliance required
   
152.121   Securing building; recovery of costs
   
152.122   Hearing on condemnation
Enforcement; Service of Notices and Orders; Hearings
   
152.135   Nature of violations
   
152.136   Request for hearing
   
152.137   Action by Health Officer following hearing
   
152.138   Decisions a matter of public record; approval
   
152.139   Public health emergencies
 
   
152.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Establishment of minimum housing standards, see I.C. 36-7-8-4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BASEMENT. A portion of the building located partly under ground, but
having not more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
      CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and
having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
      DILAPIDATED. No longer adequate tor the purpose or use for which it was
originally intended.
      DWELLING. Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be
used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that, temporary
housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a DWELLING.
      DWELLING UNITS. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a
single habitable unit when those units possess facilities which are used, or
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating; and
         (b)   Any mobile home.
      EGRESS. An arrangement of exit facilities to assure a safe means of exit
from buildings.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal vector elimination methods
approved by the Health Officer.
      GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space for use as a living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility
rooms of less than 50 square feet, foyers or communicating corridors stairways,
closets, storage spaces and workshops, hobby and recreation areas in unsealed
or uninsulated parts of structure below ground level or in attics.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The County Health Officer or his or her duly authorized
representative.
      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
      MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle which is constructed to permit its being used as
a conveyance, either self-propelled or non-self-propelled, upon the public
streets and highways, and which is designed and constructed to permit its
occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons and which has
no foundation other than wheels, jacks, skirting or other temporary support.
      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
      OCCUPANT. Any person, living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
      OWNER. Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
         (a)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; provided, however, that, whenever the
dwelling or dwelling unit is subject to conditional sales contract, lease with
option to purchase, or any other form of written contract under the terms of
which any person is entitled to a conveyance of legal title upon payment of a
specified sum, the term OWNER shall mean the person who shall have the
contractual right, rather than the person holding legal title; or
         (b)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit as executor, executrix, trustees, receiver or guardian of the owner as
defined in division (a) immediately preceding. Any person thus representing the
actual OWNER shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this ordinance to
the same extent as if he or she were the OWNER. Any person acting as agent of
the OWNER shall not be construed to be an OWNER within the terms of this
chapter, but shall be bound to notify the owner, by means of a registered
letter addressed to the owner at his or her last known address, of any order or
notice by the Health Officer relating to the property of the owner.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
      PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment; gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes,
water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower
baths, installed clothes-washing machines catch basins, drains, vents and any
other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer
or gas lines.
      REASONABLE CAUSE. The follow-up of a community complaint or the apparent
substandard health conditions as determined by the Health Officer.
      ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to five
or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father,
or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
      RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage;
and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust.
      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, mobile home, or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached
to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 days.
   (B)   Undefined words not specifically defined in this chapter shall have
the common definition set forth in a standard dictionary.
   (C)   Whenever the words “dwelling”, “dwelling unit”, “rooming house”,
“rooming unit”, “premises” are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof”.
   (D)   The word “premises”, occupied or vacant, shall mean any lot or area
located in the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-45) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.002 HEALTH OFFICER TO INSPECT.
   (A)   The Health Officer is authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units and premises located
within the county, in order that the Health Department may perform its duty of
safe-guarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the
general public.
   (B)   For the purpose of making the inspections the Health Officer, having
reasonable cause, is hereby authorized to enter, examine, at proper times upon
presenting proper credentials of identification, all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises.
   (C)   The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Health Officer access to
the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at proper times
for the purpose of the inspection and examination.
   (D)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner
thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of the dwelling or
dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making the repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-46) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES
§ 152.015 DWELLING UNIT REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the
purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply
with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by either
the State Board of Health, the Health Officer or Building Commissioner having
jurisdiction over the area in which the dwelling is located.
   (B)   The dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within the room which is equipped with a fresh water closet and a
lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to water and
sewer systems approved by either State Board of Health, the Health Officer or
Building Commissioner having jurisdiction over the area in which the dwelling
units are located.
   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person using the room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Health Officer.
   (D)   In every dwelling unit, the kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub
or shower required under the provisions of divisions (A), (B) and (C) above,
shall be properly connected and providing both hot and cold water lines.
   (E)   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers.
   (F)   Where public sewer facilities are not available within 100 feet of the
lot upon which a dwelling unit is located, a private sewage disposal system
shall be required. It shall be of a sanitary type construction and operate in
conformity with Chapter 52 of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   Every dwelling unit shall have a safe, useable water supply available
on the lot upon which the dwelling is located. The water supply, public or
private, shall be subject to the approval of the Health Officer.
   (H)   Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed and maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of
divisions (A), (B) and (C) above and are capable of heating water to a
temperature as to permit cleanliness and promote personal hygiene.
(Prior Code, § 5-56) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING
§ 152.030 OCCUPANCY STANDARDS.
   No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 5-60) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.031 WINDOW OR VENTILATION DEVICES.
   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be
easily opened or other device as will adequately ventilate the room.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to kitchens or family
recreation rooms where adequate mechanical ventilation, approved by the Health
Officer, is provided.
(Prior Code, § 5-61) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.032 HEATING FACILITIES.
   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments
in every dwelling unit located therein.
(Prior Code, § 5-62) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.033 ELECTRIC SERVICE.
   Where there is usable electric service available: the service, outlets and
fixtures shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe
working condition and shall be connected to a source of electric power in a
manner prescribed by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the county or the
rules and regulations of the city or town in which the dwelling unit is
located.
(Prior Code, § 5-63) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.034 LIGHTING.
   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by natural or electric light at all times. Every public hall
and stairway in structures containing not more than two dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate
lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time
lighting.
(Prior Code, § 5-64) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.035 SCREENS.
   During the portion of each year when the Health Officer deems it necessary
for protection against mosquitos, flies and other insects, every door opening
directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied screens and
a self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
supplied with screens.
(Prior Code, § 5-65) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.036 BASEMENT WINDOWS.
   Every basement or cellar window, used or intended to be used for ventilation
and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be supplied with a screen or other device as will effectively prevent
their entrance.
(Prior Code, § 5-66) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS AND PARTS OF DWELLINGS
§ 152.050 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit,
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Every foundation, roof, exterior wall and window shall be reasonable
weather-tight and damp-free and shall be sound and in good repair. Every
premises shall be graded, drained, free of standing water and maintained in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition.
   (B)   Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonable
weather-tight and insect- and rodent-proof.
   (C)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair.
   (D)   Every plumbing fixture and water waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks and obstructions, that affects human health.
   (E)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom and kitchen
floor surface shall be constructed so as to be reasonably impervious to water
and so as to permit the floor to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (F)   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from,
shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied, except
for temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies or when
discontinuance of service is approved by the Health Officer.
   (G)   No owner shall let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit
unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
   (H)   Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall be constructed, and yard grading
shall be accomplished, to direct the discharge of normal rainfall into natural
drainage channels, dedicated drainage swales, the public right-of-way or storm
sewers.
   (I)   No dwelling, dwelling unit, structure, yard, lot premises or part
thereof shall be maintained as or permitted to become an insect infestation or
rat harborage.
(Prior Code, § 5-70) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
152.999
ROOMING HOUSES
§ 152.065 ROOMING HOUSE REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with
the provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of §§
152.050 and
152.080.
(Prior Code, § 5-85) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.066 INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever, upon inspection of any rooming house, the Health Officer finds
that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of
this chapter, the Health Officer shall give notice in writing that unless the
conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be
determined by the Health Officer, the operation of the premises as the rooming
house shall be discontinued. At the end of the period, the Health Officer shall
reinspect the rooming house, and if he or she finds that the conditions or
practices have not been corrected, he or she shall give notice in writing to
the operator that the operations shall cease. Upon receipt of the notice from
the Health Officer, the operator shall immediately cease operation of the
rooming house, and no person shall occupy, for sleeping or living purposes any
rooming unit herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-86) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.067 RESTROOM FACILITIES.
   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Health officer
and in good condition, shall be supplied for each six persons or fraction
thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator’s
family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided:
   (A)   In a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinal may
be substituted for not more than one-half of the required number of water
closets;
   (B)   All facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be
reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing
the facilities;
   (C)   Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
heated and unheated water under pressure at all times; and
   (D)   No facilities shall be located in a basement.
(Prior Code, § 5-87) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.068 SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of a
sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house; and shall be
further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where
the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.
(Prior Code, § 5-88) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.069 HOTELS.
   Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall also
apply to hotels, except to the extent that any provision may be found in
conflict with the laws of the state or with the lawful regulations of any state
board or agency.
(Prior Code, § 5-89) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
PREMISES MAINTENANCE AND SANITARY CONDITION
§ 152.080 HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARDS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or
part thereof shall be constructed, made, used, maintained or operated in any
manner causing or producing any health or safety hazard, or permitted to become
a rodent harborage and insect infestation. It shall be unlawful for any
occupant of any dwelling unit, building or structure of any kind whatever, to
vacate the premises without his or her causing to be removed therefrom and
properly disposed of, all garbage or rubbish or other objectionable waste of
any kind.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of the county Code of Ordinances for any
property owner to vacate or allow to be vacant, any structure on said owner's
property without securing the property in order to prevent animals or persons
from entering the property.
      (1)   If a property is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter by the County Department of Code Enforcement or the Board of County
Commissioners, the Board of Commissioners shall direct the County Auditor to
give written notice to the owner of the property upon which the structure(s)
exists, stating that the owner is required to board up or otherwise secure the
structure(s) on the property within ten days from the date of issuance of the
notice.
      (2)   The notice shall refer to this chapter and shall also state that if
the owner does not comply with the requirements of the notice, the Board of
Commissioners will cause the structure(s) to be secured and the actual cost
thereof incurred by the county shall be paid by the owner and shall further
state that if the same is not paid within 20 days after the date of the notice
of the cost thereof, the County Auditor shall pay the amount claimed and place
said amount on the tax duplicate against the property affected by the work and
the amount shall be collected as taxes are collected.
      (3)   Secured. SECURED is defined as: closed/locked windows and doors
which are intact or the openings are covered with plywood or oriented strand
board which is secured to the structure with nails or screws.
(Prior Code, § 5-94) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988; Ord. 2022-07, passed 8-22-
2022)  Penalty, see §
152.999
OWNER AND OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 152.095 CLEAN, SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   Every owner of a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be
responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(Prior Code, § 5-75) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.096 OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he or she occupies and controls.
(Prior Code, § 5-76) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.097 RUBBISH REMOVAL.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or
her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 5-77) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.098 ORGANIC WASTE REMOVAL.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all garbage
and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a clean
and sanitary manner, as approved by the Health Officer, and in accordance with
§
152.015. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply the facilities
or containers to accommodate all dwelling units in a multiple dwelling. In all
other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to dispose of their
garbage in a sanitary method.
(Prior Code, § 5-78) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.099 HANGING OF SCREENS.
   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens whenever the same are required under the provisions of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the
owner has agreed to supply the service.
(Prior Code, § 5-79) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.100 EXTERMINATION OF INSECTS.
   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for extermination
whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure
of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat-proof or reasonable insect-proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in
the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 5-80) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
UNFIT DWELLING DESIGNATION; LEGAL PROCEDURE OF CONDEMNATION
§ 152.115 UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of the unfit dwellings or
dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 5-98) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.116 CONDEMNATION.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects and continue uncorrected, under the terms of §
152.135 shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so
designated and placarded by the Health Officer:
   (A)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health of the occupants
or of the public;
   (B)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitary facilities
adequate to protect the health of the occupants or of the public; and
   (C)   One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary
or otherwise dangerous to the health of occupants or of the public.
(Prior Code, § 5-99) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.117 PLACARDED DWELLING.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and
so designated and placarded by the Health Officer shall be vacated within 30
days or as ordered by the Health Officer, as which time the owner must secure
the placarded dwelling against entry thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 5-100) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.118 WRITTEN APPROVAL TO REMOVE PLACARD.
   (A)   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as
unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from and the placard is removed by the Health
Officer.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall remove the placard whenever the defect or
defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.
(Prior Code, § 5-101) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.119 UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE OR REMOVE PLACARD.
   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as
such, except as provided in §
152.118.
(Prior Code, § 5-102) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.120 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Immediately upon compliance of the occupants to vacate a condemned dwelling
or dwelling unit, the owner must immediately secure the dwelling against entry
through any external openings or entry ways, until the time the reasons cited
for condemnation have been abated, corrected or removed.
(Prior Code, § 5-103) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.121 SECURING BUILDING; RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   Should for any reason, the owner not comply with securing the condemned
dwelling or dwelling unit from entry within ten days following condemnation and
placarding, the county will assume the duty of securing the facility at which
time all costs incurred will be assessed and presented to the owner for
repayment.
(Prior Code, § 5-104) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.122 HEARING ON CONDEMNATION.
   Any person aggrieved by any notice or order relating to the condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Health Officer
of the county under the procedure set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 5-105) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
ENFORCEMENT; SERVICE OF NOTICES AND ORDERS; HEARINGS
§ 152.135 NATURE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter which affects the health of the occupants of any dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit or the health of the general public, the Health Officer
shall give notice of the alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor, and to any known agent of the person as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
and
      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require; provided that, the notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon the owner or agent, or upon the occupant, if a copy thereof is
served upon him or her personally, or if a copy thereof is sent by certified
mail to his or her last known address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he or
she is served with the notice by any other method authorized or required under
the laws of the state.
   (C)   The notice must contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will affect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-49) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.136 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   Any person affected by any notice issued by the Health Officer may request
and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Health Officer;
provided that, the person shall file in the office of the Health Officer,
within ten days after the service of the notice, a written petition requesting
the hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefore. Upon
receipt of the petition, the Health Officer shall arrange a time and place for
the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. The hearing
shall be held as soon as practicable after the receipt of the request therefor.
At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be heard and
to show cause why the notice should not be complied with.
(Prior Code, § 5-50) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.137 ACTION BY HEALTH OFFICER FOLLOWING HEARING.
   After the hearing, the Health Officer, shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice, depending upon his or her findings as to whether the provisions of this
chapter have been complied with. If the Health Officer shall sustain or modify
the notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to §
152.135 shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing
is not filed in the office of the Health Officer within ten days after the
notice is served.
(Prior Code, § 5-51) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.138 DECISIONS A MATTER OF PUBLIC RECORD; APPEAL.
   (A)   The proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and decisions
of the Health Officer, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as
a matter of public record in the offices of the Health Officer. The record
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with
the matter.
   (B)   Any person who is aggrieved with the results of the hearing before the
Health Officer shall be entitled to an appeal to the Board of the County Health
Department. The appeal shall be reduced to writing, stated as briefly as
possible, and submitted in triplicate to the Chairperson of the Board of the
County Health Department at least ten days prior to the meeting of the Board,
at which time the appeal is to be considered.
   (C)   The Board of Health shall have authority to vary, change or alter the
orders of the Health Officer and provisions of this chapter if, in the opinion
of the Board, the ruling or provisions constitute an undue hardship.
(Prior Code, § 5-52) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.139 PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she may without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of an emergency and
requiring that the action be taken as he or she deems necessary to meet the
emergency.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom the order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the Health Officer, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible, in the manner provided in §
152.136.
   (C)   After the hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter have been complied with, the Health Officer shall
continue the order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
(Prior Code, § 5-53) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined in an amount not to exceed $500. Each violation shall
constitute a separate offense and each day after the given abatement period,
constitutes a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 5-110) (Ord. 1988-09, passed 6-6-1988)
CHAPTER 153: ELECTRICIANS AND ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
Section
Inspection and Licensing
   
153.01   Inspections by Department of Technical Code Enforcement
   
153.02   Licensing
   
153.03   Licensing fees
   
153.04   Issuance of license; disposition of fees
   
153.05   Expiration and renewal
   
153.06   Suspension of license
License Examination
   
153.20   Board of Electrician Examiners
   
153.21   Examination
   
153.22   Application for examination
   
153.23   Failure to pass examination
   
153.24   Electrical fees
Safety Rules and Regulations
   
153.35   Supervision of installation
   
153.36   Requirement of electrical inspection
   
153.37   Reinspection and notice of dangerous conditions
   
153.38   Certificate of approval
   
153.39   Furnishing electric current
   
153.40   Liability for damages
INSPECTION AND LICENSING
§ 153.01 INSPECTIONS BY DEPARTMENT OF TECHNICAL CODE ENFORCEMENT.
   The Department of Technical Code Enforcement shall be responsible for
inspection of electrical work in the county.
(Prior Code, § 5-128)
§ 153.02 LICENSING.
   To operate or engage in business as an electrician or electrical contractor
within the county, the person, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to
operate or engage in the business shall be duly licensed according to the
provisions of this chapter. The license shall be issued only in the name of the
person, firm, partnership or corporation making application for the license. A
person requesting the issuance of a license in the name of a firm, partnership
or corporation shall on the application list the names and addresses of all
members of the firm or partnership or the name and location of the place of the
principal office of the corporation. Any change in the location of the place of
business and any change in the membership of any firm or partnership shall be
reported to the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer within five days after
the change occurs. The examination required by §§
153.20 through
153.24 shall be binding upon all members of the firm, partnership or
corporation. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
industrial manufacturing concerns from installing and maintaining customary
electrical installation incidental to the operation of the concern without
complying with the licensing provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-129) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.03 LICENSING FEES.
   The fee for a license to operate as an electrician, any electrical business
or an independent electrical contractor within the county shall be $50 for the
first license issued to the applicant and $25 for each annual renewal of the
license; and, for each additional person engaged in electrical work by the
licensee, an additional fee of $10 for the first license issued the applicant
and $10 for each annual renewal of the license shall be charged.
(Prior Code, § 5-130) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   The licenses provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the Chief
Technical Code Enforcement Officer by authority of the Board of County
Commissioners. All fees for licenses shall be deposited in and become a part of
the County General Fund. The monies shall be divided equally between the County
General Fund and the General Fund for the City of Columbus. The County Auditor
shall disburse the city share of the funds on a semi-annual basis.
(Prior Code, § 5-131) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.05 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 in the
year for which the license was issued. No license shall be issued for a longer
period than one calendar year, but a license may be renewed without
reexamination as provided for in this chapter. However, no license holder will
be entitled to renew a license without examination unless an application shall
be filed in due form and the proper fee for the renewal paid not later than 30
days after the expiration of the latest license in the Office of the Department
of Technical Code Enforcement, but if the application is so filed and the fee
is so paid within 30 days from the expiration date of the latest license, then
the renewal license shall be granted without examination. No license shall be
transferable to any other person, firm, partnership or corporation.
(Prior Code, § 5-132) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.06 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to suspend the
license of any electrician or electrical contractor issued under this chapter
for a period of not more than 30 days for a violation of this chapter; and any
person whose license has been suspended may appeal the suspension to the Board
of Commissioners by filing therewith a written request for a hearing within ten
days of the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer’s action. The Board shall
have the power to reverse or affirm the decision appealed from or to
permanently revoke the license.
(Prior Code, § 5-133)
LICENSE EXAMINATION
§ 153.20 BOARD OF ELECTRICIAN EXAMINERS.
   A Board of Electrician Examiners is created and shall consist of the County
Commissioners, the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer and/or his or her
designated representative.
(Prior Code, § 5-136) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.21 EXAMINATION.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or independent contractor desiring to
engage in electrical work within the county is required to first pass an
examination as required by the Board of Examiners concerning their ability,
experience, training and fitness to engage in the line of work. Licenses shall
be issued without examination to applicants who shall have been actively and
continuously engaged in the actual pursuit of the electrical trade for at least
three years immediately preceding the date of adoption of this chapter, which
facts shall be supported by affidavit of the applicant reciting the place or
places and the approximate date or dates when and where the applicant has
pursued the occupation during the three-year period.
   (B)   A current electrician’s license issued the applicant by any city in
the state shall be prima facie evidence of the qualifications of the applicant
to engage in the electrical business. If the person applying for a license is
not qualified for a license, he or she shall employ a licensed electrician at
all times to supervise any work done under the license. The electrician shall
be responsible to the person employing him or her for compliance with this
chapter and will be responsible to the county and to the owner or occupant of
the property jointly with the employer for the compliance with all the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-137) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.22 APPLICATION FOR EXAMINATION.
   Any applicant desiring to take an examination for an electrician’s license,
where the examination is required by this chapter, shall be entitled to the
examination within ten days after the date of filing and perfecting his or her
application in the office of the Department of Technical Code Enforcement.
(Prior Code, § 5-138) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.23 FAILURE TO PASS EXAMINATION.
   In the event of an applicant failing to pass an examination for an
electrician’s license, he or she may, after three months from the filing date
of his or her prior application, apply for another examination as the Chief
Technical Code Enforcement Officer may deem necessary concerning his or her
ability, experience, training and fitness for the line of work.
(Prior Code, § 5-139) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.24 ELECTRICAL FEES.
   Electrical fees shall be those established in §§
150.20 through
150.22.
(Prior Code, § 5-140) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 153.35 SUPERVISION OF INSTALLATION.
   All electrical installations within the county shall be made under the
direct supervision of an electrician duly licensed under the provisions of this
chapter; except that, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting
the actual owner from doing one complete electrical installation or wiring job
per year in a new or existing domicile of all electrical fixtures normally
incident to single-family residential occupancy of the building. The licensing
and inspection provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any person
when the person not engaged in the business of electrical contracting,
regularly employs and maintains an electrical service department to perform
electrical service work and electrical wiring upon his or her own property.
(Prior Code, § 5-145) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.36 REQUIREMENT OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTION.
   Before any electrician, electrical contractor or other person shall complete
the wiring of any building or place located in the county and before the
electrical wiring shall be concealed in conduit or any other manner, the work
shall first be inspected by the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer or his
or her designated representative to determine whether or not the work complies
with the Electrical Code addressed in §
150.06.
(Prior Code, § 5-146) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.37 REINSPECTION AND NOTICE OF DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   The Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designated
representative, shall have authority to periodically make a thorough
reinspection of the installation of all electric wiring, devices, appliances
and equipment that may be installed within the scope of this chapter. When the
installation of any wiring, devices, appliances or equipment is found to be in
a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person owning, using or operating the
equipment shall be notified and shall make the necessary repairs or changes
required to place the wiring, devices, appliances and equipment in safe
condition and the work shall be completed within 15 days or any longer period
specified by the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her
designated representative, in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 5-147) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.38 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   When electrical work, wiring and the like conforms to the requirements
of this chapter, then the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer, or his or
her designated representative, shall give his or her certificate to the person
performing the work. The certificate shall state the description and location
of the building inspected and the date the work is approved. If the work shall
not conform to the provisions of this chapter, then the Chief Technical Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her designated representative shall notify the
person performing the work wherein it fails to conform.
   (B)   If more than two inspections are required, then there shall be an
additional inspection fee of $1 for each additional inspection.
(Prior Code, § 5-148) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.39 FURNISHING ELECTRIC CURRENT.
   No person shall furnish any electric current to any building hereafter wired
for electricity within the county until it has been furnished with a
certificate signed by the Chief Technical Code Enforcement Officer or his or
her designated representative showing that the work conforms to the rules and
requirements established in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-149) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
§ 153.40 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   This chapter shall not relieve any person from liability for damages or
injuries to persons or property because of the installation of any electric
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment; nor shall the county assume any
liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this chapter or the
certificate of approval issued as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-150) (Ord. XIII, passed - -1978)
CHAPTER 154: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
154.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 154.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The county’s Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Res. 2003-02, passed 2-3-2003; Res. 2012-05, passed 6-4-2012)
CHAPTER 155: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Findings and purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   General principles
   
155.04   Enforcement
   
155.05   Site development approval fees
Site Development Approval
   
155.15   Approval required
   
155.16   Application for site development
   
155.17   Submissions
   
155.18   Review and approval
   
155.19   Appeals
   
155.20   Exceptions
   
155.21   Project termination
   
155.22   Expiration of site development approval
   
155.23   Deposit of funds
   
155.24   Stormwater quality management
   
155.25   Stormwater quantity management
Operation and Maintenance Manual
   
155.30   Operation and maintenance manual
Operation Standards and Requirements
   
155.35   Applicability
   
155.36   Responsibility
   
155.37   Procedures and standards adopted by reference
   
155.38   Inspection
   
155.39   Special precautions
   
155.40   Amendment of plans
   
155.41   Project termination
   
155.42   Expiration of site development approval
   
155.43   Review of individual lots within a permitted project
 
   
155.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Findings. The Board of Commissioners of Bartholomew County, Indiana
finds that:
      (1)   Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing
development for certain non-agricultural uses including but not limited to the
construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings, and industrial plants,
the building of roads and streets, and the creation of recreational facilities;
      (2)   Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to
pollute and silt rivers, streams, ponds, lakes, and reservoirs;
      (3)   Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for the most
beneficial purposes and has resulted in the deterioration of the water
resources of the county;
      (4)   Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in
increased chances of flooding at risk to public health and safety;
      (5)   Adopting standards, criteria and procedures contained in this
chapter and implementing the same will address many of the detrimental effects
associated with land development;
      (6)   Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the
soils and topography of the county as well as the public health, safety and
welfare; and
      (7)   The county has the authority to adopt an erosion and sediment
control ordinance pursuant to I.C. 36-9-23-1 et seq., by home rule and further
as required by Phase II of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Stormwater program (40 C.F.R. Parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; December 8, 1999)
authorized by the 1987 amendments to the Clean Water Act, the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management's (IDEM) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) General Permit (MS4 GP), and the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management's Construction Stormwater General Permit (CSGP).
   (B)   Purpose. The Board of Commissioners of the county hereby declares that
the purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum erosion and sediment
control and pollution prevention requirements to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety and welfare of the public by guiding, regulating and
controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or
other land altering activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise
results in the movement of earth within the defined boundaries of the county
and as specified herein.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS. Tillage, planting, cultivation, or harvesting
operations to produce agricultural or nursery vegetative crops. The term also
includes pasture renovation and establishment, the construction of agricultural
conservation practices, and the installation and maintenance of agricultural
drainage tile. The term does not include land disturbing activities for the
construction of agricultural related facilities, such as:
      (1)   Barns;
      (2)   Buildings to house livestock;
      (3)   Agricultural waste lagoons and facilities;
      (4)   Lakes and ponds;
      (5)   Wetlands; and
      (6)   Other infrastructure.
   APPLICANT. Any person who seeks or is granted site development approval
which is on behalf of and who is a representative of the owner of the project
and/or the project site.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the County Department of Technical Code
Enforcement for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or
building.
   CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests
required have been performed by a qualified professional and that the tests
comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land-disturbing activities and land-disturbing
activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and structures.
This term does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor
landscaping projects.
   CONSTRUCTION SUPPORT ACTIVITY. An activity that specifically supports the
project and involves land disturbance and/or activities that may result in
pollutant generation activities on their own. These activities include but are
not limited to, concrete or asphalt batch plants, staging areas, material
storage areas, disposal sites and soil stockpile areas.
   COUNTY. Bartholomew County, Indiana.
   DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT. A land alteration that requires, pursuant to state
law or local ordinance, the approval of a site plan, plat, special land use,
planned unit development, rezoning of land, land division approval, private
road approval or other approvals, required for the construction of land or the
erection of buildings or structures; provided, however, that, for purposes of
this chapter only, developed or development shall not include the actual
construction of, or an addition, extension or modification to, an individual
single-family or a two-family detached dwelling.
   DEVELOPER. Any person financially responsible for construction activity; or
an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or lease, any lots
in a multiple lot project.
   DEVELOPMENT SITE. Any land that is being or has been developed or that a
developer proposes for development.
   DRAINAGEWAY. The area within which surface water or ground water is carried
from one part of a lot or property to another part of the lot or property or to
adjacent land.
   ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT. The County Highway Engineer, a staff member of the
Engineering Department for the county or a designee of the County Highway
Engineer.
   EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved by
humans to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   GRADING. The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired slope or
elevation.
   IDEM. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   INDIANA STORM-WATER QUALITY MANUAL. The state document used for guidance for
means and methods of acceptable erosion and sediment control within the state.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. The roads, bridges, streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary and
storm sewers, water mains, gas mains, electrical supply lines and communication
lines which supply the structures of a development with transportation means
and utilities.
   LAND ALTERATION.
      (1)   Any action taken relative to land which either:
         (a)   Removes the natural ground cover;
         (b)   Changes the existing elevation;
         (c)   Increases the runoff rate;
         (d)   Decreases the rate at which water is absorbed;
         (e)   Changes the drainage pattern;
         (f)   Creates or changes a drainage facility;
         (g)   Involves construction, enlargement or location of any building
on a permanent foundation; or
         (h)   Creates an impoundment.
      (2)   LAND ALTERATION includes (by way of example and not of limitation)
terracing, grading, excavating, constructing earthwork, draining, installing
drainage tile, filling and paving.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any manmade change of the land surface, including
removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil, excavating,
filling, transporting, and grading.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT or SALE. A plan, undertaken by a single
project site owner or a group of project site owners acting in concert, to
offer lots for sale or lease; where such land is contiguous, or is known,
designated, purchased, or advertised as a common unit or by a common name, such
land must be presumed as being offered for sale or lease as part of a larger
common plan. The term also includes phased or other construction activity by a
single entity for its own use.
   MAJOR AMENDMENT. A change in the project scope that will increase the
disturbed area 20% or more or extend the construction limits as described in
the original permit.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. As defined in Chapter 156 of this code.
   MINOR AMENDMENT. A change in the project scope that will increase the
disturbed areas less than 20% and will not extend the construction limits as
described in the original permit.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, which is:
      (1)   Owned or operated by a federal, state, city, town, county,
district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state
law) having jurisdiction over stormwater, including special districts under
state law such as a sewer district, flood control district, or drainage
district, or similar entity, or a designated and approved management agency
under § 208 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1288) that discharges into
waters of the state; or privately owned stormwater utility, hospital,
university, or college having jurisdiction over stormwater that discharges into
waters of the state;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at
40 C.F.R. § 122.2.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) DEPARTMENT. The Bartholomew
County MS4 Operator, a staff member of the MS4 Department or a designee of the
MS4 Operator.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). A permit issued by
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or IDEM that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the penuit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
   NATURAL BUFFER. An undisturbed area adjacent to, or surrounding surface
waters within which construction activity is restricted. A natural buffer may
include natural vegetation, exposed rock, overflow channels, or barren earth
that existed prior to land-disturbing activities.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). A written notification from the project site owner
sent to IDEM and to Bartholomew County at least 48 hours prior to initiating
construction activities at the construction site.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT) LETTER. A written notification from the project
site owner to IDEM and to Bartholomew County that the construction activities
for a site have been terminated and have met the requirements of this chapter.
   OWNER. The person required to submit an NOI under the CSGP and includes the
following entities: a developer, or a person who has financial and operational
control of construction activities, project plans and specifications, and the
ability to modify or cause modification of project plans and specifications.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state
and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America,
its agencies and instrumentalities, and the agent, servant, officer or employee
of any of the foregoing,
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes; yard wastes; refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter, and floatables; pesticides; herbicides; fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, effluent, fecal coliform, E. coli and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues
that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
   PROPERTY. All contiguous land in one ownership.
   REMOVAL. Cutting to the ground, complete extraction or killing by spraying
of vegetation or stumps.
   REPRESENTATIVE. The authorized representative of the MS4 Department assigned
to make detailed observation of contract performance.
   SEDIMENT. Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.
   SEDIMENTATION. The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated sediment
carried by stormwater runoff.
   SITE. A property where land-altering activity is proposed or taking place.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. Documented confirmation by the county for the
construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff and grading.
   SITE PLAN. An exhibit required to obtain a building permit from the
Columbus/Bartholomew County Department of Code Enforcement, also known as a
CONSTRUCTION STAKE OUT DRAWING or PROPOSED POT PLAN.
   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A document, which describes
the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to
identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, MS4 and/or receiving
waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   STRIP DEVELOPMENT. A multi-lot project where building lots front on an
existing road and are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
   STRUCTURE. Any construction that provides protection from weather for the
human activities of work, storage, habitation or recreation. It can also mean a
feature or part of infrastructure.
   UNIMPROVED LOT. A lot that has infrastructure brought close enough to its
boundary that could allow structures to be built for human work, storage,
habitation or recreation and has not been improved with structures for human
work, storage, habitation or recreation.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.03 GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   It is the objective of this chapter to control pollution, soil erosion
and sedimentation caused by land disturbing activities within the county.
Measures taken to control erosion and sedimentation shall be adequate to assure
that pollutants and sediment is not transported from the site by a storm event.
The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the
county's jurisdiction and the preparation of the submissions required under §§
155.15 through
155.25.
   (B)   Development should be related to the existing topography and soils of
the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes
where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible,
and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
   (C)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left unaltered
wherever possible.
   (D)   Topsoil shall be preserved, unless infeasible.
   (E)   Existing natural buffers that are adjacent to waters of the state
shall be preserved to promote infiltration and provide protection of the water
resource, unless infeasible. Activities performed by a county drainage board
under I.C. 36-9-27 are excluded.
      (1)   Natural buffers shall be preserved, including the entire buffer
bordering and/or surrounding the water resource. Existing buffers:
         (a)   50 feet or more in width shall be preserved to a minimum of 50
feet.
         (b)   Less than 50 feet in width shall be preserved in their entirety
and may be enhanced with vegetation that is native and promotes ecological
improvement and sustainability.
      (2)   Runoff directed to the natural buffer shall be:
         (a)   Treated with appropriate erosion and sediment control measures
prior to discharging to the buffer.
         (b)   Managed with appropriate runoff control measures to prevent
erosion from occurring within the buffer area.
      (3)   Further information regarding CSGP buffer requirements is contained
in IDEM's “Implementation of Buffers” guidance document.
   (F)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   (G)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff
waters from land altering activity or development.
   (H)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved.
   (I)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
   (J)   Provisions should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant
velocities of discharge will not create additional erosion.
   (K)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during development.
   (L)   Post construction measures should be considered for their ability to
provide long-term reduction in associated pollutant loading and flow rate of
the waterways.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Written deficiency notice.
      (1)   If land disturbance activities are conducted contrary to the
provisions of this chapter or accepted plans approved during review of the
SWPPP, the county may notify the project site owner in writing of the
deficiencies.
      (2)   If the deficiencies are not resolved 72 hours after receipt of the
written notice, a written notice of violation shall be issued and served on any
person engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done.
   (B)   Notice of violation.
      (1)   Whenever the county or their designee finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
county may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description
of the property for identification and include a statement of the violation(s)
and why the notice is being issued. The notice of violation shall provide at
least ten days to bring the property into compliance.
      (3)   If abatement of violation and/or restoration of affected property
is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration shall be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the county and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
   (C)   Stop work order.
      (1)   In the event that any person holding site development approval
pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the approval or implements site
development in a manner as to materially and adversely affect the health,
welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or
development site or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the county may
suspend or revoke the site development approval by issuing a stop-work order.
      (2)   The stop-work order shall be served upon any person engaged in the
accomplishment of the construction activity. The construction activity so
affected shall be stopped forthwith and until a future time as authorization to
resume work is granted by the Engineering Department.
   (D)   Show cause hearing. At any time, a show cause hearing may be ordered
if this protocol is unclear or inadequate to address specific violations.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.05 SITE DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL FEES.
   (A)   Application processing fee. The application processing fee for the
applicant’s site development plan review shall be $50.
   (B)   Plan review and inspection fee. The applicant's plan review and
inspection fees will be based upon the then-current hourly rate of the reviewer
and/or inspector/consultant retained by the MS4 Department.
      (1)   The review fee will be billed to the application prior to final
site development approval. Final approval will not be granted until the fee is
paid in full.
      (2)   Inspection fees will be billed to the application following each
inspection and due within 15 days.
   (C)   Time period for application review. The time period for application
review shall be as follows:
      (1)   Sites of less than five acres will be reviewed within ten working
days of receipt by the MS4 Department of the completed site review application
packet.
      (2)   Sites of five acres or more will be reviewed within 14 working days
of receipt by the MS4 Department of the completed site review application
packet.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
SITE DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL
§ 155.15 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   Site development approval is required from the MS4 Department for major
subdivisions; site plan reviews not part of a major subdivision with current
site development approval; building permits for sites disturbing more than one
acre that are not part of a major subdivision or site plan review with current
site development approval.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020)
§ 155.16 APPLICATION FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall be granted a building permit for site development for
land-disturbing activity requiring coverage under the CSGP without submittal of
a completed CSGP and construction water quality application for review and
inspection and the approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
by the county.
   (B)   Submittal shall be in electronic formats unless hard copies are
requested by the county.
   (C)   Submittal of notice of intent (NOI) to IDEM shall be completed by the
owner following approval of the SWPPP by the county. The initiation of
construction activity prior to approval and NOI submittal is a violation and
subject to enforcement action. Upon submittal of the NOI, the applicant shall
submit the IDEM Notice of Sufficiency (NOS) to the county and notify the county
of the start date for construction at least 48 hours in advance of
construction.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.17 SUBMISSIONS.
    The NOI for the county and the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan are to
be submitted to the county at: MS4 Department, 785 South Marr Road, Columbus,
Indiana 47201.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020)
§ 155.18 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   Each application for site development approval shall be reviewed and acted
upon according to the following procedures.
   (A)   Construction plans shall be received by the MS4 Department for review
by the MS4 Department and/or the consultant retained by the MS4 Department, and
the review and inspection fees will be remanded to the storm sewer operating
account numbered 101019319.
   (B)   After the county receives an application, a preliminary determination
will be made whether the application is substantially complete within ten days
(for projects at least one acre by less than five acres) or within 14 days (for
projects greater than or equal to five acres). If the application is deemed
insufficient, the following actions will be taken:
      (1)   The submittal is complete and sufficient pursuant to §§
155.35 through
155.43 and direct the specific review of the submittal; or
      (2)   The submittal is deficient and lacks information pursuant to §§
155.35 through
155.43 and therefore cannot be adequately reviewed; at which time:
         (a)   The applicant will receive written notice of those specific
deficiencies of the submittal; and/or
         (b)   The applicant will be invited to meet with the county or its
qualified representative to discuss specific deficiencies of the submittal.
   (C)   Upon completion of a review, the applicant shall be notified in
writing that the submitted construction plan:
      (1)   Fulfills the requirements of this chapter and constitutes site
development approval so long as an NOI is submitted to the MS4 Department and
IDEM at least forty-eight hours prior to commencement of construction
activities; or
      (2)   Does not meet the requirements of this chapter and therefore
requires revisions prior to SWPPP approval.
   (D)   The applicant may not submit the NOI to IDEM or commence land-
disturbing activities until the SWPPP is approved. The initiation of
construction activity prior to approval is a violation and subject to
enforcement action. Upon submittal of the NOI, the applicant shall submit the
IDEM Notice of Sufficiency (NOS) to the county and notify the county of the
start date for construction at least 48 hours in advance of construction.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.19 APPEALS.
    The applicant, or any person or agency which receives notice of the filing
of the application, may appeal the decision of the MS4 Department as provided
in § 155.18(C) to the Board of County Commissioners. Upon receipt of an appeal,
the County Commissioners shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after
providing the applicant a minimum 15 days' notice thereof. The County
Commissioners shall give the notice of the public hearing, as it deems
necessary and appropriate. The County Commissioners shall hear evidence at the
hearing and render a decision within 30 days after the hearing. Factors to be
considered on review shall include, but need not be limited to, the effects of
the proposed development activities on the surface water flow to tributary and
downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management plans, or the use of
any retention facilities; possible situation of fill and unsupported cuts by
water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion
and silting of drainageways; nature and type of soil or rock which when
disturbed by the proposed development activities may create earth movement and
produce slopes that cannot be landscaped.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.20 EXCEPTIONS.
   Site development approval shall not be required for any of the following:
   (A)   Development of a site of less than one acre upon which no more than
one residential structure is to be built, or no more than one commercial or
industrial structure is to be built; provided that, the person responsible for
any development shall implement necessary erosion and sedimentation control
measures to satisfy the principles set forth in §
155.03, and the county reserves the right to require the site development
techniques as will insure satisfactory erosion and sedimentation control at
locations as determined by the MS4 Department representative.
   (B)   Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation
measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Soil and Water
Conservation District and including the construction of agricultural
structures.
   (C)   Installation, renovation or replacement of a sewer line, waterline or
septic system to serve an existing structure pursuant to the prior approval of
the County Health Department.
   (D)   Installation, renovation or replacement of utility lines and
appurtenances to serve an existing structure.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020)
§ 155.21 PROJECT TERMINATION.
   (A)   The project site applicant shall submit a notice of termination (NOT)
letter to the MS4 Department in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), the project site owner shall
submit a NOT letter when the following conditions have been met:
         (a)   All land altering activities, including construction on all
building lots has been completed and the entire site has been stabilized at 70%
density of vegetation coverage;
         (b)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been
removed; and
         (c)   The county has provided a final site inspection report to the
applicant.
      (2)   The project site applicant may submit a NOT letter to obtain early
release from compliance with this subchapter if the following conditions are
met:
         (a)   The remaining, unimproved acreage does not exceed five acres,
with contiguous areas not to exceed one acre;
         (b)   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all remaining
unimproved lots is attached to the NOT letter. The map must be accompanied by a
list of names and addresses of individual lot operators of all unimproved lots;
         (c)   All public and common improvements, including infrastructure,
have been completed and permanently stabilized and all public improvements have
been transferred to the county;
         (d)   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat to the
integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties, or water quality; and
         (e)   All permanent stormwater quality measures have been implemented
and are operational.
   (B)   The NOT letter must contain a verified statement that each of the
conditions in this subchapter have been met.
   (C)   Following acceptance of the NOT letter and written approval from the
county for early release under division (A), the project owner shall notify all
current individual lot owners and subsequent individual lot owners of the
requirement to:
      (1)   Install and maintain appropriate measures to prevent sediment from
leaving the individual building lot; and
      (2)   Maintain all pollution, erosion and sediment measures that are to
remain on-site as part of the construction plan.
   (D)   After a verified NOT letter has been submitted for a project site,
maintenance of the remaining stormwater quality measures shall be the
responsibility of the individual lot owner or occupier of the property.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.22 EXPIRATION OF SITE DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.
   The expiration of a site development approval shall be consistent with and
engender the spirit of I.C. 36-7-4-1109. This may be overridden by the MS4
Department or Planning Director if there is a declared emergency by either
responsible part or an approved county official. Source is I.C. 36-7-4-1109(2).
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.23 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   All fees collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited in the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Fund.
(Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.24 STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   All stormwater quality control measures necessary to comply with this
chapter shall be implemented in accordance with the construction plan and
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the CSGP. The post-construction
measures shall be selected based on correct sizing to address the Water Quality
Volume (WQv) or water quality flow rate to ensure compliance with 327 I.A.C. 2-
1-6(a)(1)(A-D) and 327 I.A.C. 2-1.5-8(a) and 327 I.A.C. 2-15-8(b)(1)(A-D).
Selected post-construction measures shall provide 80% total suspended solids
(TSS) removal. Refer to the City of Columbus Stormwater Design Manual for water
quality calculations and removal requirements. Additional requirements include
the following:
      (1)   Any fueling area, publicly or privately owned, that installs or
replaces fuel tanks, regardless of size of disturbance, shall install
appropriate post-construction stormwater quality treatment measures to reduce
lead, copper, zinc and polyaromatic hydrocarbons in stormwater runoff.
Treatment shall include the water quality volume or flowrate;
      (2)   Class V injection wells shall be registered with EPA Region 5; and
      (3)   All required submittals listed on the county's stormwater permit
checklist (available from the county).
   (B)   In combination with proper post-construction measure selection, design
and development strategies may be selected and incorporated into the plan to
minimize the discharge of pollutants. These strategies may include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Low impact development and green infrastructure; and
      (2)   Infiltration measures, when selected, shall take into consideration
the pollutants associated with run-off and the potential to contaminate ground
water resources. When there is a potential for contamination, alternative
measures or measures that pre-treat runoff to remove and capture pollutants of
concern shall be used.
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.25 STORMWATER QUANTITY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   All stormwater quantity control measures necessary to comply with this
chapter shall be implemented in accordance with the construction plan and
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the CSGP. The post-development run-
off discharge from the project site shall not exceed the pre-development
discharge based on the two-year, ten-year, and 100-year peak storm events.
Refer to the LTAP Indiana Stormwater Drainage Manual for stormwater design
methods.
   (B)   Submit all required components listed on the county's stormwater
permit checklist (available from the county).
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE MANUAL
§ 155.30 OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE MANUAL.
   (A)   Stormwater management facilities including pipes, structures, ponds,
detention/retention facilities, swales, open channels, subsurface drains, water
quality BMPs, and low impact development practices shall have an O and M
manual. The O and M manual shall be submitted with the permit application.
   (B)   The O and M manual shall include maintenance of all ponds, stormwater
components, and low-impact development facilities/BMPs. Owners will be
responsible for inspection and maintenance. It is the plan designer's
responsibility to determine which operation and maintenance measures are
necessary to prolong the optimal function of the facility. Refer to federal or
state approved guidance when developing an O and M Manual.
   (C)   The O and M manual shall be signed by the property owner and recorded
with the property by the County Recorder's office.
   (D)   Submit all required components listed on the county's stormwater
permit checklist (available from the county).
(Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.35 APPLICABILITY.
    All grading, stripping, excavating and filling which is subject to the site
development approval requirements of this chapter, and any grading, stripping,
excavating and filling falling under §
155.22 shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth
in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.36 RESPONSIBILITY.
    The applicant shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons
or property otherwise imposed by law, and the county or the MS4 Department will
not be made liable for such damage, by:
   (A)   Issuance of a site development approval under this chapter;
   (B)   Compliance with the provisions of that site development approval or
with conditions attached to it by the county;
   (C)   Failure of the county officials to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions;
   (D)   Failure of county officials to recommend denial of or to deny a site
development approval; or
   (E)   Exemptions from the site development approval requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.37 PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   IDEM CSGP § 3.0 for general requirements on stormwater quality
control;
   (B)   IDEM CSGP § 3.8 for general requirements of individual building lots
within an approved project;
   (C)   IDEM CSGP § 3.9 for requirements for single family residences and
ponds that are not part of a larger common plan of development;
   (D)   The Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual approved by the state; and
   (E)   The City of Columbus Stormwater Design Manual for stormwater quality
and stormwater quantity calculations.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.38 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The MS4 Department may inspect any project site involved in
construction activities regulated by this chapter at any time. The county or
its designated representatives may make recommendations to the project site
owner or their representatives to install appropriate measures beyond those
specified in the SWPPP and schedule to achieve compliance.
   (B)   The permit holder or his or her agent shall make regular inspections
of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on
the approved SWPPP and construction plans and in accordance with the IDEM CSGP
§ 3.6. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall
effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures.
All inspections shall be documented in written form and provided to the county
within 48 hours of request.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2020-05, passed 9-28-2020; Ord. 2024-07,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.39 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the county
determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that further work
authorized by an existing site development approval is likely to imperil any
property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the county may
require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that reasonable
special precautions be taken as is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood
of the peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, a
more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials for
erosion control, and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or
engineering geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
   (B)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on
any development site is not complete, work may be stopped as described in §
155.04 and the applicant required to install temporary structures or take other
measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety.
On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the county may
specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that
the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of
protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.40 AMENDMENT OF PLANS.
   (A)   Amendments to the SWPPP are required when:
      (1)   The disturbed area increases;
      (2)   The construction limits change to include areas outside of the
original construction limits; and
      (3)   The applicant wishes to modify the SWPPP.
   (B)   Major amendments shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the
same manner as the original plans.
   (C)   Minor amendments may be approved by written authorization to the
applicant.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.41 PROJECT TERMINATION.
   (A)   The project site applicant shall plan an orderly and timely
termination of the construction activities, including the implementation of
storm water quality measures that are to remain on the project site.
   (B)   The project site applicant shall submit a notice of termination (NOT)
letter to the Engineering Department in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, the project site owner
shall submit an NOT letter when the following conditions have been met:
         (a)   All land altering activities, including construction on all
building lots, has been completed and the entire site has been stabilized; and
         (b)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been
removed.
      (2)   The project site applicant may submit an NOT letter to obtain early
release from compliance with this chapter if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The remaining, unimproved acreage does not exceed five acres,
with contiguous areas not to exceed one acre;
         (b)   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all remaining
unimproved lots, is attached to the NOT letter. The map must be accompanied by
a list of names and addresses of individual lot owners or individual lot
operators of all unimproved lots;
         (c)   All public and common improvements, including infrastructure,
have been completed and permanently stabilized and all public improvements have
been transferred to the county;
         (d)   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat to the
integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties or water quality; and
         (e)   All permanent storm water quality measures have been implemented
and are operational.
   (C)   The NOT letter must contain a verified statement that each of the
conditions in division (B) above have been met.
   (D)   Following acceptance of the NOT letter and written approval from the
county for early release under division (B) above, the project site owner shall
notify all current individual lot owners and all subsequent individual lot
owners of the requirements to:
      (1)   Install and maintain appropriate measures to prevent sediment from
leaving the individual building lot; and
      (2)   Maintain all erosion and sediment control measures that are to
remain on-site as part of the construction plan.
   (E)   The Engineer or Engineer’s representative may inspect the project site
to evaluate the adequacy of the remaining storm water quality measures and
compliance with the NOT letter requirements. If the inspecting entity finds
that the applicant has sufficiently filed a NOT letter, the inspecting entity
shall forward notification to IDEM, and the applicant shall no longer be
responsible for compliance with this chapter.
   (F)   After a verified NOT letter has been submitted for a project site,
maintenance of the remaining storm water quality measures shall be the
responsibility of the individual lot owner or occupier of the property.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008)
§ 155.42 EXPIRATION OF SITE DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.
   The expiration of a site development approval shall be consistent with and
engender the spirit of I.C. 36-7-4-1109. This may be overridden by the County
Engineer or Planning Director if there is a declared emergency by either
responsible party or an approved county official. Source is I.C. 36-7-4-1109
(2).
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.43 REVIEW OF INDIVIDUAL LOTS WITHIN A PERMITTED PROJECT.
   (A)   For individual lots disturbing or impacting less than one acre,
developed within a larger permitted project, a formal review and issuance of an
individual site plan will be required before a building permit can be issued.
All stormwater management measures necessary to comply with this chapter must
be implemented in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan.
   (B)   In addition to other requirements of the Columbus/Bartholomew County
Department of Technical Code Enforcement, the following information must be
submitted to this Department, for review and acceptance, by the individual lot
operator, whether owning the property or acting as the agent of the property
owner, as part of a request for review and issuance of an individual site plan
that must be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   (C)   SWPPP that, at a minimum, includes the following measures;
      (1)   Installation and maintenance of a stable construction site access;
      (2)   Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter erosion and
sediment control measures prior to land disturbance;
      (3)   Minimization of sediment discharge and tracking from the lot;
      (4)   Clean up of sediment that is either tracked or washed onto roads.
Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area with water.
Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in
compliance with all applicable statutes and rules;
      (5)   Adjacent lots disturbed by and individual lot operator must be
repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface stabilization;
      (6)   Certification of compliance stating that the individual lot plan is
consistent with the stormwater management permit, as approved by the County
Engineer for the larger project; and
      (7)   Name, address and telephone number, of the individual in charge of
the stormwater management measures for the project site.
   (D)   The individual lot operator is responsible for installation and
maintenance of all pollution, erosion and sediment control measures until the
site is stabilized.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any terms of this chapter. Occupancy certificates and building permits shall
not be issued in a development in which the holder of the site development
approval is found to be in violation of this chapter. Any person, partnership
or corporation found to be in violation of this chapter may be fined $50 per
day per offence. All fines collected will be remanded to the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Fund. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this
chapter, if the Board of Commissioners or the Engineering Department identifies
violations of this chapter, the Board or Department shall give a five-day
written notice to the applicant to bring the site into compliance. The notice
shall be served by registered mail addressed to the applicant. If the applicant
shall fail to bring the site into compliance within the time prescribed, after
receiving the notice, then the Board of County Commissioners shall proceed to
bring the site into compliance. The County Auditor shall make a certified
statement of the actual cost incurred by the county to bring the site into
compliance. The statement shall be delivered to the applicant by registered
mail and the applicant shall pay the amount due to the County Clerk. If the
applicant fails to pay the amount within ten days after receiving the
statement, a certified copy of the statement of costs shall be filed in the
office of the Auditor of the county. The Auditor of the county shall place the
amount claimed on the tax duplicate against the property affected by the work
and the amount shall be collected as taxes are collected and shall be disbursed
to the County Clerk who shall deposit the funds in the account from which the
funds were expended.
(Ord. 2008-07, passed 5-5-2008; Ord. 2024-07, passed 6-3-2024)
CHAPTER 156: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Authority
   
156.002   Purpose
   
156.003   Code compliance required
   
156.004   Minimum standards
   
156.005   Compliance required for permit issuance
   
156.006   Definitions
Administrative and Agricultural Subdivisions
   
156.020   Administrative subdivisions
   
156.021   Agricultural subdivisions
Minor Subdivisions
   
156.035   General
   
156.036   Conditions of eligibility
   
156.037   Primary approval
   
156.038   Secondary approval
   
156.039   Minor subdivisions with agricultural remainders
   
156.040   Review procedure
Major Subdivisions
   
156.055   General
   
156.056   Sketch plan
   
156.057   Primary approval
   
156.058   Secondary approval
   
156.059   Major subdivisions with agricultural remainders
   
156.060   Phases
Commercial, Industrial and Multi-Family Subdivisions
   
156.075   General
   
156.076   Classification
   
156.077   Required submission materials
Design Principles and Standards
   
156.090   General
   
156.091   Land suitability
   
156.092   Streets
   
156.093   Blocks
   
156.094   Utility parcels
   
156.095   Lots
   
156.096   Easements and reserved right-of-way corridors
   
156.097   Drainage
   
156.098   Miscellaneous requirements
   
156.099   Commercial, industrial and multi-family subdivisions
Improvements and Installations
   
156.110   General
   
156.111   Monuments and markers
   
156.112   Street improvements and construction
   
156.113   Sidewalks and wheelchair ramps
   
156.114   Drainage system
   
156.115   Water
   
156.116   Sewage
   
156.117   Soil preservation, grading and seeding
   
156.118   Other installations
Road Improvement; Minimum Requirements
   
156.130   General
   
156.131   Increased requirements
   
156.132   Standard specifications
   
156.133   Roadway standards
   
156.134   Ditches
   
156.135   Curbs and gutters
   
156.136   Traffic control
   
156.137   Culverts
   
156.138   Guard rails
   
156.139   Construction signs and barricades
Certificates and Notations
   
156.150   General
   
156.151   Surveyor’s certificate
   
156.152   Owner’s certificate
   
156.153   Primary approval certificate
   
156.154   Secondary approval certificate
   
156.155   Administrative subdivision approval certificate
   
156.156   Agricultural subdivision approval certificate
   
156.157   Improvement plans certificate
   
156.158   Board of County Commissioners certificate
   
156.159   Auditor’s certificate
   
156.160   Recorder’s certificate
   
156.161   Dedication certificate
Surveys and Preparation of Plats
   
156.175   General
   
156.176   Drafting
   
156.177   Surveys
   
156.178   Monuments and markers
Review Procedure
   
156.190   General
   
156.191   Discussion with staff
   
156.192   Agricultural and administrative subdivisions
   
156.193   Minor subdivisions
   
156.194   Major subdivisions
   
156.195   Resubdivision of land
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.205   General
   
156.206   Modifications
   
156.207   Preparation and certification of plats and surveys
   
156.208   Subdivision improvement agreement and financial guarantee
   
156.209   Preconstruction and construction inspections
   
156.210   Maintenance guarantees
   
156.211   As-built plans
   
156.212   Acceptance of improvements
   
156.213   Secondary approval
   
156.214   Administrative approval
   
156.215   Amendment
   
156.216   Plat validity
   
156.217   Revision of plat after approval
   
156.218   Record of plats
   
156.219   Sale of land within subdivisions
   
156.220   Severability
   
156.221   Fees
   
156.222   Interpretation
   
156.223   Appeal
 
   
156.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authorizes the planning and regulation of real property by platting or
subdividing, see I.C. 36-7-2-2
   Enabling legislation in this area, see I.C. 36-7-4-700
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-700, Subdivision Control,
and any amendments thereto. In accordance with the provisions of the statute,
the County Plan Commission (hereinafter called “Commission”) has exclusive
control over the approval of plats and replats involving unincorporated land
within the county.
(Prior Code, § 8-1) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the county;
   (B)   To guide the future development of the county in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and any related policies;
   (C)   To provide for the safety, comfort and soundness of the built
environment and related open spaces;
   (D)   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability and
orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards;
   (E)   To ensure that adequate public facilities will be provided in
conjunction with new development; and
   (F)   To supply proper land boundary records:
      (1)   To provide for the survey, documentation and permanent
monumentation of land boundaries of property;
      (2)   To provide for identification of property; and
      (3)   To provide public access to land boundary records.
(Prior Code, § 8-2) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.003 CODE COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   All land subdivided or platted under the terms of this chapter shall comply
with the minimum standards prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance of current
adoption. The Commission shall not have the authority to approve any
subdivision which does not comply with the chapter. For subdivisions of land
within the zoning jurisdiction of another unit of government, the zoning laws
of the unit having the jurisdiction shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 8-3) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.004 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The standards contained in this chapter and in the Zoning Ordinance are
minimum standards. In any case where another chapter contains stricter or more
stringent standards than those contained in this chapter, the stricter
standards shall apply. The Commission may require stricter standards when, in
the opinion of the Commission, those stricter standards are needed to fulfill
the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-4) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.005 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   No building permit, improvement location permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for, nor any improvements be commenced upon, any parcel of land
which was created by subdivision after the effective date of and not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No land shall be sold, leased
or offered for sale or lease unless it is in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. No road shall be laid out or constructed unless it is consistent
with the County Thoroughfare Plan and/or has been approved by the Commission as
part of a subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 8-5) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS POINT. A driveway or other means of physical connection for the
movement of vehicles between a property and an adjacent property, street or
road.
   ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS. The owners of property contiguous to the subject
property, excluding those who are also the owners of the subject property,
ignoring all intervening streams, street and railroad rights-of-way and other
similar features.
   AGRICULTURAL PURPOSE.  Farming, dairying, pasturing, agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, and animal and poultry husbandry.
   AGRICULTURAL REMAINDER. The portion of the parent tract that remains as the
result of an administrative subdivision by which a new lot(s) for an existing
home has been created. The building rights are transferred to the new
administrative lot created, leaving the AGRICULTURAL REMAINDER unbuildable. The
remainder does not have to be surveyed, but must have an agriculture affidavit.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACT. A tract created only through the agricultural
subdivision process (possibly combined with an administrative or minor
subdivision on the same property) only for agriculture purposes and is
therefore unbuildable. The tract does not have to be surveyed, but must have an
agriculture affidavit.
   ALLEY.  A public or private way primarily designed to provide vehicle access
to the side or rear of those properties which have their principal frontage and
pedestrian access on a street.
   APPLICANT.  See PETITIONER .
   APPROVAL, ADMINISTRATIVE. An approval granted to an administrative or
agricultural subdivision by the Planning Director indicating that the
subdivision complies with the applicable standards.
   APPROVAL, PRIMARY.  An approval (or approval with conditions) granted to a
subdivision by the Commission indicating that it has determined that the
subdivision complies with the applicable standards.
   APPROVAL, SECONDARY.  An approval by the official designated by the
Commission indicating that all conditions of primary approval and other
applicable standards have been met.
   BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN PLAN. The part of the comprehensive plan, now or
hereafter adopted, which includes a roadmap for the creation of a system of
bicycle and pedestrian facilities providing access to and connectivity between
all areas of the City of Columbus and/or Bartholomew County.
   BLOCK.  Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the two
nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersection of intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or
other definite barrier.
   BOARD. The Board of Public Works and Safety of Columbus, Indiana, for the
City of Columbus jurisdiction and the Board of Commissioners of Bartholomew
County for the Bartholomew County jurisdiction.
   BOARD OF HEALTH. The Indiana State Board of Health.
   CHORD BEARING. The bearing from the start point of the curve to the end
point of the curve.
   CHORD DISTANCE.  The distance of a line that links two points on a curve.
   CITY ENGINEER.  The City of Columbus City Engineer.
   CITY.  The City of Columbus, Indiana.
   CLOSURE.  The process of measurement in a closed figure for a check on
horizontal or vertical precision.
   COLUMBUS CITY UTILITIES.  The Columbus City Sewer and Water Utilities
Department primarily serving properties within the City of Columbus.
   COMMISSION.  The Columbus Plan Commission or the Bartholomew County Plan
Commission, with authority for the jurisdiction in which the subdivision is
located.
   COMMON AREA. Land within a development which is not individually owned or
dedicated to the public, but which is designed and intended for the use,
enjoyment, and maintenance of the property owners within that development or
other specific area.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A document, consistent with the requirements of the
Indiana Code, which is a compilation of policy statements, goals and
objectives, standards, maps, and statistical data for the physical, social, and
economic development of the community.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. Also referred to as improvement plans. Any maps or
drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and
design of improvements to be installed for the subdivision in accordance with
the applicable standards and as a condition of the approval of the plat.
   COST ESTIMATE.  An exhibit in association with construction plans that
provides a detailed cost estimate of the individual improvements as required
for a major subdivision.
   COUNTY. Bartholomew County, Indiana.
   COUNTY ENGINEER. The Bartholomew County Highway Engineer.
   COUNTY SURVEYOR. The Bartholomew County Surveyor.
   COVENANT.  A private agreement between property owners which places a
restriction on the development of land through a written, recorded document.
   CUL-DE-SAC.  A street or road with a single common ingress and egress and
with a circular turnaround at the end.
   CURVE. A line or outline that gradually deviates from being straight for
some or all of its length.
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Columbus - Bartholomew County Planning Department or
any agency officially designated as a successor thereto.
   DRAINAGE BOARD. The Bartholomew County Drainage Board.
   DRAINAGE SWALE.  A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface water
from a field, diversion or other site feature.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Any combination of surface and/or subsurface drainage
components fulfilling the drainage requirements of this chapter.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner, for the use by another person or
entity, of any designated part of their property for a clearly specific
purpose.
   EASEMENT, ACCESS. An easement which provides access to lots, tracts or
parcels of land across an adjoining parcel or parcels.
   EASEMENT, DRAINAGE.  An easement granted for the purpose of maintaining
drainage. The DRAINAGE EASEMENT may include a culvert or drain which feeds into
a drainage system or for drainage of runoff over an area of the property.
   EASEMENT, LANDSCAPE. An easement used specifically for the installation and
maintenance of a required landscape buffer. See LANDSCAPE BUFFER .
   EASEMENT, PEDESTRIAN. An easement used specifically for the purpose of
providing a public sidewalk or other pedestrian facility that could not be
located in the public right-of-way.
   EASEMENT, STREET TREE. An easement used specifically for the installation
and maintenance of required street trees that could not be planted in the
public right-of-way due to substantial conflicts.
   EASEMENT, UTILITY. An easement used specifically for the installation and
maintenance of a utility.
   ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT. The Columbus, Indiana, City Engineer's Office.
   EROSION.  The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water
or gravity.
   EROSION CONTROL HANDBOOK.  A handbook adopted by the Board of Public Works
and Safety or the County Commissioners, as applicable, detailing erosion
control methods.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The fire department having jurisdiction over the subject
property and/or the Bartholomew County Fire Inspector acting on their behalf.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet
at any given location in the flood hazard area.
   FLOODPLAIN (FLOOD HAZARD AREA). The relatively flat area or low land
adjoining the channel of a river or stream which has been or may be covered by
the regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes the channel, floodway, and
floodway fringe. FLOODPLAIN boundaries are to be determined by using the
floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal Insurance Administration/Federal
Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) and/or any supplements adopted by
the jurisdiction.
   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   FRONTAGE. The width of a lot measured along a straight line connecting the
side lot lines at points where said side lot lines intersect the right-of-way
line of a public or private street from which such lot has legal access. For
purposes of determining compliance with minimum frontage requirements, the
frontage shall be continuous on a single street.
   GRADING. Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling or any combination
thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Bartholomew County Health Department.
   IMPROVEMENT PLANS.  See CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A sewage disposal system for a single
parcel or structure, usually but not necessarily a septic tank filter field.
   INTERESTED PARTIES. Those parties who are to be notified by mail of a public
hearing on a proposed subdivision of land. INTERESTED PARTIES shall be those
parties so defined in the Plan Commission Rules of Procedure.
   JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION.  The area over which the Plan Commission has
authority.
   LANDSCAPE BUFFER. Any combination of fences, walls, hedges, shrubs, trees
and other landscape materials which effectively provide a solid, dense and
opaque mass, to prohibit view, absorb sound and provide site delineation. Such
screen shall provide total opacity throughout the year. LANDSCAPE BUFFERS shall
comply with the definition of a Type A Buffer contained in the Columbus and
Bartholomew County Zoning Ordinance.
   LEGAL ACCESS. A platted access easement or the minimum required frontage on
a street.
   LEGAL DESCRIPTION. A description recognized by law which definitely
describes property by reference to government surveys, coordinate systems or
recorded maps; a description which is sufficient to locate the property without
oral testimony.
   LEGAL DRAIN.  Any drainage system consisting of an open drain, a tiled
drain, or any combination of the two, that is under the jurisdiction of the
County Drainage Board as provided by I.C. 36-9-27.
   LEGEND. A key located on a plat used to explain what the symbols within the
drawing mean.
   LOCATION MAP.  See VICINITY MAP .
   LOT.  A parcel of land created only through the major or minor subdivision
process that is buildable. The label LOT signifies the parcel has been
surveyed, monumented, dedicated the required amount of right-of-way, verified
as having acceptable means of sewage disposal and otherwise reviewed and found
to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   LOT, ADMINISTRATIVE.  A parcel of land documented only through the
administrative subdivision process that is buildable. The label ADMINISTRATIVE
LOT  signifies the parcel has been surveyed, monumented, and otherwise reviewed
and found to comply with the requirements of this chapter, but has not been
verified as having acceptable means of sewage disposal or otherwise reviewed or
had dedicated the required amount of right-of-way.
   LOT WIDTH.  The distance between side lot lines as measured at and along the
front setback line.
   MARKER or MONUMENT. A pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is intended
to be a permanent survey point for record purposes.
   NO ACCESS NOTATION.  A notation placed on a plat or subdivision drawing
indicating an area in which property access to a public right-of-way is not
permitted.
   OFFSITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not such premises are in the same ownership as the
property to be subdivided.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity listed in the
records of the County Auditor having title to land sought to be subdivided
under these regulations.
   PARENT TRACT.  The buildable land from which a new lot(s) or tract(s) of
land are being taken from as recorded in the Recorder's Office.
   PARENT TRACT REMAINDER.  The portion of the parent tract that remains as the
result of a subdivision by which new lots or tracts are created through the
minor subdivision process or as used to label future phases of a major
subdivision. The PARENT TRACT REMAINDER retains the original parent tract's
status as a buildable parcel without being surveyed. The label lot shall not be
applied to the PARENT TRACT REMAINDER  on any plat unless it has been surveyed,
monumented, verified as having acceptable means of sewage disposal, and
otherwise reviewed and found to comply with the requirements of this chapter to
the same extent as new lots that are created. A PARENT TRACT REMAINDER  does
not need to be surveyed, but it must meet the minimum requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
   PERSON.  Includes an individual, corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization or any other unit or legal entity.
   PETITIONER. The owner(s) of land proposed to be subdivided or his/her
representative. This includes potential future owners or developers. Surveyors,
designers, or other professionals involved in the project should not be
considered PETITIONERS .
   PLAT.  The map, drawing, or plan of a subdivision.
   PLAT COMMITTEE.  The PLAT COMMITTEE , appointed by the Plan Commission,
consistent with its Rules of Procedure.
   PLAT, FINAL.  A drawing prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, submitted for secondary approval and intended for recording.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A drawing indicating the proposed manner or layout of a
subdivision to be submitted to the Commission for primary approval in
accordance with this chapter.
   PRIMARY APPROVAL.  Approval granted by the Plan Commission to a preliminary
plat.
   RADIUS. The distance from the center of the curve to any point on the
circular curve.
   REGULATED DRAIN. Any drainage system over which the County Drainage Board
has legal control.
   RELATIVE POSITIONAL ACCURACY.  The value expressed in feet or meters that
represents the uncertainty due to random errors in measurements in the location
of any point on a survey relative to any other point on the same survey at the
95% confidence level.
   REPLAT.  Any change in an approved preliminary or final plat.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land, other than an easement, dedicated for public
use and to be occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, pedestrian way,
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main, drainage swale, or for another special use.
The boundaries of such rights-of-way are considered to be the lot lines of
adjoining property from which setback distances are measured.
   ROAD. See STREET.
   SECONDARY APPROVAL.  The final approval granted to a subdivision by the
Commission or a designated representative. This approval authorizes the owner
or agent to record the plat.
   SECTION CORNER.  A corner established as part of the United States Public
Land Survey System used for horizontal control in describing land.
   STREET.  A right-of-way dedicated or otherwise legally established which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A STREET may be
designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, lane,
drive or other appropriate name. A STREET also is classified according to
function as defined in the Official Thoroughfare Plan.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS.  Local roads which are parallel to and separated by
a limited access landscape buffer strip from arterial streets and highways.
These roads provide for access to abutting property on one side only. [Note:
This definition shall not be interpreted as including marginal access
subdivision streets in the jurisdiction of the Bartholomew County Plan
Commission.]
   STREET, PRIVATE.  Streets which serve the same function as local streets but
which are not dedicated to nor maintained by any unit of government.
   SUBDIVIDER.  See PETITIONER .
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots,
parcels, or other similar units.
   SUBDIVISION, ADMINISTRATIVE. The platting process that includes one or more
of the following:
      (1)   The removal of interior lot lines, with the outside perimeter of
the property remaining unchanged, resulting in fewer parcels than were
contained in the original parcel;
      (2)   The removal or relocation of easements on the property;
      (3)   The changing of notations written on the plat or correction of
errors thereon;
      (4)   A division of land pursuant to an allocation of land by court
decree;
      (5)   To correct errors in an existing legal description, provided that
no additional building lots are created;
      (6)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of tracts between
adjoining land owners, provided that no additional building sites are created;
      (7)   A division or resubdivision of land for the acquisition by the
public or by a utility for street right-of-way or easement; or
      (8)   A division of a building site containing an existing dwelling which
has been located on the site for at least three years from an agricultural
parent tract.
   SUBDIVISION, AGRICULTURAL. The subdivision of land to create a parcel for
agricultural purposes, not for building, which meets the following criteria:
      (1)   All parcels, including the parent tract have legal access;
      (2)   The land is being divided for agricultural purpose and not for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of use, building development, or other
improvement for residential, commercial, industrial, recreational or other
nonagricultural purposes;
      (3)   Contains at least 75% Class I or Class II soils as shown in and
defined by the Soil Survey of Bartholomew County;
      (4)   At least 75% of the land is planted with fruit-or-nut-bearing
trees, vines, bushes or crops which have a nonbearing period of less than five
years;
      (5)   At least 75% of the land is planted with ornamental plants or trees
for sale for use in landscaping;
      (6)   Has at least 75% of its area planted with trees of the species,
Pinus, Picea, or Abies (pine, spruce or fir) grown for the purpose of sale as
Christmas trees; or
      (7)   Which has been used in three of the last five years for the
cultivation and harvesting of crops, grazing by livestock, production of dairy
products, the raising of poultry and production of eggs, or the raising of
livestock.
   SUBDIVISION BENCHMARK.  A permanent monument of known elevation, tied to the
U.S.G.S. Benchmark System, installed at ground level.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR.  A division of land involving new streets, alleys,
roads, other public infrastructure or the extension of utilities. This should
not include those minor subdivisions that require the installation of
sidewalks.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR.  A division of land fronting an existing public right-
of-way, not involving any new streets, alleys, roads, other public
infrastructure (other than sidewalks), or not requiring the extension of
utilities. [Note: To qualify as a minor subdivision the proposal must meet all
of the conditions set forth in §§
156.035 et seq.]
   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT. A document which establishes the
contractual relationship between the developer of a subdivision and the local
government of jurisdiction for the installation of improvements in accordance
with the applicable standards and specifications.
   SUBDIVISION REVIEW COMMITTEE.  A committee established by the Commission to
assist with the technical evaluation of subdivisions and to make appropriate
technical recommendations to the Commission.
   SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE. A system of pipes, tile, conduit or tubing installed
beneath the ground surface used to collect ground water from individual
parcels, lots or building footings.
   SURFACE DRAINAGE. A system by which the storm water run-off is conducted to
an outlet. This would include the proper grading of parking lots, streets,
driveways, yards, and the like, so that storm water runoff is removed without
ponding and flows to a drainage swale, open ditch or a storm sewer.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN.  The part of the comprehensive plan, now or hereafter
adopted, which includes a major street and highway plan and sets forth the
location, alignment, dimensions, identification, and classification of existing
and proposed public streets, highways and other thoroughfares.
   TRACT. See PARENT TRACT  or AGRICULTURAL TRACT .
   UNBUILDABLE. A parcel of land with no building rights. To gain building
rights, the parcel must be surveyed, verified as having acceptable means of
sewage disposal, and otherwise reviewed and found to comply with the
subdivision control requirements.
   UTILITY PARCEL. A parcel of land that is unbuildable and intended for
ownership and permanent use by a utility. The label “Utility Parcel -
Unbuildable” signifies a parcel specifically reserved for a sanitary sewer lift
station, water tower, electric substation, and the like. This parcel can be
created through the administrative subdivision process and/or as part of a
minor or major subdivision.
   VICINITY MAP. A map showing the location of a subdivision in relation to a
larger area. This may include major thoroughfares related to the subdivision,
nearby community facilities such as parks, schools, fire stations, and the
like, and adjoining property. This may also show the parent tract.
   WITNESS MARKER.  A marker or monument that is set as a reference to the
actual corner when it is not possible or practical to set actual corner.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. An ordinance and maps, which divide the area within the
territorial zoning jurisdiction into zoning districts. The  ZONING ORDINANCE
prescribes and establishes regulations and procedures for the establishment of
land use controls.
(Prior Code, § 8-27)
(Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 1-26-1987; Ord. 1990-01,
passed 1-8-1990; Ord. 1994-02, passed 1-24-1994; Ord. 1998-11, passed 8-17-
1998; Ord. 03, 2013, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
ADMINISTRATIVE AND AGRICULTURAL SUBDIVISIONS
§ 156.020 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. Administrative subdivisions are subject only to a
certification by the official designated in §
156.214 that the subdivision is within one of the categories included in the
definition of “subdivision, administrative” in §
156.006. Replats which meet the conditions of administrative subdivisions also
may be considered under the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Filing fee. A request for Department review of a subdivision shall be
accompanied by the filing fee as established by the Commission.
   (C)   Submission materials. The following materials shall be submitted by an
applicant for approval of an administrative subdivision:
      (1)   Application signed by the owner(s) of record of all property
involved in the subdivision;
      (2)   A drawing prepared in accordance with all applicable standards set
forth in §
156.176 showing the property involved in the subdivision, indicating the area
of each lot or parcel in acres (for parcels larger than 20,000 square feet in
area) or square feet and indicating the configuration of the property and any
easements thereon before and after the proposed administrative subdivision.
This drawing is not required for those applications covered by divisions (C)
(5), (6), (7), (8)(c), (9) and (10) below;
      (3)   Approval certificates: see §§
156.150 through
156.161
;
      (4)   For removal of interior lot lines, a legal description of the
property and the new lot number(s);
      (5)   For removal of platted easements, signed and notarized letters of
approval of the proposed action by all utilities having an interest in the
easements, and in the case of drainage easements, any neighboring property
owners affected by the easements. A notation shall be placed on the plat
indicating that the easement has been vacated;
      (6)   For changes in the notations on a previously approved plat, an
explanation of the reason(s) for the changes. If the Department finds that the
changes have a significant effect on the subdivision as approved by the
Commission, the Department may require the change to be decided by the
Commission;
      (7)   For divisions by court decree, a copy of the decree showing by
legal description how the land is to be divided;
      (8)   (a)   For sale or exchange of adjoining land where one or more of
the affected parcels is platted, a legal description and indication on the
drawing of the tract to be divided and the tract to be added and certification
by a registered land surveyor that monuments have been or will be set to
indicate the relocated property lines. If the land involved in the subdivision
has not been monumented, no monumentation is required;
         (b)   For sale or exchange of adjoining unplatted land, a legal
description and indication on the drawing of the tract to be divided and the
tract to be added;
         (c)   For subdivision where the purpose is to resolve a boundary
dispute or to establish a mutually agreed upon boundary line, an affidavit
signed by all affected property owners stating the purpose of the subdivision;
and
         (d)   At the time that an administrative subdivision as defined in §
156.006 is submitted for secondary approval, the submission shall include
quitclaim or warranty deed(s) containing the legal description for each parcel
of property for which ownership is transferred within and by said
administrative subdivision.
      (9)   For corrections of legal descriptions, an affidavit signed by the
affected owners stating that the description was in error and a corrected legal
description. The correction shall be recorded and an appropriate notation shall
be placed on the recorded plat;
      (10)   For dedication or granting of easements for purposes other than
access, a legal description. The easements shall be recorded and an appropriate
notation shall be placed on the recorded plat;
      (11)   For dedication of right-of-way or access easements, a legal
description and a plat showing the parcels and the location of the right-of-way
or easement. In addition, for right-of-way dedication, certification by a
registered land surveyor that monuments will be set indicating the relocated
property lines; and
      (12)   For division of a building site containing an existing dwelling
from an agricultural parent tract, evidence that the dwelling has been on the
site for at least three years and a survey by a registered land surveyor
meeting the minimum standards contained in §
156.177 and monumentation as required in §
156.178.
   (D)   Review procedure. See §§
156.190 through
156.195.
   (E)   Length of approval.
      (1)   The approved administrative subdivision shall be recorded in the
County Recorder’s office within 120 days of certification by the Department.
Any subdivision and certification not recorded within that period shall become
null and void.
      (2)   The approved administrative subdivision and any deed as required by
division (C)(8)(c) above shall be recorded concurrently in the County
Recorder’s office within 120 days of certification by the Department. Any
subdivision, deed(s) and certification not recorded within that period shall
become null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-27) (Ord. 1991-15, passed 12-30-1991; Ord. 03, 2013, passed
10-21-2013)
§ 156.021 AGRICULTURAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. Agricultural subdivisions are subject only to certification
by the Department that all property involved in the subdivision meets the
criteria contained in the definition of “subdivision, agricultural” in §
156.006. With the exceptions listed below, land subdivided under the terms of
this section shall not be considered building lots and no building permit shall
be issued on a parcel so subdivided.
      (1)   Permits may be issued to remodel, expand, improve or repair a
dwelling existing on an agricultural parcel at the time of the subdivision.
      (2)   In the event a dwelling existing on an agricultural parcel at the
time of the subdivision is destroyed, a permit may be issued to construct a new
dwelling to replace it, but no other new residential structures shall be
permitted.
   (B)   Filing fee. A request for Department review of an agricultural
subdivision shall be accompanied by the required filing fee as established by
the Commission.
   (C)   Submission materials. The following materials shall be submitted by an
applicant for approval of an agricultural subdivision:
      (1)   Application signed by the owner(s) of record of all property
involved in the subdivision;
      (2)   Legal description of the property;
      (3)   Documentation sufficient to show that the property involved in the
subdivision meets the criteria contained in the definition of “subdivision,
agricultural” in §
156.006;
      (4)   A drawing prepared in accordance with the standards contained in §
156.176, showing the area of each lot or parcel in acres (for parcels larger
than 20,000 square feet) or square feet, and the configuration of the property
before and after the proposed subdivision, and showing the location and nature
of the legal access to the property. The drawing shall be set at a scale no
smaller than one inch equals 400 feet, unless the size and configuration of the
property makes this scale impractical. Where appropriate, the drawing may be
prepared with a broken scale; and
      (5)   All applicable certificates: see §§
156.150 through
156.161.
   (D)   Subdivision with agricultural remainder. A subdivision involving a
division of land classified as a minor subdivision and also involving land
meeting the criteria for an agricultural subdivision may be handled in
accordance with the procedure described in §
156.039. A subdivision involving a division of land classified as a major
subdivision and also involving land meeting the criteria for an agricultural
subdivision may be handled in accordance with the procedure described in §
156.059.
   (E)   Review procedure. See §§
156.190 through
156.195.
   (F)   Length of approval. Agricultural subdivisions must be recorded in the
County Recorder’s office within 120 days after certification by the Department
that the subdivision meets the required criteria. Any agricultural subdivision
not recorded within that time shall be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-27) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 7-
27-1987; Ord. 1987-01, passed 10-21-1986)
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 156.035 GENERAL.
   Those subdivisions meeting the definition of “subdivision, minor” contained
in §
156.006 may be considered under the provisions of this chapter. Replats meeting
the conditions of eligibility contained herein also may be considered under the
provisions of this chapter. After a subdivision request has been filed, the
Planning Director shall determine whether the petition may be considered as a
minor subdivision. The Planning Director’s decision may be appealed to the
Commission. Minor subdivisions may receive primary approval by the Plat
Committee or Plan Commission and secondary approval by the official designated
in §
156.213.
(Prior Code, § 8-33) (Ord. 1994-02, passed 1-24-1994)
§ 156.036 CONDITIONS OF ELIGIBILITY.
   Before determining that a subdivision is eligible to be considered under
this chapter, the Planning Director shall find that all of the following
criteria are satisfied.
   (A)   Orderly development. The subdivision will not impede orderly
development of land or the provision of public services and improvements.
      (1)   The subdivision will not interfere with the implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The subdivision will not interfere with the provision of streets to
provide access to adjoining or nearby property in the event that the property
is developed in the future.
   (B)   Utilities and drainage. All parcels in the subdivision will have
adequate utilities and drainage.
      (1)   All lots shall be served by a sanitary sewer or other sewerage
system approved by the State Department of Health or they shall have the
capability to contain a subsurface disposal system which complies with all
requirements of the State Department of Health and the County Health
Department. Any subdivision of land which requires the extension of existing
sewers or the construction of new treatment facilities shall be considered as a
major subdivision. If extension of sewer service is found to be a feasible
alternative and is desirable because of soil conditions, topography, lot sizes
or other factors, the petition shall be considered as a major subdivision.
      (2)   All lots shall be served by a public or quasi-public water system
or shall have the capability to contain a well which complies with all
requirements of the State Department of Health and the County Health
Department.
      (3)   All lots shall be provided with drainage improvements as necessary
to comply with the requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.099.
   (C)   Access. All parcels in the subdivision and adjacent land will have
adequate ingress and egress without the construction of any new streets or
substantial improvement to existing streets.
      (1)   All lots will have legal access to a platted private street or to a
public street which has been accepted for maintenance by, or has been
continuously maintained for a period of ten years immediately preceding the
filing of the subdivision, by a public agency regularly having responsibility
for the maintenance.
      (2)   Frontage on limited access streets on which driveways cannot open
shall not constitute legal access.
      (3)   If, by reason of topography, natural or human-made features or
other conditions relating to the property requested for subdivision, better
access can be provided through construction of a new street, the petition shall
be considered as a major subdivision.
         (a)   For the purposes of this division, any subdivision that involves
the cumulative creation of no more than four new buildable lots, excluding any
that are permitted through an administrative subdivision process, shall not
require road improvements or the construction of new streets. Such subdivisions
shall be considered as having been provided with the best possible access
through individual driveways, provided that the areas available for driveway
locations meet all applicable requirements of this chapter, the Zoning
Ordinance and the County Engineer. In no instance shall this be interpreted as
waiving the required dedication of right-of-way along the frontage of any new
lots created, consistent with §
156.092(A)
         (b)   Any subdivision that involves the cumulative creation of more
than four new buildable lots, excluding any that are permitted through an
administrative subdivision process, shall not be approved by the Plat
Committee, but shall instead be forwarded to the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission shall consider the thoroughfare plan and the specifications of this
chapter for new roads in determining adequate ingress and egress, any needed
road improvements, and whether or not better access can be provided through the
construction of a new street. If the Plan Commission determines that a new
street is required and/or that road improvements are required, and they are
substantial, the application shall be considered a major subdivision and shall
be refiled as such.
         (c)   The four buildable lots shall be calculated from the effective
date of this chapter, October 21, 1986.
         (d)   The use of an access easement, consistent with §
156.096, shall not be considered as the extension or construction of a private
street.
      (4)   All lots will have driveway locations which will provide for
adequate sight distance and will be properly spaced according to county
standards.
      (5)   Land adjacent to the property involved in the subdivision also will
have adequate access according to the criteria contained in this section.
   (D)   Suitability. All lots in the subdivision will provide suitable
building sites for the purpose for which the land is to be used. Land
suitability shall be determined by the criteria contained in §
156.091.
   (E)   Endangerment. The subdivision will not be detrimental to nor endanger
the public health, safety or general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 8-34) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 05, 2011, passed 8-
1-2011)
§ 156.037 PRIMARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   General. All subdivisions of land meeting the definition of
“subdivision minor” in §
156.006 may be submitted to the Plat Committee or Commission for primary
approval as specified in this section.
   (B)   Required submission materials. All requests for primary approval of a
minor subdivision shall be submitted with the items listed in this section.
      (1)   Filing fee. Each minor subdivision submitted for review shall be
accompanied by the required filing fee as established by the Commission.
      (2)   Preliminary plat. An original drawing prepared in accordance with
the survey and drafting standards set forth in §§
156.175 through
156.178 and copies (with the number to be specified by the Department) showing
the following:
         (a)   Legal description of the subdivision;
         (b)   Bar scale (the scale shall be 50 feet to the inch or larger,
unless the property involved in the subdivision is of a size or shape which
requires a smaller scale to fit on the required sheet size, in which case
another scale approved by the Department may be used);
         (c)   Lot numbers, dimensions and sizes in square feet or acres;
         (d)   Boundary lines of floodway and floodway fringe areas on each lot
as scaled from the flood plain district maps of current adoption by the county,
appropriately labeled;
         (e)   If there is a parent tract remainder which qualifies as an
agricultural subdivision under the terms of this chapter, the land shall be
shown on the drawing. The agricultural land may be shown based upon an existing
deed description;
         (f)   Any easements (existing or proposed, including but not limited
to utility easements, drainage easements, access easements and the like), legal
drains and easements to be vacated by the subdivision with notations regarding
the vacation;
         (g)   Rights-of-way as established by the thoroughfare plan;
         (h)   Area location map;
         (i)   All applicable certificates and notations as shown in §§
156.150 through
156.161; and
         (j)   For subdivisions containing land with a slope of 10% or greater
as determined by the soil survey of the county, the topography as shown on the
U.S.G.S. quad sheets. The topography may be shown on a separate print, but it
shall be shown at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 300 feet.
      (3)   Supporting material. The following supporting material shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat:
         (a)   One application on forms specified by the Department;
         (b)   A list specifically citing any requirements of this chapter for
which modifications are requested;
         (c)   The names and addresses of all interested parties as defined by
this chapter, keyed to a map;
         (d)   A map showing all significant topographical and other physical
features, including water bodies, existing buildings, alleys, streets or other
information which will aid in the location of the property for site visits;
         (e)   Evidence that a sewerage permit can be obtained from the County
Health Department or evidence that other acceptable sewer and/or water service
is available to all building lots in the subdivision;
         (f)   Documentation sufficient to show that all applicable design
standards of this chapter are met by the proposed subdivision;
         (g)   Erosion control plan, if necessary to comply with the design
standards of this chapter (see §§
156.090 through
156.099);
         (h)   Drainage report, if necessary to comply with the design
standards of this chapter (see §§
156.090 through
156.099);
         (i)   If there is a parent tract remainder, a drawing showing the
property involved in the petition and the remainder. The drawing should include
average and percentage dimensions on the AG remainder;
         (j)   Any covenants or other restrictions which will run with the land
included in the subdivision;
         (k)   Land suitability summary (see §
156.091), containing the following information:
            1.   For lots which will be served by individual subsurface
disposal systems, the number of acres or square feet of contiguous land
containing slopes of less than 10% and the minimum land area required by the
regulations of the State Department of Health for a filter field on the lot;
            2.   For lots which contain water bodies, the number of acres or
square feet of contiguous land area on the lot, the minimum lot size for the
zone district in which the lot is located, and a calculation of 75% of the
minimum lot size for the zone district in which the lot is located;
            3.   For lots which will be served by individual subsurface
disposal systems, the number of acres or square feet of land containing soils
having slight or moderate limitations for septic systems, a calculation as to
the size of an individual subsurface disposal system which will be sufficient
to accommodate the wastewater generated by the uses permitted on the property
and the number of acres or square feet of land containing soils indicated by
the soil survey of the county to have severe limitations for septic systems;
and
            4.   The number of acres or square feet of land which is located in
a floodway, a floodway fringe, a Zone A District (with each type of flood
hazard area calculated separately) and the amount of land which is not located
in a flood hazard area.
         (j)   If any lot in a minor subdivision is to receive its access from
a state highway, evidence that a driveway permit can be issued by the State
Department of Transportation shall be submitted.
   (C)   Length of approval. Primary approval of a minor subdivision shall be
valid for 120 days, unless an extension is granted by the Plat Committee or
Commission. If secondary approval is not granted before the expiration of 120
days, the primary approval shall be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-35) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01,passed 1-26-
1987; Ord. 1994-02, passed 1-24-1994; Ord. 03, 1998, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 156.038 SECONDARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   General. After all conditions of primary approval have been met, the
applicant may request secondary approval.
   (B)   Required submission materials. All requests for secondary approval
shall be accompanied by the materials listed in this section.
      (1)   Final plat. An original drawing (which may be the same drawing
submitted as the preliminary plat) prepared in accordance with the standards
set forth in §§
156.175 through
156.178 and two copies showing all information required in §
156.037(B) as approved by the Commission.
      (2)   Supporting material. Documentation sufficient to show that all
conditions of approval by the Commission have been met.
   (C)   Length of approval. Secondary approval of a minor subdivision shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of the approval. If the
subdivision is not recorded before the expiration of one year, it shall become
null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-36) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.039 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS WITH AGRICULTURAL REMAINDERS.
   (A)   A minor subdivision which has a parent tract remainder meeting the
criteria for an agricultural subdivision may be subdivided under the provisions
of this chapter, with the agricultural portion of the property shown on the
drawing based upon a metes and bounds or other deed description.
   (B)   If the size and configuration of the property makes it impractical to
show the agricultural remainder at the same scale as the minor subdivision, a
smaller scale may be used; provided that, except in extreme circumstances, the
scale shall be no smaller than one inch equals 400 feet. The staff may approve
a smaller scale only when the applicant demonstrates that unusual conditions
exist related to the size and configuration of the property which make it
impractical to use the required scale.
(Prior Code, § 8-37) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.040 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   See §§
156.190 through
156.195.
(Prior Code, § 8-38) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
§ 156.055 GENERAL.
   Major subdivisions require primary approval by the Commission and secondary
approval by the official designated in §
156.213. Before filing a major subdivision, applicants are encouraged to
present a sketch plan for the subdivision to the Department for informal
discussion. Replats which require extension of streets or utilities shall be
considered under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-41) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.056 SKETCH PLAN.
   The subdivider is encouraged to submit a sketch plan and informally consult
with the Department prior to the submission of a major plat. This consultation
will enable the subdivider to become familiar with the general requirements and
conditions which might affect the subdivision and thus avoid unnecessary
revisions. The sketch plan should be in a tentative form with the sufficient
detail for review and comment.
(Prior Code, § 8-42) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-
25-1988; Ord. 05, 2011, passed 8-1-2011; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.057 PRIMARY APPROVAL.
   If the Commission approves development in phases under the terms of this
chapter, the preliminary plat may be for only the first phase of the
subdivision.
   (A)   All subdivisions of land meeting the definition of “major subdivision”
in §
156.006 may be submitted to the Commission for preliminary approval as
specified in this section.
   (B)   Required submission materials. All requests for primary approval shall
be submitted with the items listed in this section.
      (1)   Filing fee as established by the Commission;
      (2)   Preliminary plat. An applicant for primary approval shall submit a
set of drawings conforming to the survey and drafting standards contained in §§
156.175 through
156.178; except that, scalar rather than computed dimensions may be shown and
copies (with the number to be specified by the Department) of the drawing(s)
showing the following:
         (a)   Legal description of the subdivision;
         (b)   Bar scale (the scale shall be 50 feet to the inch or larger,
unless the property involved in the subdivision is of a size or shape which
requires a smaller scale to fit on the required sheet size, in which case
another scale approved by the Department may be used);
         (c)   Lot numbers, scalar layout, dimensions and sizes in square feet
or acres;
         (d)   Accurate locations of all existing and platted streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract;
         (e)   Source of the owner’s title to the land as shown by the last
entry in the records of the County Recorder;
         (f)   All applicable certificates and notations as shown in §§
156.150 through
156.161;
         (g)   Accurate locations and dimensions of any property to be
dedicated to the public or reserved for public, semi-public or community use;
         (h)   Street rights-of-way as established by the official thoroughfare
plan of the county;
         (i)   Topographic contours at vertical intervals of five feet for
areas containing land with 10% slope or greater, and at intervals of two feet
for areas containing land with less than 10% slope. The topography may be shown
on a separate print, but it shall be shown at the same scale as the original
plat;
         (j)   Delineation of flood plain boundaries, indicating the
classification of each flood plain area;
         (k)   Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of
all existing or proposed permanent features, either natural or human-made,
including, but not limited to, streets, sewers, drains, water bodies, swamps or
other wetlands, railroads, transmission towers, existing structures, county
ditches, legal drains, water mains, culverts, utility lines, fire hydrants,
drainage structures and significant topographic features. Water elevations of
adjoining lakes and streams at the date of the survey and the approximate high-
and low-water elevations. All elevations shall be referred to the U.S.G.S.
datum plane;
         (l)   Location of pedestrian circulation system, if any, and the
materials to be used for the system;
         (m)   Delineation of the phases, if any, of the development,
indicating the lots and improvements to be included in each phase; and
         (n)   Area location map.
      (3)   Supporting material. An applicant for primary approval shall submit
the following supporting material with the preliminary plat:
         (a)   One application, on forms specified by the Department;
         (b)   The names and addresses of all interested parties as defined by
this chapter, keyed to a map;
         (c)   Erosion control plan (see §
156.097);
         (d)   Sewage disposal plan;
         (e)   Drainage report (see §
156.097);
         (f)   Copies of all restrictions and/or covenants which will run with
the land;
         (g)   Zoning classifications of the property included in the
subdivision;
         (h)   Specifications for any required improvements to existing county
roads;
         (i)   Delineation on a U.S.G.S. base map of the drainage area in which
the subdivision is located and of the location of drainage courses and surface
water flow within the drainage area;
         (j)   For any improvements or systems which are to be owned and/or
maintained by the property owners in the subdivision, a plan for establishing
the ownership and for providing and financing the maintenance. Documents and/or
plans submitted under this section are subject to determination by the
Commission that they are adequate to ensure that the county will not be held
responsible in the future for the maintenance;
         (k)   Sewage system approval:
            1.   If the development is to contain individual subsurface
disposal systems, the applicant must show that the design criteria in §§
156.090 through
156.099 are met, and in addition, the applicant must provide for each lot a
certificate from the County Health Department indicating that a system can be
installed on the property and detailing any conditions to be placed upon the
installation. The Commission may require these conditions to be recorded as
part of the approved subdivision.
            2.   If the development is to be served by a public or semi-public
sewer system, the applicant must provide evidence that the system has the
capacity and capability to serve the development and guarantees of a sufficient
number of hook-ons to serve all lots in the subdivision.
            3.   If the development is to be served by a private system, the
applicant must provide evidence that the system design has been approved by the
State Department of Environmental Management, that there are arrangements to
ensure continued operation and maintenance of the system, that the system has
or will have sufficient capacity to serve the development and guarantees of a
sufficient number of hook-ons to serve all lots in the subdivision.
         (l)   A list specifically citing any requirements of this chapter for
which modifications are requested and the reasons for the request;
         (m)   Land suitability summary (see §
156.091), containing the following information:
            1.   For lots which will be served by individual subsurface
disposal systems, the number of acres or square feet of contiguous land
containing slopes of less than 10% and the minimum land area required by the
regulations of the State Department of Health for a filter field on the lot;
            2.   For lots which contain water bodies, the number of acres or
square feet of contiguous land area on the lot, the minimum lot size for the
zone district in which the lot is located, and a calculation of 75% of the
minimum lot size for the zone district in which the lot is located;
            3.   For lots which will be served by individual subsurface
disposal systems, the number of acres or square feet of land containing soils
having slight or moderate limitations for septic systems, a calculation as to
the size of an individual subsurface disposal system which will be sufficient
to accommodate the wastewater generated by the uses permitted on the property,
and the number of acres or square feet of land containing soils indicated by
the soil survey of the county to have severe limitations for septic systems;
and
            4.   The number of acres or square feet of land which is located in
a floodway, a floodway fringe, a Zone A District (with each type of flood
hazard area calculated separately) and the amount of land which is not located
in a flood hazard area.
         (n)   Documentation sufficient to show that all design standards as
set forth in §§
156.090 through
156.099 are met; and
         (o)   If any lot or road in a major subdivision is to receive access
from or intersect with a state highway, a copy of the driveway permit or
approval letter issued by the State Department of Transportation shall be
submitted.
   (C)   Review procedure. See §§
156.190 through
156.195.
   (D)   Length of approval. Primary approval shall be valid for one year from
the date of approval by the Commission. The Commission may establish time
limits of less than one year on any or all conditions of primary approval. If
the Commission approves development in phases, secondary approval of each phase
shall automatically continue the primary approval of the remaining phases to
the same expiration date as that for the secondary approval.
(Prior Code, § 8-43) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 7-
27-1987; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-25-1988; Ord. 03, 1998, passed 2-23-1998; Ord.
4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.058 SECONDARY APPROVAL.
   After all conditions of primary approval have been met, a final plat meeting
these conditions may be submitted for secondary approval.
   (A)   Required submission materials. An application for secondary approval
shall be accompanied by all materials specified in this section.
      (1)   Final plat. An applicant for secondary approval shall submit
original drawings prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in §§
156.175 through
156.178 and copies (with the number to be specified by the Department) showing
all information listed in §
156.057(B)(2)(a) through (i) (with computed lot dimensions and sizes), in
accordance with the Commission’s approval.
      (2)   Final improvement plans. An applicant for secondary approval shall
submit drawings detailing all improvements to be installed as approved by the
Commission. These drawings shall contain all applicable notations and
certificates as specified in §§
156.150 through
156.161.
      (3)   Supporting material. An applicant for secondary approval shall
provide documentation sufficient to show that all conditions of approval by the
Commission have been met.
   (B)   Review procedure. See §§
156.190 through
156.195.
   (C)   Length of approval. Secondary approval shall be valid for one year
from the date of the approval.
(Prior Code, § 8-44) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.059 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS WITH AGRICULTURAL REMAINDERS.
   (A)   A major subdivision which has a parent tract remainder meeting the
criteria for an agricultural subdivision may be subdivided under the provisions
of this chapter, with the agricultural portion of the property shown on the
drawing to be recorded based upon an existing deed description.
   (B)   If the size and configuration of the property makes it impractical to
show the agricultural remainder at the same scale as the minor subdivision, a
smaller scale may be used; provided that, except in extreme circumstances, the
scale shall be no smaller than one inch equals 400 feet. The staff may approve
a smaller scale only when the applicant demonstrates that unusual conditions
exist related to the size and configuration of the property which make it
impractical to use the required scale.
(Prior Code, § 8-45) (Ord. 1987-01, passed 7-27-1987)
§ 156.060 PHASES.
   The Commission may permit the development of a subdivision to take place in
phases. In reviewing a request for phased development, the Commission shall
consider the factors listed in this section.
   (A)   Design standards. The relationship of the number and configuration of
the lots in each phase shall conform to the design standards of this chapter.
   (B)   Improvements. The improvements in each phase shall be adequate to
serve the lots to be developed in that phase.
   (C)   Non-completion of subdivision. The Commission shall attempt to ensure
that each phase of the subdivision will conform to the intent and purposes of
this chapter in the event that some phases are not completed.
(Prior Code, § 8-46) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY SUBDIVISIONS
§ 156.075 GENERAL.
   (A)   Commercial, industrial and multi-family subdivisions are recognized as
having a different character and different requirements from those established
for residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   Any land zoned or intended to be used for commercial, industrial or
multi-family purposes shall be subject to the requirements of this subchapter,
as well as all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-50) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.076 CLASSIFICATION.
   Commercial, industrial and multi-family subdivisions may be classified as
minor or major subdivisions according to the definitions in §
156.006 and are subject to all requirements relating to that classification.
(Prior Code, § 8-51) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.077 REQUIRED SUBMISSION MATERIALS.
   (A)   Applicants for approval of a subdivision under this subchapter shall
submit all materials specified in this chapter for the appropriate
classification of subdivision.
   (B)   The subdivisions are required to meet the design and improvement
standards for commercial, industrial and multi-family subdivisions as specified
in §§
156.090 through
156.099 and
156.110 through
156.118.
(Prior Code, § 8-52) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS
§ 156.090 GENERAL.
   The standards contained in this chapter apply to all minor and major
subdivisions. All subdivisions shall be designed with consideration given to
the topography of the land and other natural characteristics of the site and
surrounding property.
(Prior Code, § 8-55) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.091 LAND SUITABILITY.
   If the Commission finds that the property requested to be subdivided is
unsuitable for development because of flooding, topography, inadequate water
supply, inadequate sewage disposal or other conditions which may endanger
health, life or property, the Commission shall not approve the land for
subdivision. As a minimum, the Commission is empowered to approve the
subdivision of land only after it finds that the land meets the following
criteria.
   (A)   Steep slopes. For subdivisions with lots which will be served by
individual subsurface disposal systems, each lot will contain a contiguous land
area with slopes of less than 10% providing a suitable site for a filter field
which contains at least the minimum lot area required by the State Department
of Health. The remainder of the lot may contain slopes of 10% or greater. The
soil survey of the county shall be used to determine steep slopes.
   (B)   Water bodies. Each lot will contain a contiguous land area providing a
suitable building site which is at least 75% of the minimum lot size
established by the Zoning Ordinance. The remaining 25% of the required minimum
lot size may contain permanent or seasonal water bodies.
   (C)   Sewage disposal. Each lot will be served by an existing public or
private sewer system or a proposed system design approved by the State
Department of Health and the County Health Department or each lot will contain
enough land of a soil type suitable for septic tanks to permit installation of
an individual subsurface disposal system of sufficient size to accommodate the
wastewater generated by the uses permitted on the property. The permeability
ratings contained in the soil survey of the county shall be used as a basis for
determining land suitability for subsurface disposal systems, unless an on-site
soil evaluation by a qualified soil scientist shows that other soil types are
found on the property. The Department or Commission may request that any
evaluation be reviewed by the Soil Conservation Service. If the soil survey
indicates that absorption fields are to be located in soils having severe
limitations for the systems, each lot will be large enough to accommodate two
absorption fields, each containing at least 1,200 square feet of trench bottom.
   (D)   Water service. Each lot will have an adequate supply of potable water
through a public or community system approved by the State Department of Health
or by individual wells. If the lots are to be served by individual wells, a
letter from the County Health Department certifying that a well meeting the
locational requirements of current applicable regulations can be located on
each lot shall be required.
   (E)   Flood hazards. Each lot will contain enough land which is not located
in a floodway, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, to accommodate the permitted
use(s) of the property and, if required, an individual subsurface disposal
system. In general, lots consisting entirely of land located in a flood hazard
area shall not be approved for subdivision, unless there is no property
included in the parent tract which is located outside the flood hazard area
which can reasonably be subdivided to provide a building site.
(Prior Code, § 8-56) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 1-
26-1987)
§ 156.092 STREETS.
   Streets must be designed with regard to topography, soil characteristics,
natural features, function, clarity of movement and economy of street length.
The layout of new streets shall be designed in relation to existing streets.
Where deemed appropriate by the Commission, access to existing streets shall be
provided. The Commission may require the subdivision to have more than one
point of ingress and egress. The arrangement and character of all streets shall
conform to the Official Thoroughfare Plan of the county.
   (A)   Right-of-way. The owners of property to be subdivided on existing
streets shall dedicate any additional right-of-way necessary to comply with the
minimum standards of the Thoroughfare Plan. Where topography, design features
or other conditions necessitate additional right-of-way or easements to permit
construction of a street to the established standards for the street, the
Commission may require dedication of the right-of-way or establishment of the
easements.
   (B)   Extension of streets. Where the Commission deems appropriate, streets
shall be extended to the subdivision boundary line to provide for existing and
future traffic circulation.
   (C)   Dead-end streets. Permanent dead-end streets shall not be permitted.
Temporary dead-end streets shall be permitted only as part of a continuing
street plan and where more than one lot long must be provided with temporary
turn-arounds meeting the specifications in §
156.133.
   (D)   Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential subdivisions. The
Commission may permit alleys in commercial or industrial subdivisions if it
finds that alleys are the best means of serving the subdivision. The alleys
shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet and a minimum pavement width
of 16 feet.
   (E)   Geometric standards. The minimum geometric standards shall be as shown
on
Table § 156.092(1).
Table § 156.092(1) Bartholomew County Roads Minimum Design Standards
 Arterial Collector Local Marginal Access Subdivision
Table § 156.092(1) Bartholomew County Roads Minimum Design Standards
                     Arterial            Collector   Local      Marginal Access
                                                                Subdivision
ADT                  1,000 or more       500 to 999  100 to 499 <100
Design speed         50 mph              45 mph      40 mph     30 mph
Maximum grade        8%                  10%         12%        12%
Minimum bridge width 30 ft.              30 ft.      28 ft.     28 ft.
Minimum R-O-W width  100 ft.             70 ft.      50 ft.     40 ft.
                     center line w/no
Pavement markings    parking zone & edge center line none       none
                     lines
Pavement width       24 ft.              22 ft.      22 ft.     20 ft.
Shoulder width       8 ft.               6 ft.       4 ft.      4 ft.
Sight distance
   Stopping       350 ft.             310 ft.     275 ft.    200 ft.
   Intersection   500 ft.             450 ft.     400 ft.    300 ft.
NOTES TO TABLE:
(1)   The pavement cross slope shall be between 1/4 inch per foot and 3/8 inch
per foot.
(2)   The shoulder cross slope shall be between ½ inch per foot and one inch
per foot.
(3)   The minimum grade shall be 0.10%.
(4)   For arterial and collector streets, at least 2 feet of the shoulders
shall be stone or paved.
(5)   The right-of-way shall be adequate for construction and maintenance of
pavement, shoulders and ditches. The Commission may require an additional
right-of-way as it deems necessary for these purposes, or may reduce the
required right-of-way widths if the applicant provides justification deemed
adequate by the Commission.
(6)   The pavement widths shown on this table are for streets and roads having
a typical shoulder section. For each parking lane, an additional 8 feet of
pavement shall be provided, and for curb and gutter an additional 2 feet shall
be provided. At least one parking lane shall be provided on all roads with curb
and gutter.
(7)   Residential subdivision streets shall be designed according to the
traffic volumes shown on this table assuming 8 trips per lot per day.
(8)   The minimum outside radius and approach radius of the pavement of a cul-
de-sac shall be 50 feet. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 1,000 feet in
length, and in no case shall more than 15 lots have frontage on a single cul-
de-sac. In all other respects, cul-de-sac streets shall meet all standards for
subdivision streets.
(9)   The minimum outside radius of a temporary turn-around shall be 50 feet.
Any turn-around shown on the construction plans shall be installed in
conformance with the standards set forth in § 156.133.
 
   (F)   Intersection design standards. See
Table § 156.092(2).
Table § 156.092(2) Minimum Intersection Design Standards
Design Criterion Standard
Table § 156.092(2) Minimum Intersection Design Standards
Design Criterion                        Standard
Angle of intersection                   90 degrees (in no case <75 degrees)
Maximum approach speed                  25 mph
Maximum number of roads at intersection 2 (4 approaches)
Minimum centerline offset of adjacent roads
   Collector-arterial                1,320 ft.
   Collector-collector               600 ft.
   Local-collector                   300 ft.
   Local-local                       200 ft.
   Local-subdivision                 200 ft.
   Subdivision-subdivision           150 ft.
Minimum curb radius
   Collector-collector               40 ft.
   Local-collector                   30 ft.
   Local-local                       25 ft.
   Local-subdivision                 25 ft.
   Subdivision-subdivision           25 ft.
Vertical alignment with intersection    50% of approach grade
 
   (G)   Vertical alignment. All changes of grade shall be connected by
vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to 85 times the algebraic
difference in the rate of grade, expressed in feet per hundred, for arterial
streets, 55 times the algebraic difference for collector streets and 35 times
the algebraic difference for local and other minor streets. The minimum length
of the vertical curve shall be 180 feet for arterial, 120 feet for collectors
and 90 feet for local or minor streets.
   (H)   Half-streets. Dedication of new half-streets shall not be permitted.
Where a dedicated or platted half-street is adjacent to a tract being
subdivided, the other half of the half-street shall be platted and constructed.
   (I)   State highways. If any subdivision or any lot therein abuts a state
highway, evidence of compliance with all applicable regulations of the State
Department of Transportation shall be required.
   (J)   Improvements. When subdividing property which involves the
construction of new streets, the subdivider shall be required to install all
improvements specified by the Commission in accordance with this chapter. When
a subdivider owns and proposes to subdivide property on only one side of an
existing street, the subdivider shall be required to install improvements
specified by the Commission in accordance with this chapter for a minimum of
one-half of the road and right-of-way width. The Commission may require the
additional improvements as it deems necessary to make the existing street
suitable for the safe movement of traffic to be generated by the proposed
subdivision. When the Commission deems it in the best interest of the county,
it may require improvements equivalent in cost to the required half right-of-
way improvements to be made over the entire right-of-way or any portion
thereof, or it may accept an equivalent amount of money to be used for county
street improvements.
   (K)   Topography and arrangement.
      (1)   Streets shall be related appropriately to the natural topography.
Where appropriate to the topography, streets shall be arranged so as to provide
building sites which are at or above the grades of the streets to the maximum
practical extent. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography.
      (2)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares.
      (3)   All arterial and collector streets shall be properly related to
special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
churches and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of
existing and proposed land uses.
      (4)   Local and subdivision streets shall be laid out to conform as
nearly as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic and
to permit efficient drainage and utility systems.
      (5)   Proposed collector streets shall, where the Commission deems
appropriate, be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided.
(Prior Code, § 8-57) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.093 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of
lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads and waterways.
   (B)   Arrangement. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as
are appropriate for the locality and the type of development permitted. Block
lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,400 feet nor be less than 400
feet in length. Wherever practical, blocks along arterial and collector streets
shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length. Irregularly shaped blocks may be
approved by the Commission if it finds that a pattern is appropriate to the
land to be subdivided and is properly designed.
   (C)   Pedestrian ways. Pedestrian ways not less than ten feet in width may
be required through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long or at other
appropriate locations and at the ends of cul-de-sacs where the Commission deems
the ways desirable to provide for circulation or access to neighboring uses. In
determining whether pedestrian ways are required, the Commission shall consider
methods of maintaining the ways and their usefulness in providing access to any
common open space, water areas, recreation areas, schools, churches and other
surrounding uses.
   (D)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required on each side of the street when
the subdivision contains three or more lots per acre or is adjacent to
subdivisions containing sidewalks or where necessary to provide access to
school sites.
   (E)   Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter shall be required on all new streets
in subdivisions designed for three or more lots per acre.
(Prior Code, § 8-58) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-
25-1988)
§ 156.094 UTILITY PARCELS.
   Utility parcels may be provided as locations for utility-owned substations,
sanitary sewer lift stations, water towers, and the like. Utility parcels may
not be provided, however, for drainage ponds or other storm water
infrastructure that is not owned and operated by a public utility. Utility
parcels may not be the location of any non-utility structures and are not
intended for use by utility offices, shop buildings, or other facilities that
are not directly a component of a distribution or collection system. All
utility parcels shall be labeled on all plats as “Utility Parcel - Unbuildable”
followed by the use for which each is established, such as “Water Tower”, “Lift
Station”, and the like. The need for a utility parcel, its size, and cost to
the utility, if any, shall be determined by the property owner and/or property
developer together with the relevant utility. The provisions of this chapter
allowing the creation of utility parcels shall not be interpreted as a
requirement by the county for any property owner to donate a utility parcel.
(Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.095 LOTS.
   (A)   Arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that all lots will have
satisfactory building sites, properly related to topography and surrounding
land and uses. Each lot shall comply with the minimum requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance and with all applicable health regulations. Each lot shall be
capable of providing safe, usable driveway access.
   (B)   Frontage. Each lot shall have its full frontage on a dedicated street
or approved access easement. To the fullest extent practical, residential lots
shall front on residential subdivision streets in a manner as to provide
neighborhood cohesiveness. Lots laid out in long lines along arterial,
collector or local streets shall be avoided.
   (C)   Depth. The depth to width ratio of any single-family residential lot
shall not be greater than three to one for any lot smaller than one acre.
   (D)   Side lot lines. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to street
lines and radial to curved street lines, except where the Commission determines
that a variation to this rule would provide a better layout.
   (E)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage residential lots shall be
avoided, except when the Commission determines that the lots are essential to
provide separation of residential development from streets. The lots shall be
provided with a landscape buffer area at least ten feet in depth which provides
a visual screen and prevents vehicular access to one of the two frontages.
Double frontage non-residential lots are acceptable, however, the Commission
may require a landscape buffer area at least ten feet in depth which provides a
visual screen and prevents vehicular access to one of the two frontages.
   (F)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently larger than interior
lots to allow maintenance of setback lines on both streets.
   (G)   Shape. Lots shall be designed to provide suitable building sites and
related yard areas. Irregularly shaped lots may be permitted by the Commission
where it deems a pattern to be more appropriate to the site conditions than
regular shapes. Financial advantage for the subdivider and/or the ability to
create a larger number of lots is not in itself sufficient reason for allowing
irregular shapes.
   (H)   Access from arterial streets. In general, lots shall not derive direct
access from an arterial street. Where driveway access from the street is the
only possible access for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require
that the lots be served by a combined marginal access street in order to limit
the possible traffic hazards from multiple access to the streets. The
Commission may require that driveways be designed and arranged so as to avoid
the necessity for vehicles to back into traffic on arterial, collector or local
streets.
   (I)   Driveway separation. Driveway locations shall conform to the following
requirements for separation:
 
Minimum Distance Between Drives or to Nearest Intersection
Street Type Residential Drive   Commercial or Industrial Drive
Arterial    300 ft.*            600 ft.
Collector   200 ft., if allowed 200 ft.
Local       100 ft.             100 ft.
Subdivision One per lot         100 ft.
NOTES TO TABLE:
*   It is the intent of Ord. 1988-08 to avoid residential driveways directly
onto arterial streets whenever possible. When the driveways are necessary, it
is preferable to have a minimum number of access points. Therefore, in some
cases, it may be preferable to locate two driveways immediately adjacent,
rather than to use the 300 feet separation.
 
(Prior Code, § 8-59) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1989-07, passed 7-
31-1989; Ord. 1998-08, passed 4-25-1988; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.096 EASEMENTS AND RESERVED RIGHT-OF-WAY CORRIDORS.
   (A)   Access easements and/or reserved right-of-way corridors. Access
easements and/or reserved right-of-way corridors may be used to provide legal
access to residential lots under the conditions set forth in this section.
These corridors are privately owned but must be available as access to serve
future subdivisions. Access easement and/or reserved right-of-way corridors
providing legal access to land shall, to the fullest extent possible, be so
located as to be suitable for future public streets meeting the standards set
forth in this section. Reserved right-of-way will be required when the Plan
Commission deems it necessary or desirable to provide proper access in the
future.
      (1)   The following standards shall apply to access easement and reserved
right-of-way corridors:
         (a)   Type A corridor. This type is allowed only under the following
conditions:
            1.   When lot size, topography, flood hazard areas, or other
natural or existing features prevent further subdivision. This determination
shall be made by the department pursuant to this section. The owner may appeal
the department’s decision.
            2.   When an existing drive serves an existing house that is being
divided from a parent tract. In this case, the note in §
156.152 shall appear on the recorded subdivision plat or drawing.
         (b)   Type B corridor. This type of corridor is required when further
subdivision and expansion of subject property and or adjacent property is
possible. Any Type B corridor shall be labeled on the plat or drawing as
“access easement” or “reserved right-of-way”. A reserved right-of-way corridor
shall include automatic dedication certificate specified in §
156.152 .
      (2)   Type A and Type B corridors may serve a maximum of ten lots as
specified in Table 8-1, provided that such corridors comply with the minimum
design standards contained in Table 8-1. Higher standards than these minimum
requirements may be applied if the Plan Commission finds that there are special
conditions which necessitate such higher standards.
Table 8-1
   Minimum Design Standards
   Type A and Type B Corridors
Condition 1: Corridor serves one lot
                                        Type B
Type A                                  Minimum corridor width: 50'
Minimum corridor width: 30'             Driveway construction shall comply with
Driveway construction shall comply with the County Highway Department standards
the County Highway Department standards and requirements of current adoption.
and requirements of current adoption.   The location of the corridor shall be
                                        suitable for future development.
Condition 2: Corridor serves two lots
                                        Type B
Type A                                  Minimum corridor width: 50'
Minimum corridor width: 30'             Minimum centerline radius: 100'
Minimum centerline radius: 50'          Corridor profile grade, horizontal
Corridor profile grade horizontal       alignment, length and drainage shall
alignment, length and drainage shall    meet the standards for a public street.
meet the standards for a public street. Certified construction plans shall be
Certified construction plans shall be   submitted to the County highway
submitted to the county highway         engineer for approval. Improvements
engineer for approval. Improvements     shall extend to the property line of
shall extend for the entire length of   the farthest lot(s) which will receive
common use.                             access from this corridor. The corridor
                                       shall extend to any appropriate
                                        adjoining property boundary.
                                         
Minimum required cross-section:         Minimum required cross-section:
Condition 3: Corridor serves three or four lots
                                        Type B
Type A                                  Minimum corridor width: 50'
Minimum corridor width: 50'             Minimum centerline radius: 100'
Minimum centerline radius: 100'         The corridor profile grade, horizontal
The corridor profile grade, horizontal  alignment, length and drainage shall
alignment, length and drainage shall    meet the standards for a public street.
meet the standards for a public street  Certified construction plans shall be
certified construction plans shall be   submitted to the county highway
submitted for approval. Improvements    engineer for approval. Improvements
shall extend to the property line of    shall extend to the property line of
the farthest lot(s) receiving access    the farthest lot(s) which will receive
from this corridor.                     access from this corridor. The corridor
Minimum required cross-section:         shall extend to any appropriate
                                       adjoining property boundary.
                                        Minimum required cross-section:
   Condition 4: Corridor serves five to ten lots
                                        Type B
Type A                                  Minimum corridor width: 50'
Minimum corridor width: 50'             Minimum centerline radius: 100'
Minimum centerline radius: 100'         Corridor profile grade, horizontal
Corridor profile grade, horizontal      alignment, length and drainage shall
alignment, length and drainage shall    meet the standards for a public street.
meet the standards for a public street. Certified construction plans shall be
Certified construction plans shall be   submitted to the county highway
submitted to the county highway         engineer for approval. The improvements
engineer for approval. Improvements     shall extend to the property line of
shall extend to the property line of    the farthest lot(s)receiving access
the farthest lot(s) receiving access    from this corridor. The corridor shall
from this corridor.                     extend to any appropriate adjoining
Minimum required cross-section:         property boundary.
                                       Required cross-section:
                                         
 
      (3)   The following requirements shall apply to access easements and
reserved right-of-way corridors:
         (a)   Side lines shall be monumented in the same manner as is required
for a public right-of-way.
         (b)   The developer shall install topsoil, and shall rake, seed and
mulch disturbed and barren areas after grading.
         (c)   All access easement and reserved right-of-way corridors shall
originate from public streets.
         (d)   The plat or drawing shall indicate the type of corridor depicted
thereon.
         (e)   A sign assembly approved by the County Highway Department shall
be placed at the intersection of the corridor with the public street. The sign
shall state the access street name and indicate the addresses served. The signs
shall indicate that the street is private. Street names shall be shown on the
plat or drawing.
         (f)   A turnaround approved by the county highway engineer shall be
constructed near the end of improved corridor. If a pull-in-type turnaround is
used, the property owner shall install appropriate signs prohibiting vehicles
from blocking the pull-in area.
         (g)   Whenever an access corridor is platted on a lot which has an
existing drive that is in an location which is unsuitable because of inadequate
sight distance, inadequate driveway separation, or other similar condition, the
property owner shall relocate the existing drive to provide access from the new
corridor.
         (h)   When more than one lot is served by an access easement or
reserved right-of-way corridor, there shall be restrictive covenants adequate
to ensure proper maintenance.
         (i)   Whenever an access easement or reserved right-of-way corridor
crosses a lot or agricultural remainder where future dedication of the corridor
would create separate buildable lot(s), agricultural tract(s), or unbuildable
remnant(s), the land so crossed shall be platted as separate lot(s), tract(s)
or unbuildable parcel(s) at the time the corridor is created.
         (j)   The plat committee may approve subdivisions with a maximum four
lots served by an access easement or a reserved right-of-way corridor. Plats
containing more than four lots served by such corridor may be approved only by
the County Plan Commission. No more than ten lots shall be served by the same
access easement or reserved right-of-way. A public street meeting the standards
of this ordinance is required for any subdivision containing more than ten lots
receiving access from the same corridor.
      (4)   Secondary approval shall not be granted for a subdivision that
requires certified construction plans and improvements, as described above,
unless the owner does the following:
         (a)   Completes the required improvements shown on the approved
construction drawings within one year after primary approval; or
         (b)   Posts a financial guarantee in an amount equal to 125% of the
estimated cost of improvements shown on the approved construction drawings and
enters into a written agreement stating that the improvements will be completed
within a period of one year after the date of secondary approval.
   (B)   Drainage and utility easements. There shall be easements at least ten
feet in width on each side of any street which has a right-of-way width of less
than 50 feet.
   (C)   Utility easements. Adequate areas of suitable size and location shall
be allocated for utility easements. The easements shall provide reasonable
continuity from block to block and shall be at least 15 feet in width. The
Commission may require larger easements when it deems the additional width
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this section.
   (D)   Drainage easements. Easements shall be provided where the Commission
deems them necessary to provide proper drainage for the subdivision. The
easements shall be at least 15 feet in width and may be coincident with utility
easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a legal drain, the easement for
the drain shall be in accordance with the Indiana Code requirements for legal
drains.
   (E)   Maintenance easements. Where the Commission deems appropriate,
easements for the maintenance of dams or adjoining property may be required.
   (F)   Farm tile easements. Where there are farm tiles which are to remain on
property proposed for subdivision, an easement at least 20 feet in width shall
be provided for protection and maintenance of such tiles. The Commission may
require larger easements when it deems additional width necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this section.
   (G)   Farm access easements. All parcels, including agricultural property
shall have legal access meeting the minimum standards of this chapter. In
addition to the legal access, access easements at least 25 feet in width for
farm machinery and other agricultural purposes may be provided. The easements
shall not be permitted unless the remaining property has legal access, frontage
and width.
(Prior Code, § 8-60) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1998-11, passed 8-
17-1998; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.097 DRAINAGE.
   The Commission shall not approve any subdivision which does not make
adequate provision for installation and maintenance of an adequate storm water
drainage system. A drainage plan shall be submitted with all computations and
backup data describing the storm drainage system. This report shall be reviewed
by the County Engineer and County Surveyor who shall make recommendations
regarding it to the Commission.
   (A)   Methodology. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system. The storm water drainage system shall
be designed by the Rational Method or other method approved by the County
Engineer and a copy of the design computations shall be submitted with the
plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or
around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in a gutter,
or when the encroachment of storm water into the street disrupts traffic. When
calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further
allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point and catch basins or inlets
shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns
shall be shown for each lot and block.
      (1)   Runoff. Drainage systems shall be designed so that there is no
increase in the rate of runoff leaving the property involved in the subdivision
after development. The County Engineer shall review the proposed drainage
facilities and provide the Commission with an opinion as to whether the system
is of sufficient size, based upon the provisions of the required construction
standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed
development permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
      (2)   Downstream areas. The applicant shall provide information for
review by the Department and County Engineer regarding the effect of each
proposed subdivision on existing drainage facilities outside the area of the
subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the
development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage
facility, the Commission shall not approve the subdivision until provision has
been made for the improvement of the potential condition.
      (3)   Areas of poor drainage. Areas which are not in designated floodway
or floodway fringe areas, but contain soils which are subject to flooding may
be approved for subdivision by the Commission; provided that, the applicant
fills the affected areas of the subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place
building sites (including septic system locations) and streets two feet above
ponding levels.
   (B)   Drainage patterns. Natural drainage patterns and natural stream
channels shall be maintained wherever possible.
   (C)   Blocks and lots. Each block shall be adequately drained, either
through the streets or by the use of a ditch, culvert or other approved method.
Each lot shall be graded in accordance with the standards set forth in the
Erosion Control Handbook.
   (D)   Streets. All roads abutting or included within property to be
subdivided shall be provided with drainage systems in accordance with the
standards contained in this chapter.
   (E)   Erosion control. Any disturbed or graded area shall be protected from
erosion in accordance with the Erosion Control Handbook.
   (F)   Retention ponds. The Commission may require retention ponds to
regulate the flow at the outfall. The ponds shall be protected from erosion in
accordance with the Erosion Control Handbook. The ponds shall be designed and
constructed to enable adequate access for maintenance.
   (G)   Off-road drainage. Off-road drainage systems shall be extended to a
watercourse or ditch of adequate size to receive the storm water.
   (H)   Connections to existing systems. Connection to a state drainage system
is allowed only with written approval from the State Department of
Transportation. Connection to a county legal drain is allowed only with written
approval in accordance with the Indiana Code requirements for local drains.
Connection to a county road ditch is allowed only with written approval from
the County Engineer.
   (I)   Maintenance of drainage systems. The Commission shall not approve any
subdivision for which adequate provision for maintenance of drainage systems
has not been made. The provision may include, but is not limited to, acceptance
of the system by the County Drainage Board or establishment of a lot owners
association with responsibility to set and collect fees for drainage system
maintenance. Roadside ditches shall not be filled without written approval of
the County Engineer.
   (J)   Drainage report. The drainage report shall identify the applicable
areas of concern and problem areas as listed on the selection matrix contained
in the Erosion Control Handbook and shall indicate the control strategies for
these problem areas. The report shall indicate the existing and proposed
drainage conditions and the individual practices to be used to accomplish the
objectives of this chapter. Methods selected to control drainage shall be
consistent with the Handbook. The report shall evaluate the ability of the
proposed water course, channels, drainage tiles, farm tiles, storm sewers,
culverts and other improvements to handle the run-off. A registered
professional engineer or land surveyor shall prepare this report. The report
shall include:
      (1)   Estimates of the water entering the subdivision. Estimates shall
assume that the upper watershed will be fully developed according to the
current land use plan;
      (2)   Conditions of the watershed that may affect run-off such as subsoil
type, positive drainage channels, obstructions and so forth;
      (3)   Quantities of flow at each pickup point or culvert;
      (4)   Description of minor and major drainage systems. The minor system
will usually consist of, but not be limited to, storm sewers, drainage ditches,
drainage swales, storm inlets or infiltration structures. The minor system
shall be designed to handle a ten-year storm. The major system will usually
consist of, but not be limited to, roadways, culverts, bridges or overflow
drainage ways. The major system shall be designed to handle a 50-year storm;
      (5)   The location of all existing subsurface drainage tiles and a plan
to preserve or relocate the tiles; and
      (6)   Proposals which include holding lagoons, storm water ponds or
infiltration facilities shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer
and shall include data coordinating field tests with design assumptions and
estimates of expected annual maintenance costs.
   (K)   Erosion control plan.
      (1)   This plan shall identify the applicable areas of concern and
problem areas as listed on the selection matrix contained in the Erosion
Control Handbook and shall indicate the control strategies for these problem
areas. The plan shall indicate the proposed individual practices to be used to
accomplish the objectives of this chapter.
      (2)   Methods selected to control erosion shall be consistent with the
Handbook.
(Prior Code, § 8-61) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.098 MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Subdivisions crossing municipal or county boundaries. Lots which
straddle municipal or county boundaries should be avoided wherever practical.
If a subdivision is located in more than one jurisdiction, approvals from all
plan commissions in affected jurisdictions shall be required. If access to a
subdivision is required across land in another jurisdiction, the applicant
shall provide evidence that the access is legally established and the access
shall be permitted only if the County Engineer finds that the access road is
adequately improved or a performance bond has been duly executed to assure the
construction of the access road.
   (B)   Maintenance of improvements. Before approving any subdivision, the
Commission shall review the improvement plans and shall ensure that there are
adequate methods to maintain all improvements. The improvements include, but
are not limited to, recreation facilities, common open space, private
pedestrian ways, private sewer and water systems and drainage facilities.
   (C)   Off-site improvements. In reviewing an application for approval of a
subdivision under this section, the Commission shall consider the adequacy of
existing county roads and other facilities to serve the proposed subdivision
and may require the subdivider to make and pay for improvements deemed
necessary by the Commission. In no case shall the county be obligated to make
improvements for the purpose of making private land suitable for development.
   (D)   Oversized improvements. The Commission may require the installation of
oversized improvements where it deems the improvements to be in the best
interests of the county. In the event that the improvements are required, the
county shall be responsible for the additional cost related to the oversizing
of the required improvements.
(Prior Code, § 8-62) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.099 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General. Any proposed subdivision containing land that is zoned or
otherwise intended to be used for commercial, industrial or multi-family uses
is subject to the design standards contained in this section, in addition to
those standards applying to all subdivisions of land.
   (B)   Arrangement of lots and/or blocks. Proposed commercial, industrial or
multi-family parcels shall be laid out in such a manner as to provide safe
access; harmonious arrangements of land uses; separation of differing modes of
transportation; areas for drainage runoff and, where applicable, retention
areas; parking; landscape buffers; and utilities.
   (C)   Frontage. Each lot or parcel shall have the full required frontage on
a public road meeting the minimum standards of this chapter.
   (D)   Streets. If access will be required for large trucks and/or heavy
loads, the Commission may increase the construction and design requirements
upon the recommendation of the County Engineer. Roads serving primarily non-
residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended
to the boundary of adjacent tracts used or zoned for residential purposes, nor
shall primarily residential roads be used for access to industrial
subdivisions. Multi-family dwelling complexes shall be designed to discourage
traffic from using streets designed and constructed primarily for single-family
residential use.
   (E)   Alleys. Alleys may be permitted by the Commission to provide loading
and service areas. The alleys shall have a right-of-way width of at least 20
feet and a pavement width of at least 16 feet.
   (F)   Other. The following items shall be addressed, either through the lot
design or through notations placed upon the plat:
      (1)   Loading docks and parking. Loading docks, truck parking and/or
truck turnaround areas shall be designated by the use of signs and pavement
markings. These areas shall be separated from parking and access areas used by
automobiles or pedestrian traffic. Public streets shall not be used for truck
parking, standing or backing.
      (2)   Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be required at all entrances and exits
to structures and storage areas and at all locations of hydrants, Siamese
connections, sprinkler controls or other locations deemed appropriate by the
Commission. Fire lanes shall be marked by signs and pavement markings in
accordance with current standards and specifications.
      (3)   Parking lots. Parking lots shall have a hard, dust-free surface and
shall be designed to provide safe, well-defined points of ingress and egress.
The Commission may require physical barriers, pavement markings, signs and
landscaping as it deems necessary to properly channel traffic to designated
parking entrances and exits.
      (4)   Buffers. Subdivisions containing land zoned for commercial or
multi-family use shall contain landscaped buffer areas at least 15 feet in
depth along all lot lines abutting land zoned for single-family or two-family
residential use. Subdivisions containing land zoned for industrial use shall
contain landscaped buffer areas at least 25 feet in depth along all lot lines
abutting land used or zoned for residential use. The subdivision plans must
show the planting details, including the type(s) and height of vegetation and
the caliper of trees to be planted. The landscaped buffer shall be at least six
feet in height and shall consist of materials which will form a dense screen
within two years or an opaque fence shall be constructed to accomplish this
purpose. The design and materials of the fence shall be shown on the plans.
      (5)   Snow storage. Developments which have parking, loading and driveway
areas in excess of 40,000 square feet shall contain snow storage areas.
Drainage plans shall include plans for the disposal of melt water.
   (G)   Drainage. A drainage plan meeting the specifications contained in §
156.097 shall be submitted. The system shall be designed so as to minimize the
disposal of storm water off-site. The system shall make maximum use of on-site
retention ponds or detention basins to minimize the downstream impact of the
drainage from the site.
   (H)   Water and sewer facilities. The Commission may impose requirements as
it deems necessary on the installation of water and sewer facilities.
(Prior Code, § 8-63) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-
25-1988; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
IMPROVEMENTS AND INSTALLATIONS
§ 156.110 GENERAL.
   Improvements required by this chapter shall be installed in accordance with
the specifications of this subchapter. Improvement plans required by this
chapter shall show all details necessary to indicate compliance with these
standards.
(Prior Code, § 8-66) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.111 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Monuments and markers shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
and specifications set forth in §
156.178.
(Prior Code, § 8-67) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.112 STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION.
   All streets required to be constructed or improved under the terms of this
chapter shall conform to the standards and specifications contained in §
156.092.
   (A)   Major intersections. When subdivision streets intersect with collector
or arterial streets, the subdivider may be required to install deceleration and
passing lanes or other improvements along the major street.
   (B)   Pavement construction. All street construction undertaken under the
terms of this chapter shall conform to the standards set forth in §§
156.130 through
156.139.
   (C)   Development on existing streets. Existing streets on which new lots
will front or which intersect with new private streets or access easements and
thus will receive the traffic flow generated by the subdivision shall be
improved at the applicant’s expense to standards adequate to safely and
adequately handle the traffic the Commission estimates will be generated by the
development of the lots in the subdivision. The Commission may, when it deems
appropriate, require funds sufficient to cover the cost of required
improvements to be placed in escrow with the County Auditor for future
improvements to existing streets. The County Engineer shall recommend to the
Commission the improvement standards appropriate to the subdivision.
   (D)   Curb and gutter. All curb and gutter required to be installed under
the terms of this chapter shall conform to the standards set forth in §§
156.130 through
156.139.
(Prior Code, § 8-68) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.113 SIDEWALKS AND WHEELCHAIR RAMPS.
   When sidewalks are required (see §
156.093), they shall be constructed of portland cement concrete at least four
inches thick and four feet wide. A grassed or landscaped strip at least two
feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. Ramps for access by
disabled persons shall be provided at all corners and at other locations as the
Commission deems appropriate for adequate access.
(Prior Code, § 8-69) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.114 DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   The applicant shall be required to install a drainage system as shown on the
approved plans. All roadside drainage structures and all culverts installed
pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the standards set forth in §§
156.130 through
156.139.
(Prior Code, § 8-70) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.115 WATER.
   (A)   Public water systems. If the subdivision can be served by a public or
community water system, the applicant shall install a complete water
distribution system to the specifications of the water utility which will serve
the subdivision and/or with all applicable regulations, including Recommended
Standards for Water Works, published by the Health Education Service, Inc.,
Albany, New York. The water system shall include any required hydrants.
   (B)   Future water service. If the subdivided area is planned or scheduled
to be served by a public or community water system in the future, the
Commission may require the applicant to provide facilities for future
connection.
(Prior Code, § 8-71) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.116 SEWAGE.
   (A)   Public sewer service. If the subdivision can be served by a public or
community sewer system, the applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities
to the specifications of the utility which will serve the subdivision and/or
all applicable regulations, including Recommended Standards for Sewage Works,
published by the Health Education Service, Inc., Albany, New York.
   (B)   Future sewage service. If the subdivided area is planned or scheduled
to be served by a public or community sanitary sewer system in the future, the
Commission may require the applicant to provide facilities for future
connection, including, but not limited to, pumping stations, capped mains and
laterals, for each lot in the subdivision.
(Prior Code, § 8-72) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.117 SOIL PRESERVATION, GRADING AND SEEDING.
   (A)   Grading. All lots and other land included within a subdivision shall
be graded in accordance with the approved construction plans. Except for land
covered by buildings, included in streets, or where the grade has not been
changed and natural vegetation not seriously disturbed, the land shall be
covered with topsoil containing no particles more than two inches in diameter
and having an average depth of at least four inches. Topsoil shall not be
removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so
as to provide at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs and
between shoulders and right-of-way lines and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
   (B)   Seeding. Seeding and planting shall be completed in accordance with
the Erosion Control Handbook.
   (C)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, rocks, stones, junk,
rubbish or other waste material shall be buried in any land, or left or
deposited on any lot or street at the time of occupancy within a subdivision,
nor shall any material be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at
the time of expiration of the performance guarantee or dedication of public
improvements.
   (D)   Fencing. The Commission may require the applicant to provide and
install fences wherever the Commission determines that a hazardous condition
may exist. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the fences have
been installed.
(Prior Code, § 8-73) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.118 OTHER INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   The applicant shall be required to install county street name signs at
the intersections of all streets and wherever streets change names and at any
other locations deemed appropriate by the Commission.
   (B)   Other traffic control signs shall be installed by the applicant when
the Commission deems the signs necessary or desirable.
   (C)   The applicant shall install any other improvements shown on the
approved construction plans.
(Prior Code, § 8-76) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT; MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.130 GENERAL.
   These standards apply to all roadway improvements made in the county under
the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-77) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.131 INCREASED REQUIREMENTS.
   The standards contained herein are minimum design standards. The Commission
may raise these requirements where existing or anticipated conditions indicate
that more than 10% of the traffic to be carried by a street will be truck
traffic and/or consist of trucks requiring oversize load permits. After
recommendation from the County Engineer, the Commission shall require all
streets to be designed for the estimated conditions.
(Prior Code, § 8-78) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.132 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   Unless otherwise stated, all materials and construction procedures and
design details shall be in accordance with the most recent editions of the
Standard Specifications, the Indiana Department of Transportation Standards,
Road Design Manual, Bridge Design Manual and A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets, published by the American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials. Any other procedure or equipment which is found
by the County Engineer to produce an acceptable end product may be substituted.
(Prior Code, § 8-79) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.133 ROADWAY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Pavement thickness.
      (1)   The minimum pavement thickness standards indicated on the tables
below shall be used for construction of new roads or overlay of existing roads.
      (2)   Any modification of these standards shall be based on a
determination of the California Bearing Ratio (CBR) by a qualified soils
engineer.
      (3)   The soil survey of the county shall be used to determine the CBR
unless soil sampling and testing has been done by a qualified soil scientist.
 
Table § 156.133(2) Pavement Thickness
Pavement Type Full Depth Asphalt  Asphalt Inches on Stone Plain Concrete
              (Inches)            (Inches)                (Inches)
Table § 156.133(2) Pavement Thickness
Pavement Type Full Depth Asphalt  Asphalt Inches on Stone  Plain Concrete
              (Inches)            (Inches)                 (Inches)
Type 1        8                   3 9                      6
Type 2        9                   3 12                     6
Type 3        10                  3 15                     8
Type 4        6                   3 6                      6
Type 5        7                   3 7                      7
Type 6        8                   3 11                     7
Type 7        8                   3 10                     6
Type 8        7                   3 8                      5
 
Table § 156.133(3) Estimated CBR Values for Indiana Soils
Soil Type Est. CBR Soil Type Est. CBR Soil Type Est. CBR
Table § 156.133(3) Estimated CBR Values for Indiana Soils
Soil Type  Est. CBR Soil Type    Est. CBR Soil Type Est. CBR
Avonburg   5        Gilpin       4        Rodman    15
Ayrshire   6        Haymond      6        Ross      3
Bartle     5        Hennepin     6        Rossmoyne 5
Berks      4        Henshaw      4        Russell   5
Bloomfield 10       Hickory      4        Saranac   2
Bonnie     4        Landes       7        Shoals    6
Brookston  3        Martinsville 6        Sleeth    5
Burnside   8        McGary       3        Steff     5
 
Table § 156.133(3) Estimated CBR Values for Indiana Soils
Soil Type Est. CBR Soil Type Est. CBR Soil Type Est. CBR
Table § 156.133(3) Estimated CBR Values for Indiana Soils
Soil Type  Est. CBR Soil Type  Est. CBR Soil Type  Est. CBR
Camden     5        Med way    6        Stendal    5
Celina     4        Miami      4        Stonelick  7
Cincinnati 5        Milton     4        Wakeland   6
Clermont   4        Nineveh    6        Weikert    4
Corydon    2        Ockley     6        Westland   4
Crosby     3        Otwell     4        Whitaker   6
Dubois     4        Peoga      4        Wilbur     6
Eel        6        Princeton  6        Xenia      5
Fincastle  5        Rarden     3        Zanesville 4
Fox        6        Rensselaer 4        Zipp       2
Genessee   6        Rockcastle 3
 
   (B)   Asphalt. Asphalt shall consist of the following:
      (1)   Surface: HAC No. 9 or 11 or HAE No. 11, Type; III (one-inch minimum
thickness);
      (2)   Binder: HAC No. 8 or 9 or HAE No. 8 or 9 (two-inch minimum
thickness);
      (3)   Base: HAC No. 4 or 5 or HAE No. 4 or 5 or 5D;
      (4)   Prime Coat: AE-SP (applied at the rate of approximately 0.5 gal./
yd2); and
      (5)   Tack Coat: AE-T (applied at the rate of approximately 0.05 gal./
yd2).
   (C)   Concrete. Concrete pavement shall be plain Portland cement concrete.
Joint spacing shall be at a maximum of 15 feet.
   (D)   Stone. Stone shall be Type O compacted aggregate No. 53.
   (E)   Temporary turn-arounds. Temporary turn-arounds required by this
chapter shall be constructed of at least six inches of stone.
(Prior Code, § 8-80) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.134 DITCHES.
   (A)   Slope. The minimum slope on all roadside ditches shall be 0.25%. The
maximum side slope for ditches along arterial, collector and subdivision
streets shall be three to one (3:1) and the maximum back slope shall be two to
one (2:1). For local streets, the maximum side slope shall be two to one (2:1).
   (B)   Depth. The minimum depth of all roadside ditches shall be 18 inches
below the edge of pavement.
   (C)   Seeding or paving. All roadside ditches with grades of less than 3%
shall be seeded and mulched with straw or sodded. All ditches with grades of at
least 3%, but less than 5% shall be sodded and all ditches with grades of 5% or
more shall be paved. Any method of stabilizing the ditches which is deemed
equivalent of the foregoing by the County Engineer is acceptable. Seeding and
sodding shall be in conformance with the State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications. The seed mixture to be used shall be indicated on the
plans.
(Prior Code, § 8-81) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.135 CURB AND GUTTER.
   Curb and gutter shall conform with the State Department of Transportation
standards and shall be constructed of portland cement concrete.
(Prior Code, § 8-82) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.136 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   All traffic control devices, including regulatory, warning and guide signs
and pavement markings (if necessary) shall conform to the most recent edition
of the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(Prior Code, § 8-83) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.137 CULVERTS.
   (A)   Materials. All culverts shall be corrugated aluminum, galvanized
corrugated steel, corrugated plastic or concrete pipe.
   (B)   Size. All culverts installed within street rights-of-way shall be a
minimum of 12 inches in diameter. Pipe end sections shall be installed on all
pipes 36 or fewer inches in diameter. All culverts under the roadway shall
extend at least the full roadway width, including the shoulders.
(Prior Code, § 8-84) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.138 GUARD RAILS.
   All guard rails shall be “blocked out” from posts a minimum of four inches.
All guard rail ends shall be terminated in buried ends or breakaway cable
terminals unless they are wrapped around a driveway or field entrance in
accordance with State Department of Highway standards.
(Prior Code, § 8-85) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.139 CONSTRUCTION SIGNS AND BARRICADES.
   Construction signs and barricades shall be adequate to protect the area
under construction, workers and the traveling public. The applicant shall be
responsible for maintaining the signs and barricades to the satisfaction of the
County Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 8-86) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
CERTIFICATES AND NOTATIONS
§ 156.150 GENERAL.
   All plats or drawings must contain all applicable certificates and notations
included in this chapter in substantially the same form indicated. Deviations
in form or wording may be permitted by the Department, provided that the
certificate or notation fulfills its intended purpose. Additional certificates
and/or notations may be required by the official designated to sign the final
plat where special circumstances warrant the additions. Using the templates as
a guide, in all cases, the appropriate number of signature lines for each
certificate shall be provided. Each of the certificates shall be included on
all subdivisions unless otherwise noted.
(Prior Code, § 8-89) (Ord. 1987-01, passed 1-26-1987; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.151 SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE.
 
   SURVEYOR CERTIFICATE
   I,  (name)  , hereby, certify that I am a professional land surveyor, licensed in compliance with the laws of the State of
Indiana;
   Any of the following applicable statements shall be inlcuded in the Surveyor’s Certificate:
   (A)   that, to the best of my knowledge, this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me, or under my supervision on
     (Date)      : that any changes from the description appearing on the last record transfer of the land contained in the final
plat are so indicated;
   (B)   that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or will be installed.
   (C)   that, the land shown on this drawing has not previously been platted, and no additional monuments have been or will be
set under my supervision.
   (D)   that, except as otherwise indicated, this administrative/agricultural subdivision has been prepared in accordance with
property descriptions contained in existing deeds  (insert #) , without the benefit of a field survey.
        (Signature)                                                 RLS (#)                              (Date)               
(Seal)
 
 
(Prior Code, § 8-90) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.152 OWNER’S CERTIFICATE.
 
   OWNER CERTIFICATE
   We, the undersigned,       (Names) , owner(s) of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby certify that we
have laid off, platted, and subdivided said real estate in accordance with this plat.
   The subdivision shall be known and designated as  (Insert Subdivision Title)  consisting of (#) lots, (#) administrative
lots, (#) common areas, (#) tracts, (#) remainders and (#) utility parcels, identified as    (list names of lots/
administrative lots/common areas/parent tracts/agriculture tracts/remainders/utility parcels and containing in all (#) acres.
   All public streets and alleys shown and designated as such and not previously dedicated are hereby dedicated to the
public. Other public lands shown and not previously dedicated are hereby dedicated for public use.
   Clear title to the land contained in this subdivision is guaranteed. (Any encumbrances and special assessments are
explained as follows:)
   The building setbacks shall be determined by the applicable zoning regulations of current adoption, as periodically
amended.
   Future Subdivision Rights: Per the current zoning designation (insert zoning abbreviation), the remaining future
subdivision rights of the subject property, as described in the City of Columbus - Bartholomew County Zoning Ordinance,
effective (April 2008), are assigned as follows: (list all resulting parcels, lots, common areas, tracts, and remainders with
appropriate subdivisions rights for each) This paragraph should be on all plats unless determined not relevant by the
Planning Department based on zoning and jurisdiction.
   Any of the following paragraphs which are applicable shall be included in the Owner s Certificate:
   (A)   Private Access: There are private access easements and/or private streets shown on this plat and marked accordingly.
( This access or Easement A, B, C, etc. ) is intended to serve  (Insert Lot #s) for the purpose of (legal access, farming
only access, maintenance, etc.) (Repeat this sentence as appropriate for subdivisions with multiple easements. Differentiate
multiple access easements by A, B, C. etc.) These are intended to be private in perpetuity, and there is no obligation for
any government entity to assume any responsibility for these. The responsibility for maintenance and snow removal is assumed
by the property owners of lots and not by the County.
   (B)   Utility Easement: There are strips of ground shown on this plat and marked utility easement , reserved for the use
of public utilities and subject to the paramount right of any such utility to isntall, repair, maintain or replace its
installation.
   (C)   Drainage Easement: All drainage easements identified on the plat are specifically authorized to be used for drainage
purposes. This area shall not be disturbed in such a manner as to interfere with the flow of storm water. No plantings,
structures, fill, or regrading shall be permitted in such easements unless authorized by the County Engineer.
   (D)   Pedestrian Easement: There are pedestrian easements shown on this plat and marked accordingly. They are intended to
serve (the public), and in no instance shall be deemed to be limited to the use of the owner(s) of lots in this plat or other
subset of the general public.
   (E)   Flood Certificate: This subdivision contains property included in the mapped floodplain on the National Flood
Insurance Rate Map Number (#), dated (Date). (Include any map amendments, ex. LOMR, with case number and effective date). All
construction, fill, grading, or alteration of the mapped floodplain shall be done in accordance with the provisions in the
Columbus - Bartholomew County, Indiana Zoning Ordinance as periodically amended. If the applicable, adopted floodplain map is
amended or otherwise changed after this plat has been recorded, that updated floodplain mapping shall apply and the out-of-
date floodplain information on the plat shall be disregarded.
   (F)   Regulated Drain: There is an existing regulated drain right-of-way for the (Name of Regulated Drain) shown on this
plat, reserved for the maintenance and reconstruction of this drain. The right-of-way is under jurisdiction of the
Bartholomew County Drainage Board and further described under Indiana Code 36-9-27-33.
   (G)   Cemetery Note: This property contains a known burial site. A person may not disturb the ground within 100 feet of a
burial ground or cemetery for the purpose of excavating or covering over the ground or erecting, altering, or repairing any
structure without having a development plan approved by the Division of Historic Preservation and Archaeology as described
under Indiana Code 14-21-1-26.5. This 100-foot buffer is identified on the plat drawing.
   (H)   Agriculture Remainder/Tract: No building permits shall be issued for agriculture remainders and/or agriculture
tracts contained in this subdivision unless subsequently replatted as eligible building lots.
   (I)   Restrictions and Covenants: The lots in this subdivision are subject to restrictions and covenants as set forth in
Plat Book (#), Page (#) and any amendments thereto. Restrictions and covenants are private agreements between the owners
within the subdivision and will not be enforced, recognized, or otherwise administered by ( the City of Columbus or
Bartholomew County ).
   (J)   Previous Plat Vacation: (Lot #s) in (Insert Subdivision Title) are hereby vacated by this plat.
      (Repeat this sentence as appropriate for plats with lots from multiple subdivisions.)
   (K)   Variance Notification: Describe the variance granted. Granted by the Bartholomew County Board of Zoning Appeals/
Hearing Officer per case number (insert case number).
      (Add this paragraph if a variance is required for the plat to be approved, and deemed appropriate by the Planning
Department to be referenced on the recorded plat. For example buildable rights or permitted lot size, but not setback or
drive separation.)
   WITNESS OUR HANDS AND SEALS this (day) day of (month), (year).
                      (Signature of Owner)                          (Signature of Owner)
   (Name, include title if owner is a company or trust)      (Name, include title if owner is a company or trust)
   STATE OF INDIANA         )
                        ) SS:
   COUNTY OF BARTHOLOMEW   )
   Before me, the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State, personally appeared (Name, include title if
owner is a company or trust) who acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed,
for the purposes therein expressed.
   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this (day) day of (month), (year).
                                              
   Notary Public (Seal)
                                              
   County of Residence
                                              
   My Commission Expires
 
(Prior Code, § 8-91) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 1-
26-1987; Ord 1998- 11, passed 8-17-1998; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.153 PRIMARY APPROVAL CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The following certificate shall be used for items that receive
approval from the Plan Commission:
 
   PRIMARY APPROVAL
   Under authority provided by IC 36-7-4-700, Subdivision Control, and any amendments thereto, this plat was given PRIMARY APPROVAL by Bartholomew County, Indiana as follows:
   Approved by the Plan Commission at a meeting held                                   ,              .
                                                                                                                                           
   President: (Name)                           Secretary: (Name)
   Void unless secondary approval is received by                                    ,                 .
 
   (B)   The following certificate shall be used for items that receive
approval from the Plat Committee:
 
   PRIMARY APPROVAL
   Under authority provided by IC 36-7-4-700, Subdivision Control, and any amendments thereto, this plat was given PRIMARY APPROVAL Bartholomew County, Indiana as follows:
   Approved by the Plat Committee at a meeting held                                  ,            .
                                                                                                                                                      
   Chairman: (Name)                     Secretary: (Name)
   Void unless secondary approval is received by                                                           ,                       .
 
 
(Prior Code, § 8-90) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1994-02, passed 1-
24-1994; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.154 SECONDARY APPROVAL CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The following text shall be included on all secondary plats of major
subdivisions:
 
   PRIMARY APPROVAL
   This plat received approval from the Bartholomew County Plan Commission at
the meeting held                 ,        .
 
 
   (B)   The following certificate shall be used for all items that receive
secondary approval.
 
   SECONDARY APPROVAL
   All conditions of primary approval have been met and this plat is granted secondary approval.
   Approved by the Planning Director this          day of                       ,            .
                                                            
   Planning Director: (Name)
   Void unless recorded by                         ,            .
 
(Prior Code, § 8-93) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.155 ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL CERTIFICATE.
   The following certificate shall be used for all administrative subdivisions:
 
ADMINISTRATION SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
   This plat has been determined to be an administrative subdivision and is eligible for recording as
such.
   Approved by the Planning Director this         day of                       ,          .
                                                     
   Planning Director: (Name)
   Void unless recorded by                     ,            .
 
(Prior Code, § 8-94) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-
21-2021)
§ 156.156 AGRICULTURAL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL CERTIFICATE.
   The following certificate shall be used for all agriculture subdivisions:
 
AGRICULTURE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
   This subdivision has been determined to be an agricultural subdivision and is eligible for recording as
such. No building permits shall be issued for agriculture remainders and/or agriculture tracts contained
in this subdivision unless subsequently replatted as eligible building lots.
   Approved by the Planning Director this         day of                       ,          .
                                                     
   Planning Director: (Name)
   Void unless recorded by                     ,            .
 
(Prior Code, § 8-95) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1993-03, passed 4-
26-1993; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.157 IMPROVEMENT PLANS CERTIFICATE.
   The following certificate shall appear on each sheet of the final
improvement plans for a major subdivision.
IMPROVEMENT PLANS
This document contains or is a part of the approved improvement plans for
                                           . The improvements to be installed
in this subdivision will not be accepted for maintenance by the County
Commissioners unless and until all improvements shown hereon have been
installed and are in substantial compliance with these plans. Planning Director
                                                                                                                                                     
Planning Director
                                                                                                                                                     
Date
(Prior Code, § 8-96) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.158 BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS CERTIFICATE.
   The following certificate shall appear on all plats containing land and/or
improvements to be dedicated to the public.
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
The dedication(s) shown on this plat is (are) hereby accepted by the Board of
County Commissioners of Bartholomew County, Indiana, at a meeting held on the
                day of                         ,                  .
[The following paragraph shall appear on all plats involving improvements for
which financial guarantees of performance are posted.]
This acceptance does not constitute acceptance for maintenance by the county.
Maintenance by the county shall commence only after the release of the
financial guarantee.
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     
ATTEST:
                                                                                                                                                     
County Auditor
(Prior Code, § 8-97) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.159 AUDITOR’S CERTIFICATE.
 
   The real property has been duly entered for taxation and transferred on the records of the Auditor of Bartholomew County
this         day of                       ,          .
                                                                
   Bartholomew County Auditor: (Name)
 
(Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.160 RECORDER’S CERTIFICATE.
 
RECORDER’S CERTIFICATE
   Recorded in Plat Book           , page number            , this         day of                                 ,           , at
                       o’clock    m.
   Instrument No.                  . Fee Paid $             .
                                                                           
   Bartholomew County Recorder: (Name)
   A notation has been made on the original plat of “(Insert Subdivision Title)”, Plat Book (#) Page (#). (This paragraph to be added below the
Recorder’s Certificate on any subdivision that contains land that has previously been recorded.)
   I affirm, under the penalties for perjury, that I have taken reasonable care to redact each social security number in this document, unless
required by law. (Name of who created document) (This paragraph to be added on all documents intended to be recorded.)
 
 
(Prior Code, § 8-90) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1989-07, passed 7-
31-1989; Ord. 1993-03, passed 4-26-1993; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.161 DEDICATION CERTIFICATE.
   The following text shall be included on all plats requiring Board of County
Commissioner’s Approval (those subdivisions dedicating right-of-way that are
located in the unincorporated areas of the county and outside a city or town’s
extra-territorial jurisdiction):
 
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS APPROVAL
   The dedication(s) shown on this plat is (are) hereby accepted, on behalf of the public, by the Board of County Commissioners of Bartholomew County, Indiana, at a meeting held this          day of                     ,        .
   This acceptance does not constitute acceptance for maintenance by the County. Maintenance of any improvements by the County shall commence only after all improvements have been installed, the improvements have found to be in substantial compliance with the approved improvements plans, and the release
of the financial guarantees for performance, which requires a separate Board approval.
                                                                                                                                                        
   Commissioner: (Name)                     Commissioner: (Name)
                                                                                                                                                        
   Commissioner: (Name)                     Attest: (Name)
 
(Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
SURVEYS AND PREPARATION OF PLATE
§ 156.175 GENERAL.
   All surveys shall be conducted and plats prepared in accordance with the
State Survey Standards adopted by the State Society of Professional Land
Surveyors and any amendments thereto. In the event of any difference between
the State Survey Standards and this chapter, the stricter requirement shall
apply.
(Prior Code, § 8-102) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.176 DRAFTING.
   All plats submitted for approval shall be prepared by or under the
supervision of a professional land surveyor licensed in compliance with the
laws of the state. All drawings shall be neat, legible, reproducible, reducible
and drawn on a permanent material.
   (A)   Material. All plats of major and minor subdivisions shall be drawn on
Mylar or equivalent material at least two mils in thickness. Agricultural and
administrative subdivisions may be drawn on white paper.
   (B)   Lettering, symbols and drafting. Lettering identifying surveying
points or labeling items displayed graphically shall be done using a Leroy or
equivalent lettering system or freehand using plastic lead (El to E3).
Lettering shall be no smaller than 14 point or one-eighths inch in height and
shall be legible when the drawing is reduced 65%. Symbols shall be drawn using
appropriate templates. Certificates and notations shall be typewritten or drawn
using a Leroy or equivalent lettering system. Drafting may be done with pen and
ink or plastic lead as specified above. Lettering for agricultural and
administrative subdivisions which are not intended for reduction may contain
smaller lettering which is neat, black and legible.
   (C)   Legend.
      (1)   All plats shall contain a legend, using the following standard
symbols:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1354.jpg]   5/8 inch x 30 inch rebar set
•   5/8 inch rebar found
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1356.jpg]   Section corner monument set
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1360.jpg]   Section corner found
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1358.jpg]   Other types of monuments set
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1363.jpg]   Other types of monuments found
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1365.jpg]   5/8 inch x 30 inch rebar set at all other property
corners
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/248dbfd6b0399e2887c818d9f0dece2719d08f79/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1367.jpg]   State highway r/w monument found
      (2)   Note: All monuments shall be described in a legend or on the plat
near the monument. Additional symbols may be required.
   (D)   Size. Plats shall be drawn on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36
inches and no smaller than 12 inches by 18 inches. Plats may consist of more
than one sheet, but each sheet shall be labeled with the name of the
subdivision and numbered. Administrative and agricultural subdivisions may be
drawn on sheets no smaller than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches.
   (E)   Copies. Copies of drawings required to be submitted under the terms of
this chapter shall be blueline or blackline prints and shall be legible.
   (F)   Layout. Layout of the sheet should be similar to the example except
when the configuration of the property prohibits the layout.
   (G)   Contents. Each plat shall contain as a minimum the following:
      (1)   Name of subdivision;
      (2)   North arrow;
      (3)   Bar scale;
      (4)   Title block containing the name and address of the land surveyor or
surveying firm which prepared the plat;
      (5)   Names of roads and adjoining subdivisions with lot designations and
title of the plat including plat book and page number;
      (6)   Location map;
      (7)   If the boundary of the plat is represented by a U.S. public land
survey section line, two section corners shall be shown for each section line
with bearings and distances to each section corner;
      (8)   If the property involved in the subdivision is located on an
existing county road and right-of-way is to be dedicated to the county by the
plat, an area summary in acres or square feet of each lot and right-of-way area
(see examples below);
         Lot 1   14,780 sq. ft.         Lot 1   1.56 ac.
         Lot 2   10,020 sq. ft.         Lot 2   6.234 ac.
         Lot 3    7,635 sq. ft.         Lot 3   1.00 ac.
         R/W    240 sq. ft.          R/W    .17 ac.
            33,675 sq. ft.            8.964 ac.
      (9)   Accurate direction and length in feet and hundreths of feet of each
line. Geometrically curved lines shall be identified with sufficient curve data
to define the curve. (Curve data include delta angle, radius, chord distance,
chord bearing, arc length, tangent length.) Lines required to be shown include,
but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Plat boundary (heavy solid line);
         (b)   Right-of-way lines of streets and alleys (solid line);
         (c)   Easements (dashed line);
         (d)   Lot lines (solid line); and
         (e)   Lines indicating easements or lot lines to be vacated by the
plat (dashed or dotted line).
      (10)   A description of all monuments including a notation as to whether
found or set;
      (11)   Accurate distances and bearings from an established monument or
property corner to the subdivision benchmark; and
      (12)   Distances and bearings for easements shown on the plat which are
sufficient to locate the easements.
(Prior Code, § 8-103) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 7-
27-1987; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-25-1988)
§ 156.177 SURVEYS.
   All surveys conducted and graphically represented under the terms of this
chapter shall comply with the minimum standards contained herein.
   (A)   Positional tolerance. The relative precision of the survey shall meet
or exceed the following: The true horizontal distance between any two points
whose positions are stated relative to each other, whether directly or
indirectly by calculation, shall not differ from the reported distance by more
than one part in 5,000, plus two-tenths feet.
   (B)   Point of beginning. The point of beginning shall be called out in the
description and on the drawing.
   (C)   Source of bearing system. The source of the bearing system shall be
stated (i.e., assumed, magnetic, astronomic) in the description by the bearing
on the face of the plat.
   (D)   Area of tract. The calculated area of the tract in square feet or
acres shall be included in the description.
   (E)   Ties. All surveys of unplatted ground shall be tied to at least two
section corners. Surveys of platted ground shall be tied to previously platted
and monumented points.
(Prior Code, § 8-104) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 1-
26-1987)
§ 156.178 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Monuments and markers shall be placed so that their centers shall coincide
exactly with the intersection of the lines to be marked.
   (A)   Monuments. Monuments shall be set at the following locations:
      (1)   At the intersections of all lines forming angles in the boundary of
a major subdivision;
      (2)   At the beginning and ending of all curves along street right-of-way
lines and at the intersection of street right-of-way lines in major
subdivisions; and
      (3)   Those points falling in paved roadway may be represented by road
nails or railroad spikes provided a witness monument is set.
   (B)   Markers. Markers or monuments shall be set at the following locations.
      (1)   At the intersection of street right-of-way lines;
      (2)   At all section corners;
      (3)   At all points where lot lines intersect curved property lines,
either front or rear;
      (4)   At all angles in property lines of lots;
      (5)   At all lot corners not otherwise described herein;
      (6)   At the beginning and ending of all curves along street right-of-way
lines;
      (7)   At all points described in this section in minor subdivisions; and
      (8)   Those points falling in paved roadway may be represented by road
nails or railroad spikes provided a witness marker is set.
   (C)   Subdivision benchmarks. One Benchmark shall be set in each major
subdivision containing 100 lots or fewer. An additional benchmark shall be set
for each additional 100 lots or fraction thereof. The locations of benchmarks
shall be approved by the County Surveyor.
      (1)   The applicant’s land surveyor shall establish subdivision benchmark
elevations by a closed level circuit from the nearest U.S.G.S. Benchmark.
      (2)   Each subdivision benchmark shall be installed behind the curb line
at an intersection so that the top of the benchmark is level with the top of
the curb, unless otherwise permitted by the County Surveyor.
   (D)   Subdivision benchmark specifications. Each benchmark shall be precast
or poured-in-place concrete with a 28-day compressive strength of 4,000 psi and
6% air entrainment. Benchmarks shall be at least 12 inches square by 36 inches
deep and shall be marked on top with a three-inch diameter curved head brass
marker set flush with the top of the concrete.
   (E)   Monument and witness monument specifications. Monuments consist of
iron pipes or steel bars at least 36 inches long and five-eighths inch in
diameter.
   (F)   Marker and witness marker specifications. Markers and witness markers
shall consist of iron or steel dowels at least 30 inches long and five-eighths
inch in diameter (e.g., 5/8” x 30” rebar).
   (G)   Cap or label. All monuments and markers shall be identified by a cap
or permanent label carrying the Surveyor’s registration number.
(Prior Code, § 8-105) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-
25-1988; Ord. 13, 1997, passed 12-1-1997)
REVIEW PROCEDURE
§ 156.190 GENERAL.
   Applicants for subdivision approval shall follow the procedure contained in
this subchapter for the type of subdivision for which approval is sought.
(Prior Code, § 8-110) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.191 DISCUSSION WITH STAFF.
   (A)   General. Prior to submitting any of the materials required by this
chapter, the applicant or his or her representative is encouraged to discuss
with the Department the nature of the land division being proposed. Based upon
the information provided at this conference, the Department will provide the
applicant a preliminary opinion as to the classification of the subdivision and
which application and review procedure applies to that type of subdivision.
Failure to hold this conference and/or to provide complete and accurate
information to the Department at this stage may cause delays in formal
consideration of the subdivision.
   (B)   Classification of land divisions. All land to be divided shall be
categorized into one of four classes in accordance with this chapter. These
classes are as follows:
      (1)   Administrative subdivision;
      (2)   Agricultural subdivision;
      (3)   Minor subdivision; and
      (4)   Major subdivision
(Prior Code, § 8-111) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.192 AGRICULTURAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Application. An application for approval of an administrative or
agricultural subdivision shall be filed at the Department on forms specified by
the Department together with all required materials (see §§
156.020 and
156.021).
   (B)   Administrative review. The Department will review the application for
compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Field trip. The Department and its representatives, at its discretion,
may visit the site any time during the review process.
   (D)   Consultation. The Department shall consult with any other persons and
agencies necessary to make an accurate determination of the compliance of the
application with the terms of this chapter. In the event of any uncertainty by
the staff as to compliance or proper classification of any subdivision, the
staff shall place the subdivision on the agenda of the Commission for
consideration.
   (E)   Written notice. After the Department has made a determination on the
application’s compliance with the criteria for an agricultural or
administrative subdivision, written notice will be sent to the applicant.
Notice will be sent within ten working days.
   (F)   Signature. After the Department has determined that the agricultural
or administrative subdivision complies with the criteria for the subdivision,
the official designated in §
156.214 shall sign the drawing.
   (G)   Recording of an agricultural or administrative subdivision. The
approved drawing must be recorded in the County Recorder’s office prior to the
expiration date or the approval will be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-112) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.193 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Primary approval procedure for minor subdivisions before the Plat
Committee. The Plan Commission hereby establishes a Plat Committee to review
and decide petitions for minor subdivisions.
      (1)   Application and fees. The application and supporting materials
shall be filed with the Planning Department. The fee, as set by the Commission,
shall be paid at the time of the filing.
      (2)   Review. The committee shall review the plat for compliance with
this chapter.
      (3)   Action. Action by the Committee shall be by a majority vote.
      (4)   Public notification. Approval may be granted by the Plat Committee
without public notice and hearing. Within ten days after approval, staff shall
provide due notice by mail to adjacent property owners and the petitioners. The
notice shall include a notification of the right to appeal the Committee’s
decision.
      (5)   Comment period. A notice of appeal must be filed with the Plan
Department within ten days after a copy of the notice is mailed.
      (6)   Appeal. Appeal shall be governed in accordance with §
156.223.
      (7)   Approval certificate. The Chairperson and Secretary of the Plat
Committee are authorized to sign the approval plat.
   (B)   Primary approval procedure for minor subdivisions before the Plan
Commission.
      (1)   Application. An application for primary approval of a minor
subdivision shall be filed at the Department on forms specified by the
Department together with all required materials (see §§
156.020 and
156.021) in accordance with the filing schedule.
      (2)   Placement on the Commission agenda. Complete applications will be
docketed for a public hearing before the Commission. The applicant will be
notified of the time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Administrative review. Prior to the meeting, the Department and the
Subdivision Review Committee will review the application for compliance with
this chapter. The Department will send a copy of its written analysis of the
proposal to the Commission and applicant prior to the public hearing.
      (4)   Field trip. The Commission and its representatives, at its
discretion, may visit the site any time during the review process.
      (5)   Public hearing notification. The Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the primary approval of the minor subdivision. At least ten days
before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be in the local newspaper of
general circulation and sent by certified mail to interested property owners as
defined by this chapter.
      (6)   Public hearing. At the public hearing, the request will be
presented, and all those present will be given an opportunity to be heard
regarding the proposal. The hearing may, at the discretion of the Commission,
be continued to another date. Additional notice of a continued hearing is not
required, but may be requested by the Commission.
      (7)   Decision by Commission. After the public hearing has been
concluded, the Commission will make a decision regarding the application. The
Commission shall make findings of fact as to the compliance of the subdivision
request with the terms of this chapter. The Commission may approve, approve
with conditions or deny the request. If the Commission denies the request, it
shall make written findings that set forth its reasons. The decision shall be
signed by the Director of the Department and the Department shall provide the
applicant with a copy.
      (8)   Signing. If the Commission grants primary approval, two officers of
the Commission shall sign the primary approval certificate.
      (9)   Written record. The Department will provide the applicant a written
record of the findings of the Commission.
   (C)   Secondary approval procedure.
      (1)   Application. After all conditions of primary approval have been
met, the applicant may request secondary approval. An application for secondary
approval shall be filed at the Department on forms specified by the Department
together with any supporting documents required by the Department to provide
sufficient evidence that all conditions of primary approval have been met.
      (2)   Determination of conformance. The Department will review the
request for secondary approval and make a timely determination on its
compliance with the primary approval and conditions.
      (3)   Changes after primary approval. If a subdivision plat deviates in
any way, except for corrective details from the one receiving primary approval
with the approved conditions, the subdivision will not receive secondary
approval. Any changes in the approved plans must be submitted to the Commission
or Plat Committee, unless the changes qualify for administrative approval under
the definition of “administrative subdivision”.
      (4)   County Commissioners’ approval. Subdivisions involving public
improvements or dedication of land to the public require action by the Board.
The improvements must be installed in accordance with the approved plans or
guarantees of performance specified in §§
156.205 through
156.223 must be provided before the Board signs the final plat. The Department
will place the subdivision on the Board agenda when the improvements are
completed or performance guarantees provided.
      (5)   Signature and seal. After the Department has determined that the
final plat complies with the conditions of approval of the Commission and the
Board has accepted any public dedications, improvements and/or guarantees of
performance, secondary approval shall be given by the official designated in §
156.213 and the Commission seal affixed to the final plat.
      (6)   Recording. The final plat must be recorded in the County Recorder’s
office prior to the expiration date or it will be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-113) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1994-02, passed 1-
24-1994)
§ 156.194 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   This section applies to any subdivision which is deemed to be a major
subdivision under the terms of this chapter.
   (A)   Primary approval procedure.
      (1)   Application. An application for primary approval of a major
subdivision shall be filed at the Department on forms specified by the
Department together with all required materials (see §
156.057) in accordance with filing schedule.
      (2)   Placement on Commission agenda. Complete applications for the
primary approval will be docketed for a public hearing before the Commission.
The applicant will be notified of the time and place of the meeting.
      (3)   Administrative review. Prior to the Commission meeting, the
Department will review the concept plan. Comments on the plan may be requested
by the Department from the Subdivision Review Committee and by other persons as
the Department deems appropriate.
      (4)   Public meeting. The Commission shall review the proposed concept
plan at a public meeting. Comments on the plan will be presented to the
Commission by the Department. The Commission will discuss the plan and provide
guidance to the applicant as to the suitability of the land for subdivision and
the design and layout of proposed lots and improvements.
      (5)   Written record. The Commission will provide a written record to the
applicant on the discussion within 45 days after the meeting(s) at which the
concept plan is discussed.
      (6)   Commission action. The Commission shall by a motion duly made and
seconded approve, deny or continue the concept plan. Approvals may be
conditioned upon design changes. Any motion to continue must include guidance
to the applicant as to the type(s) of information and/or changes the Commission
requires in order to arrive at a decision. Any motion to deny must include the
reasons for the denial. The approved concept plan shall contain the signature
of the presiding officer of the Commission and shall be kept on file at the
Department.
   (B)   Primary approval procedure.
      (1)   Application. After receiving the written record of the discussion
of the concept plan, the applicant may request primary approval. An application
for primary approval shall be filed at the Department on forms specified by the
Department together with all required materials (see §
156.057) in accordance with the filing schedule.
      (2)   Placement on the Commission agenda. Complete applications for
primary approval will be docketed for a public hearing before the Commission.
The applicant will be notified of the time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Administrative review. Prior to the meeting, the Department and the
Subdivision Review Committee will review the application for compliance with
this chapter. The Department will send a copy of its written analysis of the
proposal to the Commission and applicant prior to the public hearing.
      (4)   Field trip. The Commission and its representatives, at its
discretion, may visit the site any time during the review process.
      (5)   Public hearing notification. Within 30 days after receiving the
application, the Department shall announce the date of a public hearing before
the Commission. At least ten days before the hearing, notice of the hearing
shall be published in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 and sent in the manner
specified by the Commission’s rules of procedure to interested property owners
as defined by this chapter.
      (6)   Public hearing. At the public hearing, the request will be
presented, and all those present will be given an opportunity to be heard
regarding the proposal. The hearing may, at the discretion of the Commission,
be continued to another date. Additional notice of a continued hearing is not
required, but may be requested by the Commission.
      (7)   Decision by Commission. After the public hearing has been
concluded, the Commission will make a decision regarding the application. The
Commission shall make findings of fact as to the compliance of the subdivision
request with the terms of this chapter. The Commission may approve, approve
with conditions or deny the request. If the Commission disapproves the
subdivision, it shall make written findings that set forth its reasons. The
decision shall be signed by the director of the Department, and the Department
shall provide the applicant with a copy.
      (8)   Signature. If the Commission grants primary approval, two officers
of the Commission shall sign the primary approval certificate.
   (C)   Secondary approval procedure.
      (1)   Application. After all conditions of primary approval have been
met, the applicant may request secondary approval. An application for secondary
approval shall be filed at the Department on forms specified by the Department
together with any supporting documents required by the Department to provide
sufficient evidence that all conditions of primary approval have been met.
      (2)   Determination of conformance. The Department will review the
request for secondary approval and make a timely determination on its
compliance with the primary approval and conditions.
      (3)   Changes after primary approval. If a major subdivision plat
deviates from the one receiving primary approval with the approved conditions,
the subdivision will not receive secondary approval. Any changes in the
approved plans must be submitted to the Commission, unless the changes qualify
for administrative approval under the definition of “administrative
subdivision”.
      (4)   County commissioners’ approval. Subdivisions involving public
improvements or dedication of land to the public require action by the Board.
The improvements must be installed in accordance with the approved plans or
guarantees of performance as specified in §§
156.205 through
156.223 must be provided before the Board signs the final plat. The Department
will place the subdivision on the Board agenda when the improvements are
completed or performance guarantees provided.
      (5)   Signature and seal. After the Department has determined that the
final plat complies with the conditions of approval of the Commission and the
Board has accepted any public dedications, improvements and/or guarantees of
performance, secondary approval shall be given by the official designated in §
156.213, the Commission seal affixed to the final plat and the Director shall
sign the improvement plans.
      (6)   Recording. The final plat must be recorded in the County Recorder’s
office prior to the expiration date or it will be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 8-114) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1988-08, passed 4-
25-1988; Ord. 4, 2021, passed 6-21-2021)
§ 156.195 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   Procedure. Whenever a land owner desires to resubdivide an already
approved major subdivision plat, the land owner shall first obtain approval for
the resubdivision by the same procedure prescribed for the subdivision of land,
with the additional requirements described below.
   (B)   Indications. Resubdivision is indicated when any changes having a
significant impact on the existing subdivision are proposed, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Any change in street circulation pattern or other significant
change in a public improvement;
      (2)   The addition of one or more buildable lots; and
      (3)   Any change in the amount of land reserved for public use or the
common use by lot owners.
   (C)   Waiver. The Plan Commission, in its sole discretion, may waive the
requirement hereof. The Plan Commission, after an application for resubdivision
that includes an express request for waiver, shall publish notice of the
application in a local newspaper of general circulation.
   (D)   Application. The application for a resubdivision must be filed in
accordance with the Plan Commission's rules of procedures. The proposed changes
must be shown graphically and described in an attached letter. The application
shall contain a list of lot owners in the subdivision. Regardless of the number
of lots owned, an owner will be listed once. The application shall also include
the signed consent of 75% of these listed owners to the proposed changes.
   (E)   Covenants. Any new lots created by a resubdivision are subject to the
same covenants of the original subdivision plat.
(Ord. 1998-10, passed 8-17-1998)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.205 GENERAL.
   The Department is hereby designated as the agency responsible for
administration, interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-118) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.206 MODIFICATIONS.
   The Commission may grant such modifications to the requirements and
standards of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where
owing to extraordinary conditions, fully demonstrated by the applicant on the
basis of facts presented, strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter
will result in practical difficulties or misuse of property.
   (A)   Criteria for modifications. In the exercise of its authority under
this section, the Commission shall grant modifications only upon finding all of
the following:
      (1)   The modification will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or general welfare;
      (2)   The modification will not adversely affect adjacent property;
      (3)   The modification is justified because of exceptional topographic or
other physical conditions unique to the property involved and is not to correct
mere inconvenience or financial disadvantage;
      (4)   The modification is consistent with the intent of this and other
applicable ordinances or the Comprehensive Plan;
      (5)   The condition necessitating the modification was not created by the
owner or applicant; and
      (6)   The modification will not conflict with the powers and duties of
the Board of Zoning Appeals, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Modification requests. Any request for modification(s) from the
standards of this chapter shall be submitted in writing as part of the
application for approval of a subdivision. The request shall make specific
reference to the section of this subchapter from which the modification is
requested and shall state the reasons for the request, addressing the criteria
in this section.
   (C)   Decision by Commission. In approving or denying a modification
request, the Commission shall make specific findings on each of the criteria in
this section. If the Commission approves a modification request, it may impose
conditions as it deems necessary and proper to carry out the intent and
purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-119) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.207 PREPARATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PLATS AND SURVEYS.
   (A)   All plats and surveys shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional land surveyor licensed in accordance with the
laws of the state, who shall be responsible for the monumentation thereof.
   (B)   Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with plans and
specifications prepared by a licensed engineer or land surveyor and approved by
the Commission. Unless otherwise specified in the subdivision agreement, the
licensed person who prepared the improvement drawings shall be responsible for
the stakeout, inspection and certification of completion in accordance
therewith. If the person specified in the subdivision improvement agreement is
not able to perform this duty, he or she shall give notice by registered mail
to the Department and like notice to any person, firm or corporation
guaranteeing the installation of the improvements. No work on the improvements
shall commence until a subdivision improvement agreement has been duly
executed.
(Prior Code, § 8-120) (Ord. 1990-01, passed 1-8-1990)
§ 156.208 TIME LIMIT; SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT AND FINANCIAL
GUARANTEE.
   (A)   All improvements required by the Plan Commission must be shown on the
improvement plans and must be completed within two years from the date that the
subdivision improvement agreement is signed, with the following exceptions.
      (1)   If sidewalks are to be installed as lots are developed, the staff
may approve time extensions for sidewalk completion with the submission of an
appropriate financial guarantee. Each extension shall be for a maximum of two
years and no more than two extensions may be granted. In deciding whether to
grant the extension, the staff shall consider the degree of completion of
construction in the subdivision, the effect of the extension on the property
owners in the subdivision and weather or other conditions affecting the
construction. The staff's decision to deny an extension may be appealed to the
Plan Commission.
      (2)   The staff may approve a time extension for installing the final
paving course (“surface coat”) with the submission of an appropriate financial
guarantee. The time extension shall be for a maximum of two years and only one
extension may be granted. In deciding whether to grant the extension, the staff
shall consider the degree of completion of construction in the subdivision, the
effect of the extension on the property owners in the subdivision, and weather
or other conditions affecting the construction. The staff's decision to deny an
extension may be appealed to the Plan Commission.
      (3)   Other extensions of time may be approved by the staff with the
submission of an appropriate financial guarantee if unusual conditions exist
that impede timely completion, maximum of two years and no more than two
extensions may be granted. In deciding whether to grant the extension, the
staff shall consider the degree of completion of construction in the
subdivision, the effect of the extension on the property owners in the
subdivision and weather or other conditions affecting the construction. The
staff's decision to deny an extension may be appealed to the Plan Commission.
   (B)   A subdivision improvement agreement must be executed between the
developer and the county prior to the commencement of work on any subdivision.
The agreement shall set forth the improvements to be completed, which shall
include, but are not limited to, grading, street construction, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, sidewalks, drainage, landscaping and erosion control. It also
shall set forth the terms and conditions under which the work is to be
performed. A subdivision plat may be recorded only after secondary approval has
been given as specified in this chapter. Secondary approval shall not be given
until one of the following has been accomplished:
      (1)   The acceptance for perpetual maintenance of all required public
improvements and satisfactory completion of all improvements in accordance with
the approved plans and the subdivision improvement agreement; and
      (2)   The posting of financial guarantees in the amount equal to 125% of
the cost of the improvements as specified by the subdivision improvement
agreement. The form and length of the guarantees must be acceptable to the
county attorney and shall be specified in the subdivision improvement
agreement. If time extensions are granted under division (B)(1) above, the cost
estimate must be reviewed and the amount of the guarantee increased if
necessary, but in no case shall the guarantee be for a period of more than two
years.
   (C)   As a condition of the acceptance of improvements and/or release of
financial guarantees posted under the terms of this section, the subdivider
shall post with the Board financial guarantees ensuring maintenance of the
improvements in good repair. These guarantees shall be in an amount equal to
25% of the estimated cost of all improvements as specified in the subdivision
improvement agreement. The form and length of the guarantee shall be specified
in the subdivision improvement agreement, but the length shall be for three
years or until 75% of the lots in the subdivision are developed, whichever is
longer.
   (D)   The Board may grant a partial release from a financial guarantee for
portions of the improvements which are complete and accepted by the Board;
provided that, the maintenance guarantee as specified in division (C) above is
posted for the portion of the improvements. The conditions under which partial
release of the guarantees will be permitted shall be specified in the
subdivision improvement agreement.
(Prior Code, § 8-121) (Ord. 1990-01, passed 1-8-1990; Ord. 13, 1997, passed 12-
1-1997)
§ 156.209 PRECONSTRUCTION AND CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Preconstruction. Prior to beginning any work within the subdivision,
the person or persons designated in the subdivision improvement agreement to be
responsible for the installation of improvements shall meet on the site with
representatives of the county, as specified in the agreement.
   (B)   Construction. The county representative designated in the subdivision
improvement agreement shall inspect and require that the installation of all
improvements take place in accordance with plans approved by the Commission.
The county representatives shall have authority as specified in the subdivision
improvement agreement over the schedule of construction, materials used,
methods of construction and workmanship to ensure compliance with the approved
plans and the terms of the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 8-122) (Ord. 1990-01, passed 1-8-1990)
§ 156.210 MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Maintenance bond. As a condition of acceptance of the public
improvements or release of the financial guarantee, the Board shall require the
subdivider to post a maintenance bond or other financial guarantee as specified
in §
156.208, in an amount equal to 25% of the cost of all improvements.
   (B)   Length of maintenance bond. The maintenance guarantee shall be for a
period of three years or until 75% of the lots in the subdivision are
developed, whichever is longer.
(Prior Code, § 8-123) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.211 AS-BUILT FLANS.
   After completion of all public improvements and prior to their acceptance by
the Board, the applicant shall provide the Department one Mylar copy of
drawings showing the actual locations and specifications of all improvements
installed in the subdivision. The as-built drawings shall be certified by a
land surveyor or engineer licensed in the state.
(Prior Code, § 8-124) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.212 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Upon completion of construction, the applicant may file a written request to
the Board for acceptance of all public improvements.
   (A)   Request contents. A request for acceptance of public improvements
shall contain the certification required by §
156.208 and the as-built plans required by §
156.211.
   (B)   Final inspection. The Board shall refer a request for acceptance of
public improvements to the County Engineer who shall make a final inspection
and shall make a recommendation to the Board based on all required inspections
of the project.
   (C)   Board action. After receiving the recommendation of the County
Engineer, the Board shall decide whether to accept the improvements. Any
refusal to accept the improvements shall be accompanied by findings as to the
reasons. The Board shall not accept the improvements until it has received the
maintenance bond required in §
156.210.
(Prior Code, § 8-125) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.213 SECONDARY APPROVAL.
   The Plan Director, or his or her designee, is authorized to sign the
secondary approval certificate only after the subdivision improvement agreement
has been executed and all conditions of approval imposed by the Commission have
been met.
(Prior Code, § 8-126) (Ord. 1990-01, passed 1-8-1990)
§ 156.214 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL.
   The Plan Director, or his or her designee, is hereby designated as the
official authorized to approve administrative and agricultural subdivisions. At
least every six months, the staff shall provide to the Commission a report of
all administrative and agricultural subdivisions approved. This report shall
contain the names of the subdivisions, the names of the owners, the area of the
property involved, the type of subdivision and the dates of approval.
(Prior Code, § 8-127) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.215 AMENDMENT.
   Amendment to this chapter may be initiated by the Commission, Board or by a
citizen petition. The amendment shall be considered and acted upon in
accordance with the procedures established by state law.
(Prior Code, § 8-128) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.216 PLAT VALIDITY.
   No plat of any subdivision of land, as defined by this chapter, shall be
entitled to record in the County Recorder’s office or have any validity until
approval is granted under the terms of this chapter. Any plat not properly
approved shall not be entitled to an improvement location permit or a building
permit.
(Prior Code, § 8-129) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.217 REVISION OF PLAT AFTER APPROVAL.
   No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat
of a subdivision after approval has been given by the Commission and endorsed
in writing on the plat, unless the plat is first resubmitted to the Commission
and the change(s) approved, unless the changes meet the requirements of an
administrative subdivision, in which case the staff may approve the changes.
(Prior Code, § 8-130) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.218 RECORD OF PLATS.
   (A)   All plats of subdivisions upon approval according to this chapter
shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office within the time limit
established by this chapter unless an extension is granted by the appropriate
official or board. Copies of the recorded plat or drawing shall be provided to
the following offices within three days after recording: Code Enforcement,
Assessor, Planning.
   (B)   The County Auditor’s office shall not accept a deed for property to be
entered for taxation unless the property complies with the requirements of this
chapter. Within 14 days after the plat is recorded, the applicant shall provide
the County Recorder a black line on white paper photographic reproduction of
the plat which is 18 inches by 12 inches in size for inclusion in the official
record books.
   (C)   The foregoing sentence notwithstanding, agricultural and
administrative subdivisions may be drawn on any standard paper size up to 18
inches by 12 inches, and blackline copies shall be recorded in the appropriate
book in the Recorder’s office.
(Prior Code, § 8-131) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986; Ord. 1987-01, passed 7-
27-1987)
§ 156.219 SALE OF LAND WITHIN SUBDIVISIONS.
   No owner or agent may sell or advertise for sale any land within a
subdivision before the plat has been approved and recorded in the manner
prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-132) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.220 SEVERABILITY.
   If any subchapter, section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is judged to be void, the decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-133) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.221 FEES.
   (A)   The Commission shall establish a uniform schedule of fees for filing
applications.
   (B)   These fees shall be proportioned to the cost of checking, verifying
and advertising all proposed subdivisions.
   (C)   The fee schedule shall be on display at the Department office.
(Prior Code, § 8-135) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.222 INTERPRETATION.
   It is the intent of this chapter that any interpretation of this chapter
shall be accomplished by the Department. Any interpretation made by the
Department may be appealed to the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 8-136) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
§ 156.223 APPEAL.
   (A)   Department decision. Any final decision of the Plat Committee or the
Department may be appealed to the Commission. The notice of final decision
shall contain the date of mailing thereon. The appeal may be initiated by the
applicant or any property owner affected by the final decision. The appeal
shall be directed to the Commission and shall be filed with the Department. The
appeal must be made within ten days of the mailing of the final decision to the
applicant or property owner, as the case may be. If the expiration of the ten
days occurs on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, then the expiration date
shall be extended to include the next business day thereafter following.
   (B)   Public hearing. An appeal of a Plat Committee or Department final
decision shall be heard by the Commission at a regularly scheduled session or
special session of the Commission within 45 days after the filing of an appeal
petition with the Department and the Commission shall render its written final
decision within 15 days after the hearing. With the consent of the applicant
and Commission, the hearing day may be extended.
   (C)   Commission decision. A final decision of the Commission may be
appealed to the Circuit Court or Superior Court of the county. The appeal shall
be through a petition for writ of certiorari filed with the clerk of the
appropriate court within 30 days after the date of the final decision. The
petition shall, in all respects, conform with state law.
(Prior Code, § 8-137) (Ord. 1994-02, passed 1-24-1994)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Subdivision violation. Any land within the county which is subdivided
in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a common nuisance.
Failure, by any person, to abide by any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of a Class C infraction
which, upon conviction, shall carry a fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $300 per violation, and for each day that the violation continues
unabated, a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed.
   (B)   Recording violation. Failure to deliver to the County Recorder a copy
of the plat which complies with §
156.218 shall be declared a violation of this chapter. Applicants who fail to
provide this copy within the specified time shall be guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction, shall be fined in the sum not less than $25, nor more
than $100, per day for each violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (C)   Court action. For and on behalf of the Commission, Department or the
county as their interests may appear, the Director may institute, in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction, causes of action against any person who violates any
of the terms of this chapter. The causes of action shall include, but not be
limited to, the filing of a charge of a Class C infraction; filing suit for
temporary or permanent restraining order or filing suit against the maintenance
of a common nuisance. In addition, the Department may pursue any other action
or remedy authorized by the laws of the state. All of the foregoing actions
shall be cumulative.
   (D)   Enforcement. The Department shall be responsible for the enforcement
of the terms of this chapter and the Department is authorized to do all things
and to take all action necessary and prudent, under the circumstances, to
enforce the provisions hereof.
   (E)   Settlement. The Department is authorized, as deemed prudent or
necessary under the circumstances, to enter into any compromise or settlement
involving a violation of this chapter, providing the compromise or settlement
is in the best interests of the enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-134) (Ord. 1986-7, passed 10-21-1986)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
   
157.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 157.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The county’s zoning regulations, and all amendments, are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 03, 2008, passed 2-4-2008; Ord. 02, 2009, passed 3-9-2009; Ord. 03, 2009,
passed 3-9-2009; Ord. 03, 2011, passed 7-11-2011; Ord. 06, 2011, passed 7-11-
2011; Ord. 01, 2013, passed 2-25-2013; Ord. 2014-07, passed 11-10-2014; Ord.
05, 2016, passed 5-23-2016; Ord. 03, 2017, passed 3-20-2017; Ord. 04, 2018,
passed 6-11-2018; Ord. 6, 2018, passed 7-23-2018; Ord. 06, 2019, passed 10-14-
2019; Ord. 04, 2020, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 08, 2022, passed 10-24-2022; Ord.
2022-02A, passed 11-9-2022; Ord. 02, 2023, passed 2-23-2023; Ord. 05, 2024,
passed 5-13-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS; CONTRACTS
      
II.   PROPERTY AND REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
III.   ANNEXATIONS
      
IV.   STREETS AND ROADS
      
V.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
      
VI.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
VII.   MORATORIUMS
      
VIII.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREAS
TABLE I: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS; CONTRACTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./   Date
Res.    Passed Description
No.
(R)
Comm./  12-18- Providing for professional staff support on Building Code matters between
Council 1995   the county and the Town of Hope
1996-01
(R)     11-12- Approving a statement of benefits submitted from Columbus Container, Inc.,
Council 1996   and Columbus Container of Illinois, Inc.
1996-08
(R)
Comm./  2-24-  Joining with the City of Columbus to establish the Columbus-Bartholomew
Council 1997   Planning Department and a joint Building and Zoning Administration
1997-04
Council 4-8-   Authorizing and approving the entry into an interlocal agreement for the
97-07   1997   investment of public funds
(R)
Comm./  4-14-  Providing for professional staff support on Building Code matters between
Council 1997   the county and the Town of Hartsville
1997-05
Comm.   4-14-  Authorizing and approving the entry into an interlocal agreement for the
1997-08 1997   investment of public funds
(R)     10-14- Approving an interlocal corporation agreement between the county, the City
Council 1997   of Columbus and the Columbus City Utility Department, relating to the
1997-12        agreement with Ameritech regarding centrex services
(R)     11-3-
Comm.   1997   Authorizing the timely payment of utility bills
1997-14
(R)     1-5-   Supporting the improvement of sewer service for county residents served by
Comm.   1998   the Utico Sewer Utility
1998-01
(R)     4-14-  Approving a statement of benefits submitted from Columbus Container, Inc.,
Council 1998   and Columbus Container of Illinois, Inc.
1998-05
(R)     7-20-  Providing for professional staff support on Building Code matters between
Comm.   1998   the county and the Town of Hope
1998-09
(R)     11-16- Authorizing Dunn and Associates Benefit Administrators to establish and
Comm.   1998   maintain one or more accounts with Irwin Union Securities, Inc.
1998-16
(R)     6-26-  Providing for professional staff support on Electrical Code matters between
Comm.   2000   the county and the Town of Elizabethtown
2000-07
(R)     7-10-
Comm.   2000   Authorizing a Columbus Township Trustee to pay poor relief claims
2000-08
(R)            Approving a petitioner’s request to relinquish planning jurisdiction over
Comm.   7-8-   certain territory within two miles of the corporate limits; approving the
2002-06 2002   inclusion of the area in the City of Columbus’s extraterritorial planning
               jurisdiction
(R)
Comm.   1-27-  Providing contract services for information technology support to the
01,     2003   County Solid Waste Management District
2003
(R)     5-2-   Providing for professional staff support on building code matters between
Comm.   2016   the county and the Town of Hope
2016-05
(R)     9-18-
Comm.   2017   Adopting the Bartholomew County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan
2017-04
              
 
TABLE II: PROPERTY AND REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./   Date
Res.    Passed Description
No.
(R)     6-3-
Comm.   1996   Disposing of a county maintenance vehicle
1996-04
(R)     9-16-  Transferring the title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the
Comm.   1996   Jonesville Town Council
1996-07
(R)     1-21-  Transferring real estate to the Board of Directors of Columbus Regional
Comm.   1997   Hospital as satisfaction of financial obligation for construction of bridge
1997-01
(R)     8-18-  Transferring the title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the
Comm.   1997   Elizabethtown Town Council
1997-10
(R)     3-6-
Comm.   1998   Approving the donation of real estate from the Golden Casting Corporation
1998-04
(R)     10-12- Transferring the title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the
Comm.   1998   Hartsville Town Council
1998-11
(R)     5-10-  Transferring the title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the
Comm.   1999   Hope Town Board
1999-02
(R)     7-6-   Transferring the title of a county vehicle to the Columbus Boys Club/Girls
Comm.   1999   Club/Foundation for Youth
1999-06
(R)     7-2-
Comm.   2001   Transferring the title of a county vehicle to the County Park Board
2001-03
(R)     6-3-   Authorizing the exchange of property with the Garland Brook Cemetery
Comm.   2002   Association
2002-04
(R)     9-23-  Transferring the title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the
Comm.   2002   Jonesville Town Board; accepting the return of a previously transferred vehicle
2002-08        from the Jonesville Town Board
(R)     4-8-   Authorizing the purchase of real estate described as part of Lot 72 in Branhum
Comm.   2013   and Snipes addition at the Commissioner’s Certificate Sale to utilize as a town
2013-02        park
(R)     4-28-  Transferring Lot 28 in the original plat to the Town of Newbern from the county
Comm.   2014   to the Newbern United Methodist Church to utilize as a parking area
2014-04
(R)     10-13- Transferring the title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the
Comm.   2014   Hope Town Board
2014-06
(R)
Council -      Reflecting on interest in purchasing real estate located at 785 South Marr Road
2016-02
(R)     1-25-  Accepting real estate located at 3775 North County Road 325 West from National
Comm.   2016   Home Investors, LLC
2016-02
(R)     9-6-   Authorizing completion of purchase of real property located at 785 South Marr
Comm.   2016   Road and authorizing the expenditure of telecommunication fund funds for the
2016-08        purchase
(R)     9-28-  Joint resolution with Columbus Regional Hospital for transfer and exchange of
Comm.   2016   real property
2016-09
(R)     4-3-   Transferring title of a Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the Consolidated
Comm.   2017   School Corporation C4 program
2017-02
(R)     7-16-  Approving sale of property located at 1971 State Street by the Board of
Comm.   2018   Trustees of Columbus Regional Hospital to Marian Development Group, LLC
2018-03
(R)     5-3-   Approving sale of property located at 2691 19th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Jeff and Tammy Patterson
2021-04
(R)     6-7-   Approving sale of property located at 2690 19th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Brandon Ho
2021-06
(R)     6-7-   Approving sale of property located at 2625 17th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Cody and Randy Blackburn
2021-07
(R)     6-7-   Approving sale of property located at 2611 17th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Cody and Randy Blackburn
2021-08
(R)     6-28-  Approving sale of property lcoated at 2686 19th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Wanda I. Rodriguez
2021-10
(R)     7-19-  Approving sale of property located at 2641 18th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Wen Chen
2021-13
(R)     9-13-  Approving sale of property located at 2680 18th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2021   to Wen Chen
2021-16
(R)     2-14-  Approving sale of property located at 2641 19th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2022   to H. Steven and Marcia J. Thomas
2022-02
(R)     3-7-   Approving sale of property located at 2550 16th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2022   to Kyle Kirkhoff
2022-06
(R)     4-4-   Approving sale of property located at 2650 19th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2022   to Dalton T. Bieker
2022-07
(R)     7-11-  Approving sale of property located at 2429 17th Street by the Board of Trustees
Comm.   2022   to Ralph Spencer Steenblik and Rachel Elizabeth Hunt
2022-08
(R)     8-29-  Approving sale of property located at 2675 Foxpointe Drive by the Board of
Comm.   2022   Trustees to Foxpointe Properties, LLC
2022-09
(R)     11-7-  Approving sale of property located at 1634 Gladstone Ave. by the Board of
2022-11 2022   Trustees to Blackburn Properties, LLC
(R)     8-21-  Transferring title of a County Sheriff’s Department patrol vehicle to the Town
2023-09 2023   Board of Hope, IN
(R)     10-2-  Approving sale of property located at 2670 19th Street by the Board of Trustees
2023-12 2023   to Blackburn Properties, LLC
              
 
TABLE III: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No.     Date Passed Description
(R) Comm. 2002-05 7-1-2002    Requesting the addition of territory to the
                              Eastern Bartholomew Regional Sewer District
                             
 
TABLE IV: STREETS AND ROADS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./ Date
Res.  Passed Description
No.
Comm. 1-16-  Vacating East Executive Drive, specifically the part that lies directly west
1996- 1996   of Lots 12 and 13 of Marketplace Center Section 1, third replat, in German
01           Township
Comm. 3-18-
05,   1996   Vacating a platted public easement for Lake Overlook minor subdivision
1996
Comm. 7-15-
1996- 1996   Vacating:
13
           (1) A public right-of-way in the platted north- south alley, lying between
             Lots 53 through 55 and Lots 60 through 62
           (2) An east-west platted alley, lying between Lots 53, 54, 61 and 62 in the
             addition to the Town of Walesboro
(R)
Comm. 7-29-  Recommending to the County Plan Commission the approval of name changes to
1996- 1996   certain county roads
06
Comm. 8-19-  Vacating the southernmost 66 feet of Clay Street, located between Lots 4 and 5
1996- 1996   in the original plat of the Town of Burnsville
15
(R)
Comm. 12-9-  Recommending to the County Plan Commission the approval of name changes to
1996- 1996   certain county roads
09
Comm. 12-30- Vacating a portion of Country Club Road approximately 1,700-foot north of C.R.
1997- 1996   100 S and located between the existing Club House and Pro Shop in Harrison
01           Township
(R)
Comm. 1-27-  Recommending to the County Plan Commission the approval of name changes to
1997- 1997   certain county roads
02
Comm. 3-10-
1997- 1997   Vacating:
03
           (1) All of Hurley Avenue in the original plat of the Town of Trinity
             (2) The portion of the east-west alley which tapers from the west right-of-way
           line of Hurley Avenue to the southwest corner of the east-west alley that
             abuts Lot 13 in the same subdivision
(R)
Comm. 4-21-  Recommending to the County Plan Commission the approval of name changes to
1997- 1997   certain county roads
07
Comm. 5-19-  Vacating a portion of the old right-of-way south of the existing Lowell Road
1997- 1997   right-of-way and east of the Driftwood River
09
Comm. 1-20-  Vacating a 49-foot platted right-of-way in Clifty Street, extending 485 feet
1998- 1998   north of its intersection with Main Street in the Town of Newbern
01
Comm. 3-2-   Vacating a ten-foot platted easement located along the south and east
04-   1998   boundaries of Lot 1-A in Wayne Park minor subdivision
1998
Comm. 9-28-
1998- 1998   Vacating:
14
           (1) The 12-foot east-west platted alley bisecting Lots 1, 2, 11 and 12 in the
             Town of Mt. Healthy
           (2) The 13-foot north-south platted alley located on the east side of Lots 2
             and 12 in the Town of Mt. Healthy
Comm. 11-2-  Vacating the 16-foot platted east-west alley located between Lots 17 through
1998- 1998   22 in the original plat of the Town of Newbern
15
Comm. 12-7-
1998- 1998   Vacating:
16
           (1) The 49-foot platted right-of-way of Clifty Street, extending 100 feet
             south of its intersection with Vine Street
           (2) The 30-foot platted right-of-way of Vine Street, abutting Lots 5, 6 and 7
             in the original plat of the Town of Newbern
Comm. 12-28- Vacating a ten-foot platted alley located between Lots 28 and 29 in the
17,   1998   original plat of the Town of Walesboro
1998
Comm. 6-21-
06,   1999   Vacating:
1999
           (1) The 60-foot cul-de-sac on Meadows Court
           (2) A 60-foot cul-de-sac on Otter Creek Lane in the Meadows at Ottercreek-
             South Subdivision Phase II in Clay Township
(R)
Comm. 6-28-  Recommending to the County Plan Commission the approval of name changes to
1999- 1999   certain county roads
05
Comm. 8-16-  Vacating all of the Old Marr Road right-of- way from the north end of Delta
07,   1999   Acres to C.R. 450 N
1999
Comm. 8-30-  Vacating all of the existing right-of-way lying between Lots 42, 43, 44, 54,
08,   1999   55 and 56 in the Town of Waynesville
1999
Comm. 10-25- Vacating part of Heflen Park Road lying north of Lot 1 in Heflen Park Second
11,   1999   Addition, minor plat in German Township
1999
Comm. 1-24-  Vacating part of the north-south alley running south between Boat Street and
05,   2000   Cross Street, lying between C.R. 250 E and East Street in Sandcreek Township
2000
Comm. 3-27-  Vacating 0.07 acre located in German Township, the property description of
03-   2000   Heritage Heights replat of Lot 1D
2000
Comm. 9-25-  Vacating the north end of C.R. 525 W, starting approximately 900 feet north of
12,   2000   the intersection of C.R. 930 S and C.R. 525 W, running northwesterly 884 feet,
2000         then north 1,219 feet, in Jackson Township
Comm. 4-23-  Vacating a part of the southeast quarter of Section 1, Township 8 North, Range
05,   2001   4 East, lying in Harrison Township
2001
Comm. 9-24-  Vacating all the portion of a ten-foot wide alley as platted in Mewhirter’s
07,   2001   Addition to the Town of Taylorsville
2001
Comm. 9-24-  Vacating all that portion of Herod Street as platted on Mewhirter’s Addition
08,   2001   to the Town of Taylorsville
2001
(R)
Comm. 12-10- Recommending to the County Plan Commission the approval of name changes to
2001- 2001   certain county roads
07
Comm. 10-6-  Naming an unnamed street located on the east side of U.S. 31, approximately
05,   2003   1,100 feet north of the intersection of U.S. 31 and C.R. 650 N (Tannehill
2003         Road) as Bear Lane
Comm. 12-1-  Vacating a ten-foot wide alley as platted on Steenbarger’s Addition to
08,   2003   Taylorsville
2003
Comm. 3-29-  Vacating all that part of the east half of the northwest quarter of the
01,   2004   southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 8 North, Range 7 East, lying in Rock
2004         Creek Township
Comm. 10-10- Vacating all the portion of a part of the original Town of Azalia, a ten-foot
02,   2005   alley running north-south lying between Lot 21 and Lot 4, containing 600
2005         square feet, more or less
Comm.        Vacating all that portion of an alley running east-west between East Street
04,   10-31- and Walnut Street, being five feet in width and lying north and immediately
2005  2005   adjacent to Lots 46, 47, 48 and 49 in Cox and Wallace’s Addition to the Town
             of Taylorsville
Comm.        Vacating all of that portion of the right-of-way of C.R. 950 S, beginning at
2005- 12-5-  the Bartholomew/ Brown County line, proceeding in an easterly direction across
07    2005   the current Francoueur property for a distance of 1,747 feet to a point where
             C.R. 950 S has been improved
Comm. 3-13-
2006- 2006   Renaming:
02
           (1) Aspen Drive in Sandcreek Farms major subdivision to Aspen Road
           (2) Moss Farm Road in Moss Farms minor subdivision to Webbs Way
           (3) Raintree Drive West in the plat of the Town of Harrison Lake to Raintree
             Drive North
           (4) Locust Drive in the Wehmeier’s Third Addition to the Town of Bethel
             Village to Falcon Drive
           (5) Wilson Street in the Wehmeier’s First Addition to the Town of Bethel
             Village to Collier Street
Comm.        Vacating all the portion of Mulberry Street running east-west between the
04,   7-10-  railroad right- of-way and the alley immediately to the east of the railroad,
2006  2006   being 92 feet in length, and lying between Lots 12 and 13 in the original plat
             of the Town of Taylorsville
Comm. 10-22-
07,   2007   Vacating:
2007
           (1) A right-of-way at the northeast corner of Lot 21 in the original plat of
             Taylorsville
           (2) A right-of-way beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 22 in the original
             plat of Taylorsville
Comm. 4-28-
06,   2008   Vacating:
2008
           (1) A portion of Reservoir Street
           (2) A portion of Pearl Street
           (3) All of Huldah Street
           (4) James Street
           (5) South Street
           (6) Lots 106 through 130 in the Fourth Richards Addition of Taylorsville
Comm. 8-25-
2008- 2008   Renaming:
11
           (1) C.R. 225 S, east of S.R. 11, to Huffman Drive, and the cul-de-sac to
             Huffman Court
           (2) A 1,700-foot section of C.R. 100 S from S.R. 11, west at its terminus to
             Garden Street
           (3) An unnamed section of a street connecting Marr Road to Clairmont Drive to
             Bridge Pointe Drive
             (4) C.R. 300 N from Marr Road immediately south of the Haw Creek Bridge
           easterly for approximately 1.25 mile to the intersection with Talley Road to
             Sawin Drive
Comm. 4-20-  Vacating an alley between Lots 7 and 8 in Steenbarger’s Addition to the Town
04,   2009   of Taylorsville
2009
Comm.        Vacating approximately 120 feet of C.R. 990 E south of C.R. 350 S and a
05,   4-20-  portion of the east-west alley that runs along the west side of Lot 26 and
2009  2009   along the south side of Lots 23, 24, 25 and 26 as shown in the original plat
             of the Town of Grammer
Comm. 10-26- Vacating the north-south alley parallel to and east of S.R. 58 and the east-
10,   2009   west alley parallel to and south of Main Cross Street in the plat of
2009         Waymansville
Comm. 2-13-  Renaming County Road 350 East between 25th Street and County Road 250 North to
2012- 2012   Bonnell Road
02
Comm. 6-9-   Vacating all of that right-of-way lying on the east and west side of the
04,   2014   center of abandoned Marr Road, north of Bridgepointe Drive and south of new
2014         Marr Road lying outside the City of Columbus
Comm. 2-23-  County Road 350 South Vacation: a part of the west half of the northwest
3,    2015   quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 8 North, Range 7
2015         East, lying in Rockcreek Township
             Dewey Street Right-of-Way Vacation:

Comm.        (1) All of that part of Dewey Street (also known as County Road 345 South)
4,    2-23-  running along the north side of Lots 1 and 2 in Ardery’s Addition
2015  2015
             (2) Also all of that part of the alley running south from Dewey Street to the
             south line of Lots 1 and 2 in Ardery’s Addition, being in the northwest
             quarter of Section 10, Township 8 North, Range 7 East
Comm. 9-14-  Lake Shore Drive North Vacation Plan Commission: vacating part of the south
07,   2015   half of the northwest quarter of Section 28, Township 10 North, Range 7 East
2015
Comm. 9-8-   Cross Street and County Road 1050 East Alley Vacation Plan Commission:
08,   2015   vacating part of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 10 North, Range
2015         7 East, Hawcreek Township
Comm. 8-15-  Clifty Street Alley Vacation Plan Commission: vacating a public right-of-way,
07,   2016   a part of the southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 9 North, Range 7 East
2016
Comm. 5-23-  Arbor Homes - 200 North Vacation Plan Commission: vacating all of the right-
03,   2022   of-way of County Road 200 North, between County Road 200 West and I-65
2022
Comm. 5-23-  Vacating a portion of the east-west alley north of Lot 3A, specifically
04,   2022   between Lots 1 and 3A, and the Clifty Street right-of-way running north-south
2022         from Main Street, between Lots 46 and 45 and 3A, that dead ends at Lot 1
09,   3-20-  Vacating a part of the 50 feet wide right-of-way of Beech Drive, adjacent to
2022  2023   the south lines of Lot 19-R of the Fourth Addition to the Town of Grandview
             Lake
            
 
TABLE V: FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.     Date Passed Description
                              Approving the order of the Bartholomew/ Columbus
                              Telecommunications Commission regarding the Form
(R) Comm. 1996-02 2-5-1996    1200-Series rates for basic cable television
                              service, installations and equipment submitted by
                              Sammons of Indiana (now Marcus Cable Associates,
                              LP)
                              Approving the transfer of the White River
(R) Comm. 1997-09 7-7-1997    Cablevision, LP, franchise agreement with Mark
                              Twain Cablevision, LP
                              Amending the cable television franchise agreement
(R) Comm. 1997-13 10-17-1997  between the Bartholomew/ Columbus
                              Telecommunications Commission and Apollo
                              Communications Corporation
(R) Comm. 1998-10 9-21-1998   Commencing cable franchise renewal proceedings
                              with Marcus Cable Associates, LP
                              Consenting to the transfer of a non-exclusive
(R) Comm. 1999-01 3-8-1999    cable television franchise from Marcus Cable
                              Associates, LLC, to Vulcan Cable, Inc.
                              Recommending the county and the City of Columbus
(R) Comm. 2000-11 11-6-2000   waive the 60-day notice requirement imposed upon
                              the cable operator (Insight)
                             
 
TABLE VI: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./   Date
Res.    Passed Description
No.
Comm.   2-26-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (132 feet south of the southeast
1996-04 1996   corner of C.R. 670 E and C.R. 800 N) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to C-1
               (Local Business)
Comm.   3-25-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (east side of C.R. 250 E, 150
06-1996 1996   feet south of Artesian Drive, in Sandcreek Township) from S-1 (Suburban
               Residential) to S-2 (Residential)
Comm.   3-25-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (northeast corner of C.R. 250 E
07-1996 1996   and C.R. 500 S in Sandcreek Township) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to S-2
               (Residential)
Comm.   4-9-   Amending the official zoning map for territory (Lot 2 in Marketplace Industrial
08-1996 1996   Park, Phase II) from I-2 (Industrial) to C-3 (Shopping Center)
Comm.   4-29-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (approximately 1,050 feet west
09-1996 1996   of U.S. 31 and 1,800 feet north of C.R. 500 N in German Township) from S-1
               (Suburban Residential) to S-3 (Residential)
Comm.   5-20-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (located 350 feet south of the
11,     1996   intersection of C.R. 350 E and S.R. 7 in Columbus Township) from I-1
1996           (Industrial) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (14130 South Jonesville Road
12,     6-24-  (S.R. 11), approximately 0.3 mile south of C.R. 850 S and 0.25 mile west of
1996    1996   S.R. 11 in Wayne Township) from IR (Industrial Reserve) to S-1 (Suburban
               Residential)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (part of the west half of the
17,     9-23-  southeast quarter of Section 9, Township 9 North, Range 7 East, commencing at
1996    1996   the intersection of the west line of the Columbus and Hartsville Turnpike) from
               R-1B (Single-Family Residential) to C-1 (Local Business)
Comm.   9-26-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (2.45 acres, Lot 2A of
18,     1996   marketplace Center, Section 1, sixth resubdivision) from C-4 (Roadside
1996           Commercial) to C-3 (Shopping Center)
               Amending the official zoning map for territory (32 acres, a part of the west
Comm.   11-25- half of the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 10 North, Range 5 East,
1996-19 1996   of the Second Principal Meridian) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to S-3
               (Residential)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (all that portion of Section 11,
02,     2-24-  Township 10 North, Range 5 East, of German Township relinquished by Edinburgh
1997    1997   in the 1989 interlocal agreement with Columbus and the county) to S-1 (Suburban
               Residential)
Comm.   3-24-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (containing five acres,
04,     1997   described in the attachment to the ordinance listed in this entry) from IR
1997           (Industrial Reserve) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   11-17- Amending the official zoning map for territory (Lot 2 in Alvin A. Schaeffer’s
12,     1997   second minor subdivision) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to S-2 (Residential)
1997
               Amending the official zoning map for territory (all that part of the east half
Comm.   8-3-   of the northeast quarter of Section 15, Township 10 North, Range 5 East, lying
08,     1998   east of the east line of the right-of-way of the P.C.C. & S.T. Railroad and
1998           lying south of the limited access highway I-65, containing 8.550 acres, more of
               less) from I-2 (General Industrial) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   8-3-   Amending the official zoning map for territory (Lot 1 in Alvin A. Schaeffer’s
09,     1998   second minor subdivision) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to S-2 (Residential)
1998
Comm.   12-28- Amending the official zoning map for territory (approximately 8.56 acres, Lot 2
18,     1998   of the K.L.C. minor subdivision) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to C-4
1998           (Roadside Commercial)
Comm.   3-29-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (approximately 4.52 acres, Lot 3
1999-01 1999   of Schuder’s minor subdivision) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to I-1 (Light
               Industrial)
Comm.   6-12-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (approximately 2.44 acres lying
07,     2000   in Sandcreek Township) from IR (Industrial Reserve) to S-1 (Suburban
2000           Residential)
Comm.   7-24-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (approximately 51.02 acres
10,     2000   deeded to William E. and Nora Dailey) from AG (Agricultural) and S-1 (Suburban
2000           Residential) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   9-5-   Amending the official zoning map for territory (approximately 6.51 acres on the
11,     2000   northeast side of U.S. 31, approximately 500 feet south of the I-65 Interchange
2000           in German Township) from I-2 (Industrial) to C-1 (Local Business)
Comm.   10-30- Amending the official zoning map for territory (the territory identified as the
13,     2000   area removed from the Columbus planning jurisdiction) to S-1 (Suburban
2000           Residential)
               Amending the official zoning map for territory (the southeast quarter of the
Comm.   1-29-  southeast quarter of Section 16 and the southwest quarter of the southwest
2001-02 2001   quarter of Section 15, except ten acres by parallel lines off the east side
               thereof) from I-1 (Industrial) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   2-18-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (all property in Sections 3, 4,
01,     2002   9, 10 and 11, Township 8 North, Range 6 East) from I-1 (Industrial) or I-R
2002           (Industrial Reserve) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   4-1-   Amending the official zoning map for territory (136 feet by parallel lines off
02,     2002   the south of Lot 2 of the original plat of Taylorsville and west of the
2002           railroad) from R-1B (Single-Family Residential) to C-1 (Local Business)
Comm.   7-1-   Amending the official zoning map for territory (all property in Sections 34 and
04,     2002   35, Township 10 North, Range 6 East) from I-R (Industrial Reserve) to S-1
2002           (Suburban Residential)
               Amending the official zoning map for territory (180 acres, more or less,
Comm.   8-4-   roughly bounded by the former Penn Central Rail Line on the north, C.R. 1050 E
03-2003 2003   on the west, C.R. 700 N on the south and the extended alignment of C.R. 1150E
               on the east) from I-R (Industrial Reserve) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   10-27- Amending the official zoning map for territory (104.5 acres, located on the
06,     2003   east side of S.R. 58 north of C.R. 650 S and south of C.R. 550 S in Ohio
2003           Township) from R-1A (Single- Family Residential) to S-1 (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   2-12-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (a part of the west half of
01,     2007   Section 4, Township 9 North, Range 5 East, in Columbus Township) to S-1
2007           (Suburban Residential)
Comm.   3-10-  Amending the official zoning map for territory (Lot 1 in the Sullivan
05,     2008   Administrative Subdivision) from S-1 (Suburban Residential) to C-1 (Local
2008           Business)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (part of the northeast quarter
06,     5-11-  of Section 22, Township 10 North, Range 5 East, lying in German Township) from
2009    2009   I-2 (General Industrial) to RMc (Multi-Family Residential with Conditions) and
               CRc (Regional Commercial with Conditions)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (containing 74.14 acres, more or
13,     11-2-  less, at the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 13, Township 8
2009    2009   North, Range 4 East, Ohio Township, with exceptions) from AG (Agriculture,
               General Rural) to PUD (Keeping Hill Planned Unit Development)
               Amending the official zoning map for territory (Lots 10, 11 and 12 of White’s
Comm.   11-9-  Addition to the original plat of St. Louis Crossing and the east half of the
14,     2009   former railroad right-of-way adjoining Lot 12, except therefrom the east 16
2009           feet, ten inches of Lot 10) from CC (Community Commercial) to RE (Established
               Residential)
Comm.   2-8-   Amending the official zoning map (Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Schultz’s Minor Plat as
02,     2010   recorded in Plat Book 1, Page 17) from AP (Agriculture Preferred) and I1 (Light
2010           Industrial) to CC (Community Commercial)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map (Lot 10 in Driftwood Center Section Two as
04,     6-1-   recorded in Plat Book P, Page 339B and all the northwest quarter of Section 16,
2010    2010   Township 10 North, Range 5 East, lying east of Driftwood River, containing 20
               acres more or less) to be designated as AG (Agriculture, General Rural)
               Amending the official zoning map (all that part of Lot A2A of the Roberts/Adesa
Comm.          Administrative Subdivision recorded in Plat Book Q, Page 312D, that was
04,     8-1-   originally Block A of the Willoughby Trucking Park Final Plat recorded in Plat
2011    2011   Book O, Page 73, except for Lot A1 of the Willoughby/Roberts Resubdivision of
               Block A as recorded in Plat Book Q, Page 98C), from I1 (Light Industrial) to
               CRc (Regional Commercial with Conditions)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (a part of the North Half of
07,     10-31- Section 22, Township 10 North, Range 5 East, as described in Deed Book 312,
2011    2011   Page 14, containing 5.54 acres, more or less) from RMH (Residential:
               Manufactured Home Park) to CR (Commercial: Regional Center)
Comm.          Amending the official zoning map for territory (a part of the North Half of
08,     10-31- Section 22, Township 10 North, Range 5 East, as described in Deed Book 312,
2011    2011   Page 14, containing 4.55 acres, more or less) from RMH (Residential:
               Manufactured Home Park) to CR (Commercial: Regional Center)
               Amending the official zoning map for territory:

               (1) J. V. Wright’s First Addition Lot 16, Block 1, to the Town of Grammar, from
               AP (Agriculture: Preferred) to CN (Commercial: Neighborhood Center)
Comm.   6-2-
03,     2014   (2) Lot 17 in J. V. Wright’s First Addition, and Lots 20 and 21 in J. V.
2014           Wright's Second Addition to the Town of Grammar, from I-2 (Industrial: General)
               to CN (Commercial: Neighborhood Center)

               (3) Four tracts of land located in Section 10, Township 8 North, Range 7 East,
               from RE (Residential: Established) to CN (Commercial: Neighborhood Center)
Comm.   4-6-   Amending the official zoning map for territory (Lot 2 in the Amos Chestnut
5, 2015 2015   Minor Subdivision) from AG (Agriculture: General) to RRc (Residential: Rural
               with commitments)
Comm.   12-14- Amending the official zoning map for Gehring Property (Lot 2A in A Replat of
09,     2015   KLC Minor Subdivision) from AP (Agriculture: Preferred) to CC (Commercial:
2015           Community Center)
Council 7-20-  Amending the official zoning map for an area included in the jurisdiction of
1, 2016 2016   the Edinburgh/Bartholomew/Columbus Joint District Plan Commission and rezoning
               the property from C3 (Shopping Center) to I2c (Industrial with commitments)
Comm.   2-29-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from AP (Agriculture:
02,     2016   Preferred) to CRc (Regional Center with commitments)
2016
Comm.   7-11-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from AP (Agriculture:
06,     2016   Preferred) to AG (Agriculture: General)
2016
04,     6-5-   Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from AG (Agriculture:
2017    2017   General) to CRc (Commercial: Regional with Commitments)
05,     6-5-   Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from AG (Agriculture:
2017    2017   General) to RMc (Residential: Multi-Family with Commitments)
               Amending the official zoning map for the subject property as follows:
               (1) From RMc (Residential: Multi-Family with Commitments) to CRc (Commercial:
Comm.   4-23-  Regional with Commitments);
03,     2018   (2) From CRc (Commercial: Regional with Commitments) to CRc (Commercial:
2018           Regional with Amended Commitments); and
               (3) From RMc (Residential: Multi-Family with Commitments) to RMc (Residential:
               Multi-Family with Amended Commitments)
05,     7-22-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from CC (Commercial:
2019    2019   Community) to RE (Residential: Established)
07,     11-12- Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from I1 (Industrial:
2019    2019   Light) to CR (Commercial: Regional)
08,     10-28- Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from I2c (Industrial:
2019    2019   General with Commitments) to RMc (Residential: Multi-Family with Commitments)
Comm.   7-11-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from I1 (Industrial:
05,     2022   Light) to I2 (Industrial: General)
2022
03,     4-17-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property
2023    2023
04,     10-2-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from RMc
2023    2023   (Residential: Multi-Family with Commitments) to I1c (Industrial: Light with
               Commitments)
2024-11 11-2-  Amending the official zoning map for the subject property from AG (Agriculture:
        2024   General) to I2c (Industrial: General with Commitments)
              
 
TABLE VII: MORATORIUMS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.    Date Passed Description
Comm. 10, 1999   9-27-1999   Location of telecommunications towers
Comm. 07, 2003   11-2-2003   Major subdivisions to not be served by public or
                             semi-public sewer systems
(R) Comm. 2004-2 11-17-2004  Major subdivisions to not be served by public or
                             semi-public sewer systems
Comm. 2004-5     11-29-2004  Major subdivisions to not be served by public or
                             semi-public sewer systems
Comm. 2005-06    12-19-2005  Major subdivisions to not be served by public or
                             semi-public sewer systems
                             Amending Ords. 2003-07, 2004-05 and 2005-06; major
Comm. 2006-03    3-13-2006   subdivisions to not be served by public or semi-
                             public sewer systems
                             Farm confined feeding operation (CFO) and
Comm. 2014-05    9-8-2014    concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO) Type
                             II
                            
 
TABLE VIII: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREAS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
                                Declaring an area as an economic development
(R) Comm. 2014-1    12-9-2014   area and approving an economic development plan
                                for said area
                                Modifying and confirming Res. 2014-1, declaring
(R) Comm. 2015-01   2-24-2015   an area as an economic development area and
                                approving an economic development plan for said
                                area
                                Approving statement of benefits to allow a tax
(R) Council 2016-1  6-14-2016   deduction for personal property tax abatement
                                in relation to an economic revitalization area
                                Approving tax abatement for George Utz, Inc, to
(R) Council 2016-03 12-13-2016  invest in a building addition at the address of
                                140000 N 250 West, Edinburgh, in the economic
                                revitalization area
                                Approving tax abatement for George Utz, Inc.,
(R) Council 2016-04 12-13-2016  to invest in new manufacturing equipment to
                                bring new jobs to the economic revitalization
                                area
(R) 2019-01         10-8-2019   Approving tax abatement for George Utz, Inc.
(R) 2019-02         10-8-2019   Approving tax abatement for Peer Foods Group,
                                Inc.
(R) 2023-02         2-13-2023   Approving tax abatement for SV Columbus, LLC
                                and Sentry Biopharma Services, Inc.
(R) 2023-04         2-13-2023   Approving tax abatement for Georg Utz, Inc.
(R) Redev. 2023-10  9-11-2023   Approving tax abatement for R and T Woodside,
                                Inc.
                                Amending the declaratory resolution and
(R) Redev. 22-2023  7-17-2023   development plan for the Central Economic
                                Development Area
                                Amending the declaratory resolution and
(R) Redev. 26-2023  9-19-2023   development plan for the Central Economic
                                Development Area
(R) 2023-17         11-13-2023  Approving tax abatement for Georg Utz, Inc.
(R) 2024-03         6-10-2024   Approving tax abatement for Irresistible Foods
                                Group, Inc.
                               
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Indiana Administrative Code
References to Prior Code
References to Council Resolutions
References to Commissioner Resolutions
References to Council Ordinances
References to Commissioner Ordinances
References to Redevelopment Commission Resolutions
References to Joint District Commission Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section                      Code Section
1-1-1-5                           10.04
1-1-1-7                           10.12
1-1-1-8                           10.06
1-1-4-5                           10.05
1-1-5-1                           10.11
1-1-6-1                           10.08
3-6-6-27                          30.02
3-6-6-31                          Ch. 31
3-6-6-31(a)                       30.02
4-8.1-2-7                         35.003
4-21.5-3-7                        150.49
5-3-1                             156.194
5-10.2-1 et seq.                  33.061
5-10.3-1-1 et seq.                33.060
5-10.3-2-1                        33.060
5-10.3-2-1 et seq.                33.061
5-11-1-27(c)                      33.012
5-13-7-6 through 5-13-7-7         35.088
5-13-9                            35.081
5-13-9-1 et seq.                  35.002,
                                  35.020
5-13-9-2                          35.081
5-13-9-2.5                        35.081
5-13-9-3                          35.081
5-13-9-5.3                        35.081
5-13-9-11                         35.081
5-13-9.5                          35.081
5-13-10                           35.081
5-13-10.5                         35.081
5-14-1.5-1 et seq.                31.05
5-14-1.5-5                        52.09
5-22                              35.051
5-26.5-2                          30.06
6-1.1-12.1-1 through 6-1.1-12.1-6 35.035
6-1.1-17-3(b)                     35.008
6-1.1-22-8.1(a)(1)                35.008
6-1.1-22-9                        35.008
6-1.1-22-9.5                      35.008
6-1.1-22-9.7                      35.008
6-1.1-22.5-6                      35.008
6-1.1-22.5-12                     35.008
6-1.1-22.5-18.5                   35.008
6-1.3-7-10                        150.20
6-3-4-15.7                        33.110
9-13-2-1 through 9-13-2-198.7     70.01
9-20-1-3                          Ch. 72, Sch. I
9-20-4-3                          Ch. 72, Sch. I
9-20-7-1 et seq.                  70.03
9-20-7-3                          70.03
9-20-18-11                        70.99,
                                  Ch. 72, Sch. I
9-20-18-12                        70.99
9-21-1-1 et seq.                  Ch. 70
9-21-1-2                          Ch. 70
9-21-4-13                         70.04
9-21-4-14                         70.04
9-21-8-32                         Ch. 72, Sch. II
9-22-1 et seq.                    98.99
10-14-3                           96.02
10-14-3-29                        96.01
13-16-1-2 et seq.                 50.05
13-21-5-1 et seq.                 50.05
13-21-12-8                        50.06
13-21-13-2                        50.05
14-6 (Repealed)                   71.06
14-16-1-22                        Ch. 71
14-21-1-26.5                      156.152
15-5-8-2 et seq. (Repealed)       92.04
15-20                             92.03
16-18-4                           30.06
16-20-1-9                         Ch. 110
16-41-25-9                        52.05
16-41-33-1 through 16-41-33-9     Ch. 93
16-42-1 et seq.                   110.01
22-9-1-4 et seq.                  97.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.                  97.01
22-9.5-4-8                        97.10
22-9.5-2-2                        97.02
22-9.5-2-3                        97.02
22-9.5-2-4                        97.02
22-9.5-2-8                        97.02
22-9.5-2-9                        97.02
22-9.5-2-10 (Repealed)            97.02
22-9.5-2-10(b) (Repealed)         97.02
22-9.5-2-10(c) (Repealed)         97.02
22-9.5-2-11                       97.02
22-9.5-2-13                       97.02
22-9.5-3 et seq.                  97.09
22-9.5-3                          97.03
22-9.5-5                          97.02
22-9-5.5-1                        97.03
22-9.5-6                          97.02,
                                  97.10
22-11-18                          91.51
22-13-2-7                         150.49
22-13-2-7(b)                      150.03
22-14-2-2 through 22-14-2-11      91.21
22-15-3-1                         150.35
22-15-4                           150.03
30-4-3.5                          35.079
30-4-3.5-2 (a)                    35.079
33-33-3-1                         33.008
33-33-3-2 (Repealed)              33.008
33-33-3-6 (Repealed)              33.008
34-28-5-1 et seq.                 10.99
34-28-5-4                         10.99
35-45-1-1 et seq.                 Ch. 90
36-1-3-8                          10.99,
                                  36.04
36-1-4-4                          10.18
36-1-5-3                          Adopting Ordinance
36-1-5-4                          151.015
36-1-6-2                          10.99,
                                  98.99
36-1-6-4                          10.99
36-1-7                            35.081
36-1-7-1 et seq.                  151.003
36-1-8.5                          30.06
36-1-8.5-3                        30.06
36-1-8.5-4                        30.06
36-1-8.5-4.5                      30.06
36-1-8.5-5                        30.06
36-1-8.5-6 (Repealed)             30.06
36-1-8.5-7                        30.06
36-1-8.5-9                        30.06
36-1-8.5-11                       30.06
36-1-8.5-12                       30.06
36-1-10                           50.05
36-2-1 through 36-2-1-8           30.01
36-2-2-2                          Ch. 31
36-2-2-4                          31.04,
                                  32.05
36-2-2-6                          31.02
36-2-2-8                          31.02
36-2-2-10                         31.03
36-2-2-11                         33.001
36-2-2-23                         36.03
36-2-3-1 through 36-2-3-9         31.04
36-2-3-3                          32.01
36-2-3-4                          32.05
36-2-3-6                          32.03,
                                  33.001
36-2-3-7                          32.02
36-2-3-10                         32.04
36-2-4-8                          31.05
36-2-6                            Ch. 90
36-2-9                            Ch. 90
36-2-9-1 through 36-2-9-18        33.001
36-2-11                           33.002
36-5-2-2                          10.15
36-7-1-14                         10.05
36-7-2-2                          Ch. 156
                                  Ch. 156,
36-7-4-700                        156.001,
                                  156.153
36-7-4-900                        10.05
36-7-4-1109                       155.22,
                                  155.42
36-7-4-1109(2)                    155.22
36-7-8-1 through 36-7-8-10        Ch. 150
36-7-8-4                          Ch. 152
36-7-8-7                          150.03
36-7-10.1-1 et seq.               Ch. 94
36-8-2-2                          Ch. 90
36-8-2-3                          Ch. 90
36-8-2-4                          Ch. 90
36-8-2-5                          Ch. 90,
                                  Ch. 92
36-8-2-8                          Ch. 90,
                                  99.18
36-8-2-10                         Ch. 90
36-8-16-1 through 36-8-16-19      36.05
36-9-23-1 et seq.                 155.01
36-9-27                           155.03,
                                  156.006
36-9-27-3                         156.152
36-9-30                           50.05
36-9-30-1 through 36-9-30-35      Ch. 51
36-9-30-2                         Ch. 51
36-9-30-4                         51.015
36-10-2-2                         Ch. 99
36-10-3-1 through 36-10-3-39      Ch. 99
36-10-3-39                        99.99
                                  
 
REFERENCES TO INDIANA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
I.A.C. Section Code Section
I.A.C. Section               Code Section
327 I.A.C. 2-1-6(a)(1)(A-D)  155.24
327 I.A.C. 2-1.5-8(a)        155.24
327 I.A.C. 2-6.1             53.15
327 I.A.C. 2-15-8(b)(1)(A-D) 155.24
                             112.01,
410 I.A.C. 1-5               112.02,
                             112.05,
                             112.13
410 I.A.C. 6-2               100.04
                             52.02,
410 I.A.C. 6-8.3             52.05,
                             52.06,
                             52.08
410 I.A.C. 6-8.3 et seq.     52.03
                             52.05,
410 I.A.C. 6-10.1            52.06,
                             52.08
410 I.A.C. 5-10.1 et seq.    52.03
410 I.A.C. 7-15.1            110.04
410 I.A.C. 7-16-1-1          110.04
675 I.A.C. 21.1              91.21
                             
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2011 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2011 Code Section
1-3                10.05
1-11               10.99
1-12               10.17
1-13               10.18
1-14               10.19
2-1                30.01
2-50               30.02
2-51               30.02
2-52               30.02
2-53               30.02
2-56               31.01
2-57               31.02
2-58               31.03
2-59               31.04
2-64               32.01
2-65               32.02
2-66               32.03
2-67               32.04
2-68               32.05
2-73               33.001
2-74               33.002
2-75               33.003
2-76               33.004
2-77               33.005
2-78               33.006
2-88               34.01
2-90               34.01
2-91               34.01
2-91.1             34.01
2-92               34.01
2-93               34.01
2-106              34.02
2-107              34.02
2-108              34.02
2-109              34.02
2-112              34.02
2-113              34.02
2-114              34.02
2-115              34.02
2-116              34.02
2-125              34.02
2-126              34.02
2-127              34.02
2-128              34.02
2-129              34.02
2-130              34.02
2-131              34.02
2-132              34.02
2-133              34.02
2-134              34.02
2-137              34.02
2-138              34.02
2-142              34.03
2-143              34.03
2-144              34.03
2-145              34.03
2-146              34.03
2-147              34.03
2-148              34.03
2-149              34.03
2-150              34.03
2-151              34.03
2-152              34.03
2-155              34.02
2-156              34.02
2-157              34.02
2-158              34.02
2-159              34.03
2-161              34.02
2-162              34.02
2-163              34.02
2-164              34.02
2-170              34.03
2-171              34.03
2-172              34.03
2-173              34.03
2-176              34.03
2-177              34.03
2-178              34.03
2-179              34.03
2-180              34.03
2-181              34.03
2-182              34.03
2-183              34.03
2-184              34.03
2-185              34.03
2-194              34.03
2-195              34.03
2-196              34.03
2-197              34.03
2-198              34.03
2-201              34.03
2-202              34.03
2-203              34.03
2-204              34.03
2-205              34.03
2-222              34.03
2-223              34.03
2-224              34.03
2-225              34.03
2-226              34.03
2-227              34.03
2-229              34.03
2-230              34.03
2-231              34.03
2-232              34.03
2-233              34.03
2-235              34.03
2-236              34.03
2-237              34.03
2-238              34.03
2-239              34.03
2-240              34.03
2-241              34.03
2-242              34.03
2-250              35.020
2-251              35.021
2-252              35.022
2-253              35.022
2-254              35.023
2-255              35.024
2-256              35.003
2-257              35.025
2-265              35.006
2-267              35.006
2-268              35.006
2-269              35.006
2-270              35.006
2-271              35.006
2-272              35.006
2-280              35.006
2-281              35.006
2-282              35.006
2-283              35.006
2-284              35.006
2-285              35.006
2-290              35.006
2-291              35.006
2-295              35.006
2-296              35.006
2-297              35.006
2-298              35.006
2-301              35.006
2-302              35.006
2-303              35.006
2-307              35.006
2-308              35.006
2-309              35.006
2-316              35.006
2-320              35.006
2-321              35.006
2-331              35.007
2-332              35.007
2-333              35.007
2-334              35.007
2-335              35.007
2-336              35.007
2-341              35.007
2-342              35.007
2-346              35.006
2-355              35.001
2-356              35.002
2-357              35.003
2-358              35.004
2-481              33.025
2-482              33.026
2-483              33.027
2-484              33.028
2-485              33.029
2-486              33.030
2-491              33.045
2-492              33.046
2-496              33.080
2-497              33.081
2-498              33.082
2-499              33.083
2-506              33.095
2-507              33.096
2-508              33.097
2-511              33.060
2-512              33.061
2-513              33.062
2-514              33.063
2-515              33.064
2-516              33.065
2-526              33.110
2-527              33.111
2-528              33.112
2-531              33.007
2-543              36.01
2-544              36.02
2-547              35.006
2-548              35.006
2-549              35.006
2-550              35.006
2-551              35.006
2-554              35.007
2-555              35.007
2-556              35.007
2-557              35.007
2-558              35.007
2-559              35.007
2-560              35.007
2-565              30.03
2-580              33.008
3-1                36.03
3-2                36.04
3-5                92.01
3-6                92.02
3-7                92.03
3-8                92.04
3-9                92.05
3-10               92.06,
                   92.07
3-12               92.08
3-13               92.99
3-14               92.09
3-20               36.05
3-21               36.05
3-22               36.05
3-23               36.05
3-26               36.05
3-27               36.05
3-29               36.05
3-30               36.05
3-31               35.006
3-35               110.01
3-36               110.02
3-37               110.03
3-38               110.04
3-39               110.05
3-40               110.06
3-41               110.06
3-42               110.07
3-43               110.99
3-61               36.06
3-62               36.06
3-63               36.06
3-65               36.06
3-66               36.06
3-67               36.06
3-68               36.06
3-69               36.06
3-71               36.06
3-72               36.06
3-90               35.035
3-91               35.036
3-98               111.01
3-99               111.02
3-100              111.03
3-101              111.04
3-102              111.05
3-103              111.06
3-104              111.07
3-105              111.08
3-106              111.09,
                   111.20
3-111              111.21
3-112              111.22
3-113              111.23
4-1                99.01
4-2                99.02
4-3                99.03
4-4                99.04
4-10               99.15
4-11               99.16
4-12               99.17
4-13               99.18
4-14               99.19
4-15               99.20
4-16               99.21
4-17               99.22
4-18               99.23
4-19               99.99
4-20               99.24
4-30               99.35
4-31               99.36
4-32               99.37
4-33               99.38
4-34               99.39
4-35               99.40
4-36               99.41
5-1                150.01
5-2                150.02
5-3                150.03
5-4                150.04
5-5                150.05
5-6                150.06
5-7                150.35
5-8                150.36
5-9                150.37
5-22               150.38
5-23               150.39
5-24               150.40
5-25               150.38
5-27               150.41
5-28               150.42
5-29               150.43
5-30               150.44
5-31               150.45
5-32               150.46
5-33               150.47
5-34               150.48
5-35               150.49
5-36               150.50
5-37               150.99
5-38               150.07
5-45               152.001
5-46               152.002
5-49               152.135
5-50               152.136
5-51               152.137
5-52               152.138
5-53               152.139
5-56               152.015
5-60               152.030
5-61               152.031
5-62               152.032
5-63               152.033
5-64               152.034
5-65               152.035
5-66               152.036
5-70               152.050
5-75               152.095
5-76               152.096
5-77               152.097
5-78               152.098
5-79               152.099
5-80               152.100
5-85               152.065
5-86               152.066
5-87               152.067
5-88               152.068
5-89               152.069
5-94               152.080
5-98               152.115
5-99               152.116
5-100              152.117
5-101              152.118
5-102              152.119
5-103              152.120
5-104              152.121
5-105              152.122
5-110              152.999
5-120              151.001
5-121              151.002
5-122              151.003
5-128              153.01
5-129              153.02
5-130              153.03
5-131              153.04
5-132              153.05
5-133              153.06
5-136              153.20
5-137              153.21
5-138              153.22
5-139              153.23
5-140              153.24
5-145              153.35
5-146              153.36
5-147              153.37
5-148              153.38
5-149              153.39
5-150              153.40
5-155              151.015
5-156              151.016
5-157              151.017
5-158              151.018
5-159              151.019
5-160              151.020
5-161              151.021
5-162              151.999
5-163              151.022
5-164              151.023
5-165              151.024
5-186              151.043
5-190              151.065
5-191              151.066
5-192              151.067
5-193              151.068
5-194              151.069
5-195              151.070
6-1                90.01
6-2                90.02
6-3                90.03
6-4                90.04
6-5                90.05
6-6                90.06
6-7                90.07
6-8                90.08
6-9                90.09
6-10               90.10
6-15               91.01
6-16               91.02
6-17               91.03
6-18               91.04
6-45               93.01
6-46               93.02
6-47               93.03
6-48               93.04
6-49               93.99
6-50               93.99
6-51               93.05
6-58               94.01
6-59               94.02
6-60               94.03
6-61               94.04
6-62               94.05
6-63               94.06
6-64               94.07
6-65               94.08
6-66               94.09
6-70               95.01
6-71               95.02
6-72               95.03
6-73               95.04
6-74               95.05
6-75               95.06
6-76               95.07
6-77               95.08
6-78               95.09
6-79               95.10
6-80               95.11
6-81               95.12
6-82               95.13
6-83               95.99
6-84               95.14
6-85               95.15
6-86               95.16
6-90               91.15
6-91               91.16
6-92               91.17
6-93               91.18
6-94               91.19
6-95               91.20
6-96               91.21
6-97               91.22
6-98               91.99
6-105              96.01
6-106              96.02
6-107              96.03
6-110              91.35
6-111              91.36
6-112              91.37
6-113              91.38
6-114              91.39
6-115              91.99
6-120              71.01
6-121              71.02
6-122              71.03
6-123              71.04
6-124              71.05
6-125              71.06
6-143              52.01
6-144              52.02
6-145              52.03
6-146              52.04
6-147              52.05
6-148              52.06
6-149              52.07
6-150              52.08
6-151              52.99
6-152              52.09
6-155              51.001
6-158              51.015
6-159              51.016
6-160              51.017
6-161              51.018
6-162              51.019
6-165              51.030
6-166              51.031
6-167              51.032
6-170              51.045
6-171              51.046
6-172              51.047
6-173              51.048
6-174              51.049
6-175              51.050
6-176              51.051
6-177              51.052
6-178              51.053
6-179              51.054
6-180              51.055
6-181              51.056
6-182              51.057
6-183              51.058
6-184              51.059
6-185              51.060
6-186              51.061
6-187              51.062
6-188              51.063
6-191              51.075
6-192              51.076
6-195              51.999
6-198              51.090
6-199              51.091
6-205              50.01
6-206              50.02
6-207              50.03
6-208              50.04
6-209              50.05
6-210              50.06
6-211              50.07
6-212              50.08
6-213              50.09
6-214              50.10
6-215              50.11
6-217              50.12
6-218              50.13
6-245              91.50
6-246              91.51
6-247              91.52
6-248              91.53
6-249              91.54
6-250              91.55
6-251              91.56
6-252              91.57
6-253              91.58
6-254              91.59
6-255              91.60
6-256              91.61
6-260              97.01
6-261              97.02
6-262              97.03
6-263              97.04
6-264              97.05
6-265              97.06
6-266              97.07
6-267              97.09
6-268              97.10
7-1                70.01
7-2                70.02
7-5                70.03
7-6                70.03
7-7                70.99
7-10               Ch. 72, Sch. I
7-11               Ch. 72, Sch. I
7-12               Ch. 72, Sch. I
7-13               Ch. 72, Sch. I
7-18               70.04
7-19               70.04
7-20               70.99
7-23               70.05,
                   70.99
7-24               70.05
7-60               Ch. 73, Sch. I
7-61               Ch. 73, Sch. I
7-70               Ch. 72, Sch. II
7-71               Ch. 72, Sch. II
7-72               Ch. 72, Sch. II
7-73               Ch. 72, Sch. II
7-74               Ch. 72, Sch. II
7-80               Ch. 72, Sch. III
7-81               Ch. 72, Sch. III
7-82               Ch. 72, Sch. III
7-90               Ch. 72, Sch. IV
7-91               Ch. 72, Sch. IV
7-92               Ch. 73, Sch. II
7-93               Ch. 72, Sch. IV;
                   Ch. 73, Sch. II
7-94               Ch. 72, Sch. IV;
                   Ch. 73, Sch. II
8-1                156.001
8-2                156.002
8-3                156.003
8-4                156.004
8-5                156.005
                   156.006,
8-27               156.020,
                   156.021
8-33               156.035
8-34               156.036
8-35               156.037
8-36               156.038
8-37               156.039
8-38               156.040
8-41               156.055
8-42               156.056
8-43               156.057
8-44               156.058
8-45               156.059
8-46               156.060
8-50               156.075
8-51               156.076
8-52               156.077
8-55               156.090
8-56               156.091
8-57               156.092
8-58               156.093
8-59               156.094
8-60               156.095
8-61               156.096
8-62               156.097
8-63               156.098
8-66               156.110
8-67               156.111
8-68               156.112
8-69               156.113
8-70               156.114
8-71               156.115
8-72               156.116
8-73               156.117
8-76               156.118
8-77               156.130
8-78               156.131
8-79               156.132
8-80               156.133
8-81               156.134
8-82               156.135
8-83               156.136
8-84               156.137
8-85               156.138
8-86               156.139
8-89               156.150
                   156.151,
8-90               156.153,
                   156.159
8-91               156.152
8-93               156.154
8-94               156.155
8-95               156.156
8-96               156.157
8-97               156.158
8-102              156.175
8-103              156.176
8-104              156.177
8-105              156.178
8-110              156.190
8-111              156.191
8-112              156.192
8-113              156.193
8-114              156.194
8-118              156.205
8-119              156.206
8-120              156.207
8-121              156.208
8-122              156.209
8-123              156.210
8-124              156.211
8-125              156.212
8-126              156.213
8-127              156.214
8-128              156.215
8-129              156.216
8-130              156.217
8-131              156.218
8-132              156.219
8-133              156.220
8-134              156.999
8-135              156.221
8-136              156.222
8-137              156.223
                   
 
REFERENCES TO COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. No. Date Passed Description
1986-2   - -1986     34.01
–      7-17-1987   35.035
1991-02  1-8-1991    35.006
1991-03  1-8-1991    35.006
1991-04  1-8-1991    35.006
1991-05  1-8-1991    35.006
1991-06  1-8-1991    35.006
1991-07  1-8-1991    35.006
1991-08  1-8-1991    35.006
1996-01  12-18-1995  TSO Table I
1996-03  4-9-1996    35.003
1996-08  11-12-1996  TSO Table I
1996-10  5-14-1996   35.004
1997-04  2-24-1997   TSO Table I
1997-05  4-14-1997   TSO Table I
1997-12  10-14-1997  TSO Table I
1997-16  12-16-1997  34.01
1998-05  4-14-1998   TSO Table I
98-13    10-13-1998  33.084
98-14    - -1998     30.04
98-15    11-10-1998  35.003
1999-04  4-26-1999   35.006
2000-09  7-10-2000   35.006
2003-04  3-11-2003   35.006
2016-01  6-14-2016   TSO Table VIII
2016-02  -           TSO Table II
2016-03  12-13-2016  TSO Table VIII
2016-04  12-13-2016  TSO Table VIII
2019-01  10-8-2019   TSO Table VIII
2019-02  10-8-2019   TSO Table VIII
                    
 
REFERENCES TO COMMISSIONER RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. No. Date Passed Description
–      9-10-1976   33.060—
                     33.064
–      2-17-1981   70.03,
                     70.99
1985     10-4-1982   33.065
1983-4   9-6-1983    35.001
                     33.110,
–      7-16-1984   33.111,
                     33.112
–      12-23-1985  33.095—
                     33.097
1989-02  10-2-1989   34.02
1989-06  12-11-1989  34.03
1990-03  2-26-1990   10.18
1990-08  9-17-1990   33.045,
                     33.046
1991-10  4-8-1991    33.025—
                     33.030
1992-02  3-2-1992    91.01—
                     91.04
1992-03  4-13-1992   33.080—
                     33.083
1993-13  10-4-1993   111.20—
                     111.23
1993-20  12-20-1993  50.12,
                     50.13
1994-01  1-5-1994    31.02
1994-13  8-29-1994   34.03
1994-20  11- -1994   35.006
1995-08  12-26-1995  34.02
1996-01  12-18-1995  TSO Table I,
                     III
1996-02  2-5-1996    TSO Table V
1996-04  6-3-1996    TSO Table II
1996-06  7-29-1996   TSO Table IV
1996-07  9-16-1996   TSO Table II
1996-09  12-9-1996   TSO Table IV
1997-01  1-21-1997   TSO Table II
1997-02  1-27-1997   TSO Table IV
1997-03  - -         33.009
1997-04  2-24-1997   TSO Table I
1997-05  4-14-1997   TSO Table I
1997-07  4-21-1997   TSO Table IV
1997-09  7-7-1997    TSO Table V
1997-10  8-18-1997   TSO Table II
1997-11  9-29-1997   33.110
1997-13  10-17-1997  TSO Table V
1997-14  11-3-1997   TSO Table I
1997-15  11-10-1997  34.02
1998-01  1-5-1998    TSO Table I
1998-02  3-2-1998    33.125—
                     33.128
1998-04  3-6-1998    TSO Table II
1998-08  7-27-1998   35.052
1998-09  7-20-1998   TSO Table I
1998-10  9-21-1998   TSO Table V
1998-11  10-12-1998  TSO Table II
1998-16  11-16-1998  TSO Table I
1998-18  12-28-1998  33.110
1998-19  12-28-1998  33.009
1999-01  3-8-1999    TSO Table V
1999-02  5-10-1999   TSO Table II
1999-04  5-11-1999   35.007
1999-05  6-28-1999   TSO Table IV
1999-06  7-6-1999    TSO Table II
2000-07  6-26-2000   TSO Table I
2000-08  7-10-2000   TSO Table I
2000-11  11-6-2000   TSO Table V
2001-01  3-5-2001    33.011
2001-03  7-2-2001    TSO Table II
2001-04  7-16-2001   36.05
2001-07  12-10-2001  TSO Table IV
2002-04  6-3-2002    TSO Table II
2002-05  7-1-2002    TSO Table III
2002-06  7-8-2002    TSO Table I
2002-08  9-23-2002   TSO Table II
01, 2003 1-27-2003   TSO Table I
2003-02  2-3-2003    154.01
2004-02  11-17-2004  TSO Table VII
–      12-28-2009  33.011
2012-02  2-13-2012   TSO Table IV
2012-05  6-4-2012    154.01
2013-02  4-8-2013    TSO Table II
2014-04  4-28-2014   TSO Table II
2014-06  10-13-2014  TSO Table II
2016-02  1-25-2016   TSO Table II
2016-04  4-11-2016   33.009
2016-05  5-2-2016    TSO Table I
2016-08  9-6-2016    TSO Table II
2016-09  9-28-2016   TSO Table II
2017-02  4-3-2017    TSO Table II
2017-04  9-18-2017   TSO Table I
2018-03  7-16-2018   TSO Table II
2020-3   3-23-2020   35.060
2021-02  3-8-2021    35.009
2021-04  5-3-2021    TSO Table II
2021-5   5-24-2021   31.05
2021-06  6-7-2021    TSO Table II
2021-07  6-7-2021    TSO Table II
2021-08  6-7-2021    TSO Table II
2021-10  6-28-2021   TSO Table II
2021-13  7-19-2021   TSO Table II
2021-16  9-13-2021   TSO Table II
2022-02  2-14-2022   TSO Table II
2022-06  3-7-2022    TSO Table II
2022-07  4-4-2022    TSO Table II
2022-08  7-11-2022   TSO Table II
2022-09  8-29-2022   TSO Table II
2022-11  11-7-2022   TSO Table II
2023-02  2-13-2023   TSO Table VIII
2023-04  2-13-2023   TSO Table VIII
2023-06  5-15-2023   35.060
2023-07  6-5-2023    35.060
2023-09  8-21-2023   TSO Table II
2023-12  10-2-2023   TSO Table II
2023-14  11-13-2023  35.095—
                     35.103
2023-16  11-13-2023  35.010
2023-17  11-13-2023  TSO Table VIII
2024-03  6-10-2024   TSO Table VIII
                    
 
REFERENCES TO COUNCIL ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
–      5-21-1973   35.07
18, 1996 9-26-1996   TSO Table VI
1996-20  12-10-1996  36.05
97-07    4-8-1997    TSO Table I
2000-08  6-13-2000   36.05
2007-01  3-13-2007   36.05
2009-09  8-19-2009   36.05
2009-08  12-21-2009  30.05
2009-11  - -2009     35.06
2014-01  5-13-2014   35.06
                    
 
REFERENCES TO COMMISSIONER ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
1-1959    8-3-1959    70.05
                      51.001,
                      51.015—
                      51.019,
                      51.030—
                      51.032,
1970-1    3-2-1970    51.045—
                      51.063,
                      51.075,
                      51.076,
                      51.090,
                      51.091,
                      51.999
1-4-71    3-8-1971    151.065—
                      151.070
                      93.01—
11-7-77   11-7-1977   93.05,
                      93.99
5         6-5-1978    71.06
                      153.02—
                      153.05,
XIII      - -1978     153.20—
                      153.24,
                      153.35—
                      153.40
                      34.03,
12-13-79A 12-13-1979  92.01—
                      92.08
1980-02   3-24-1980   71.01—
                      71.06
                      92.04—
1980-7    11-20-1980  92.09,
                      92.99
                      151.015,
                      151.017—
1981-1    3-6-1981    151.020,
                      151.022,
                      151.999
1982-9    10-4-1982   34.01
1982-6    11-9-1982   34.01
1982-11   11-15-1982  36.01,
                      36.02
                      91.15—
1982-11   - -1982     91.22,
                      91.99
1982-15   12-7-1982   34.01
1982-16   12-7-1982   35.06
1983-1    2-14-1983   71.06
1983-2    2-14-1983   34.01
1983-3    3-15-1983   33.006
1983-4    3-15-1983   33.005
1983-6    6-27-1983   151.001,
                      151.002
1983-7    7-18-1983   35.03,
                      35.25
1984-10   11-26-1984  35.06
1985-2    3-12-1985   35.06
1985-3    5-13-1985   36.05
1985-4    5-28-1985   96.01—
                      96.03
                      91.35—
1985-6    7-22-1985   91.39,
                      91.99
                      151.016,
1986-5    6-2-1986    151.021,
                      151.023
                      156.001—
                      156.005,
                      156.006,
                      156.021,
                      156.036—
                      156.040,
                      156.055—
                      156.058,
                      156.060,
                      156.075—
                      156.077,
                      156.090—
                      156.098,
                      156.110—
1986-7    10-21-1986  156.118,
                      156.130—
                      156.139,
                      156.151—
                      156.159,
                      156.175—
                      156.178,
                      156.190—
                      156.194,
                      156.205,
                      156.206,
                      156.210—
                      156.212,
                      156.214—
                      156.222,
                      156.999
1986-10   12-9-1986   35.07
1987-01   10-21-1986  156.021
                      156.006,
                      156.037,
1987-01   1-26-1987   156.091,
                      156.150,
                      156.152,
                      156.177
1987-4    3-9-1987    34.03
1987-5    3-9-1987    34.03,
                      35.06
                      99.15—
1987-08   6-29-1987   99.24,
                      99.99
                      156.021,
                      156.057,
1987-01   7-27-1987   156.059,
                      156.176,
                      156.218
                      92.01,
1987-16   10-26-1987  92.04—
                      92.06,
                      92.99
                      150.01—
                      150.07,
1988-04   4-4-1988    150.35—
                      150.50,
                      150.99
                      156.056,
                      156.057,
                      156.093,
1988-08   4-25-1988   156.094,
                      156.098,
                      156.176,
                      156.178,
                      156.194
                      152.001,
                      152.002,
                      152.015,
                      152.030—
                      152.036,
                      152.050,
                      152.065—
1988-09   6-6-1988    152.069,
                      152.080,
                      152.095—
                      152.100,
                      152.115—
                      152.122,
                      152.135—
                      152.139,
                      152.999
                      95.01—
1988-10   7-11-1988   95.16,
                      95.99
1988-12   8-15-1988   34.03
1989-04   4-3-1989    94.01—
                      94.09
1989-07   7-31-1989   156.094,
                      156.159
                      156.006,
1990-01   1-8-1990    156.207—
                      156.209,
                      156.213
1990-05   4-16-1990   34.03
1990-06   4-23-1990   35.06
1990-07   4-23-1990   34.03
1990-09   10-8-1990   35.06
1990-10   10-9-190    36.05
1990-11   11-3-1990   35.07
1991-05   5-6-1991    99.04
1991-06   5-6-1991    151.043
                      50.01,
1991-10   6-17-1991   50.05—
                      50.11
1991-09   12-11-1991  34.03
1991-15   12-30-1991  156.020
1992-01   1-9-1992    34.03
1992-04   3-2-1992    34.01
1992-06   6-8-1992    71.06
                      50.02—
                      50.04,
1992-09   7-27-1992   52.02—
                      52.09,
                      52.99
                      110.01—
1992-10   7-27-1992   110.07,
                      110.99
1993-18   1-29-1993   32.05
                      35.20,
1993-01   2-1-1993    35.21,
                      35.23,
                      35.24
1993-03   4-26-1993   156.156,
                      156.159
1993-09   7-26-1993   30.02
1993-15   11-1-1993   111.01—
                      111.09
1993-19   12-28-1993  31.04
                      156.006,
                      156.035,
1994-02   1-24-1994   156.037,
                      156.153,
                      156.193,
                      156.223
1994-09   6-6-1994    10.19,
                      10.99
1994-16   7-25-1996   35.06,
                      36.05
1995-02   1-3-1995    33.02
1995-05   4-3-1995    91.50—
                      91.61
1995-07   7-31-1995   30.02
1995-08   7-17-1995   35.06
1995-11   10-9-1995   71.06
1995-12   11-13-1995  36.05
1996-02   1-15-1996   34.01
1996-01   1-16-1996   TSO Table IV
1996-04   2-26-1996   TSO Table VI
05, 1996  3-18-1996   TSO Table IV
06-1996   3-25-1996   TSO Table VI
07-1996   3-25-1996   TSO Table VI
08-1996   4-9-1996    TSO Table VI
09-1996   4-29-1996   TSO Table VI
1996-10   5-14-1996   35.07
11, 1996  5-20-1996   TSO Table VI
12, 1996  6-24-1996   TSO Table VI
1996-13   7-15-1996   TSO Table IV
                      97.01—
1996-14   7-29-1996   97.07,
                      97.09,
                      97.10
1996-15   8-19-1996   TSO Table IV
17, 1996  9-23-1996   TSO Table VI
18, 1996  9-26-1996   TSO Table VI
1996-19   11-25-1996  TSO Table VI
1997-01   12-30-1996  TSO Table IV
02, 1997  2-24-1997   TSO Table VI
1997-03   3-10-1997   TSO Table IV
1997-05   3-24-1997   151.016
04, 1997  3-24-1997   TSO Table VI
1997-06   3-31-1997   36.05
1997-08   4-14-1997   TSO Table I
1997-09   5-19-1997   TSO Table IV
1997-10   8-18-1997   31.04
12, 1997  11-17-1997  TSO Table VI
13, 1997  12-1-1997   156.178,
                      156.208
1997-14   12-15-1997  92.02
1997-15   12-29-1997  31.04
1998-01   1-20-1998   TSO Table IV
1998-02   2-2-1998    31.04
03, 1998  2-23-1998   156.037,
                      156.057
04-1998   3-2-1998    TSO Table IV
1998-05   4-13-1998   33.009
1998-06   4-20-1998   35.06
1998-07   7-13-1998   35.50—
                      35.52
08, 1998  8-3-1998    TSO Table VI
09, 1998  8-3-1998    TSO Table VI
                      156.006,
1998-11   8-17-1998   156.095,
                      156.152
1998-10   8-17-1998   156.195
1998-14   9-28-1998   TSO Table IV
1998-15   11-2-1998   TSO Table IV
1998-16   12-7-1998   TSO Table IV
17, 1998  12-28-1998  TSO Table IV
18, 1998  12-28-1998  TSO Table VI
1999-01   3-29-1999   TSO Table VI
1999-02   4-5-1999    36.06
1999-05   4-26-1999   35.06
06, 1999  6-21-1999   TSO Table IV
07, 1999  8-16-1999   TSO Table IV
08, 1999  8-30-1999   TSO Table IV
1999-09   9-20-1999   36.05
10, 1999  9-27-1999   TSO Table VII
11, 1999  10-25-1999  TSO Table IV
1999-12   11-29-1999  150.20—
                      150.22
05, 2000  1-24-2000   TSO Table IV
03-2000   3-27-2000   TSO Table IV
2000-06   6-5-2000    33.009
07, 2000  6-12-2000   TSO Table VI
2000-09   7-10-2000   34.02
10, 2000  7-24-2000   TSO Table VI
11, 2000  9-5-2000    TSO Table VI
12, 2000  9-25-2000   TSO Table IV
2000-10   10-30-2000  33.009
13, 2000  10-30-2000  TSO Table VI
2001-02   1-29-2001   TSO Table VI
2001-04   2-19-2001   34.01
05, 2001  4-23-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-06   8-6-2001    33.009
07, 2001  9-24-2001   TSO Table IV
08, 2001  9-24-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-09   11-5-2001   35.06
2001-10   12-3-2001   35.05
01, 2002  2-18-2002   TSO Table VI
02, 2002  4-1-2002    TSO Table VI
04, 2002  7-1-2002    TSO Table VI
2002-05   7-22-2002   36.05
03-2003   8-4-2003    TSO Table VI
2003-04   9-8-2003    36.05
05, 2003  10-6-2003   TSO Table IV
06, 2003  10-27-2003  TSO Table VI
07, 2003  11-2-2003   TSO Table VII
08, 2003  12-1-2003   TSO Table IV
01, 2004  3-29-2004   TSO Table IV
                      98.01—
2004-02   6-1-2004    98.04,
                      98.99
2004-03   8-30-2004   36.05
2004-5    11-29-2004  TSO Table VII
2004-06   12-13-2004  33.009
2005-01   4-11-2005   70.05,
                      70.99
02, 2005  10-10-2005  TSO Table IV
2005-03   10-17-2005  33.009
04, 2005  10-31-2005  TSO Table IV
2005-05   11-14-2005  33.009
2005-07   12-5-2005   TSO Table IV
2005-06   12-19-2005  TSO Table VII
2006      1-3-2006    33.009
2006-02   3-13-2006   TSO Table IV
2006-03   3-13-2006   TSO Table VII
04, 2006  7-10-2006   TSO Table IV
01, 2007  2-12-2007   TSO Table VI
2007-02   3-12-2007   36.06
2007-03   4-23-2007   30.010
2007-04   7-20-2007   30.010
2007-05   8-20-2007   33.009
2007-06   8-27-2007   35.06,
                      36.05
07, 2007  10-22-2007  TSO Table IV
2007-08   12-10-2007  36.05
03, 2008  2-4-2008    157.01
2008-04   2-25-2008   35.06
05, 2008  3-10-2008   TSO Table VI
06, 2008  4-28-2008   TSO Table IV
                      155.01—
                      155.05,
                      155.15—
2008-07   5-5-2008    155.20,
                      155.35—
                      155.43,
                      155.99
                      53.01—
2008-08   5-5-2008    53.16,
                      53.99
2008-09   6-9-2008    36.06
2008-10   6-9-2008    110.01
2008-11   8-25-2008   TSO Table IV
2008-12   11-17-1995  35.06,
                      36.05
2009-01   2-2-2009    36.05
02, 2009  3-9-2009    157.01
03, 2009  3-9-2009    157.01
04, 2009  4-20-2009   TSO Table IV
05, 2009  4-20-2009   TSO Table IV
06, 2009  5-11-2009   TSO Table VI
2009-07   - -2009     33.009
2009-08   7- -2009    35.07
2009-12   10-19-2009  33.009
10, 2009  10-26-2009  TSO Table IV
13, 2009  11-2-2009   TSO Table VI
14, 2009  11-9-2009   TSO Table VI
2010-01   1-25-2010   33.009
02, 2010  2-8-2010    TSO Table VI
2010-03   3-22-2010   36.06
04, 2010  6-1-2010    TSO Table VI
2010-07   10-4-2010   70.05
2010-08   11-1-2010   34.02
2010-09   12-6-2010   33.009
2011-01   6-6-2011    70.05
2011-02   6-13-2011   Adopting Ordinance
03, 2011  7-11-2011   157.01
06, 2011  7-11-2011   157.01
04, 2011  7-25-2011   TSO Table VI
05, 2011  8-1-2011    156.036,
                      156.056
07, 2011  10-31-2011  TSO Table VI
08, 2011  10-31-2011  TSO Table VI
2012-02   2-20-2012   35.05
2012-04   3-5-2012    35.08
2012-05   3-26-2012   36.06
2012-06   6-4-2012    33.009
2012-07   6-25-2012   33.009
2012-08   10-8-2012   34.03
2012-09   10-15-2012  33.009
2012-11   10-29-2012  97.01—
                      97.10
01, 2013  2-25-2013   157.01
2013-02   4-1-2013    33.009
03, 2013  10-21-2013  156.006,
                      156.020
2013-04   10-28-2013  36.06
2013-05   10-28-2013  33.009
2014-01   1-27-2014   33.009
2014-02   3-24-2014   35.06
03, 2014  6-2-2014    TSO Table VI
04, 2014  6-9-2014    TSO Table IV
2014-05   9-8-2014    TSO Table VII
2014-06   9-22-2014   34.01,
                      34.03
2014-07   11-10-2014  157.01
2015-01   2-9-2015    36.05
2015-02   2-9-2015    36.05
3, 2015   2-23-2015   TSO Table IV
4, 2015   2-23-2015   TSO Table IV
5, 2015   4-6-2015    TSO Table VI
2015-06   7-6-2015    34.02,
                      35.06
07, 2015  8-10-2015   TSO Table IV
08, 2015  9-8-2015    TSO Table IV
09, 2015  12-14-2015  TSO Table VI
2015-10   12-28-2015  150.20
02, 2016  2-29-2016   TSO Table VI
2016-04   5-2-2016    34.02
05, 2016  5-23-2016   157.01
06, 2016  7-11-2016   TSO Table VI
07, 2016  8-15-2016   TSO Table IV
2016-08   12-19-2016  33.012
2016-09   12-19-2016  33.009
2017-01   2-27-2017   35.06
2017-02   3-6-2017    35.06
03, 2017  3-20-2017   157.01
04, 2017  6-5-2017    TSO Table VI
05, 2017  6-5-2017    TSO Table VI
2017-06   6-19-2017   35.06
2017-07   12-18-2017  35.06
2018-01   4-9-2018    34.02,
                      34.03
2018-02   4-9-2018    35.06
03, 2018  4-23-2018   TSO Table VI
04, 2018  6-11-2018   157.01
2018-05   6-25-2018   93.04,
                      93.99
6, 2018   7-23-2018   157.01
2018-07   12-26-2018  30.06
2019-01   1-28-2019   35.75—
                      35.89
2019-02   4-15-2019   36.06
2019-03   6-24-2019   36.05
2019-04   7-15-2019   92.99
05, 2019  7-22-2019   TSO Table VI
06, 2019  10-14-2019  157.01
07, 2019  11-12-2019  TSO Table VI
08, 2019  10-28-2019  TSO Table VI
2019-09   12-2-2019   36.06
2020-01   1-27-2020   35.75—
                      35.89
                      100.01—
2020-02   5-18-2020   100.06,
                      100.99
04, 2020  9-21-2020   157.01
                      155.02,
                      155.05,
2020-05   9-28-2020   155.15—
                      155.23,
                      155.36,
                      155.38
2021-01   1-25-2021   35.75—
                      35.89
                      156.006,
                      156.055—
                      156.057,
4, 2021   6-21-2021   156.094—
                      156.099,
                      156.150—
                      156.161,
                      156.194
2021-05   6-21-2021   35.06
                      92.01,
2021-06   8-30-2021   92.04—
                      92.09
2021-07   12-20-2021  32.05
2021-08   12-20-2021  31.04
2022-01   1-24-2022   35.75—
                      35.89
03, 2022  5-23-2022   TSO Table VI
04, 2022  5-23-2022   TSO Table VI
05, 2022  7-11-2022   TSO Table VI
                     
 
REFERENCES TO REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
2014-1   12-9-2014   TSO Table VIII
2015-01  2-24-2015   TSO Table VIII
                    
 
REFERENCES TO JOINT DISTRICT COMMISSION ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
1, 2016  7-20-2016   TSO Table VI
                    
 
