TOWN OF BEVERLY SHORES, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-15 Supplement, current through:
Ordinance 2025-07, passed 7-15-2025;
Resolution 2012-10, passed 6-18-2012; and
State law current through Indiana Legislative Service, 2025 Acts, Pamphlet No.
3
 
List_of_New_Ordinances_Enacted_but_not_yet_Codified_[pdf]
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
OF
BEVERLY SHORES, INDIANA
Effective January 1, 2024
 
TOWN COUNCIL
MEMBER          Geof Benson
MEMBER          David Phelps
MEMBER          Candice Peterson-Smith
MEMBER          Matrona Malik
MEMBER          Donna Norkus
TOWN OFFICIALS
TOWN ATTORNEY   Harris Welsh & Lukmann
FIRE CHIEF      Andrew Himan
TOWN MARSHAL    Ed Clapp
CLERK-TREASURER Ellen Hundt
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 10-08
   ADOPTING AND ENACTING THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF BEVERLY SHORES, INDIANA
   WHEREAS, the Town of Beverly Shores has determined that its laws and
ordinances should be reviewed, revised, consolidated, codified and maintained
in accordance with the laws of the State of Indiana; and
   WHEREAS, to achieve codification the Town of Beverly Shores contracted with
American Legal to examine Town ordinances, resolutions, and prior compilations
of the Town’s ordinances, for the purpose of organizing, updating,
consolidating and assuring compliance with State and Federal law; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal has presented several drafts to the Town Council for
review. After many reviews and revisions the Council determines and finds the
Code of Ordinances, inclusive of all ordinances through Ordinance 10-05, passed
June 21, 2010, as prepared by American Legal, and presented for adoption to the
Council is a true, valid, and accurate compilation of the Ordinances of the
Town; and
   WHEREAS, based upon this finding the Council believes it is in the best
interest of the Town and its citizens to adopt a Code, inclusive of ordinances
through Ordinance 10-05, passed June 21, 2010, Title One through Fifteen, as
presented by American Legal, as the official Code of the Town.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the Town of Beverly Shores,
Indiana as follows:
   Section 1. The Code of the Town of Beverly Shores, inclusive of ordinances
through Ordinance 10-05 passed June 21, 2010, Title One through Fifteen,
presented for publication by American Legal is now and hereby adopted as the
official Code of the Town of Beverly Shores.
   Section 2. All ordinances of a general or permanent nature enacted on or
before the passage of this Ordinance and not included in the Code or recognized
and continued in force by reference, are repealed.
   Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2., shall not be construed to
revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance.
   Section 4. All ordinances of a general or permanent nature enacted on or
before the passage of this Ordinance and included in the Code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein are amended to the extent said language
in this Code alters the language in the original ordinance or any subsequent
amendments to the original ordinance.
   Section 5. The absence of a history note not appearing in parentheses after
a section in this Code indicates the creation of new legislation by virtue of
this Ordinance.
   Section 6. Further additions or amendments to the Code when passed in form
as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of the Code
shall be deemed to be incorporated into the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
   Section 7. Future ordinances adopted after passage of this Ordinance that
amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be
construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon passage by the Council
and any necessary publication.
Adopted this  30th  day of November, 2010.
Town Council of Beverly Shores, Indiana
Grant Ireland /s/
Grant Ireland, President
Donna Kuschel /s/
Donna Kuschel, Vice-President
Geof Benson /s/
Geof Benson, Member
Angela Maurello /s/
Angela Maurello, Member
Rick Rikosko /s/              James B. Meyer /s/
Rick Rikosko, Member               James B. Meyer, Town Attorney
ATTEST:                                         
    Gail Saum, Clerk-Treasurer
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-02
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BEVERLY SHORES TOWN COUNCIL REVISING, REARRANGING,
RESTATING, AMENDING AND RECODIFYING THE TOWN CODE
   WHEREAS, Indiana Code 36-1-5 grants municipalities the authority to codify,
revise, rearrange and compile ordinances into a complete, simplified code,
excluding the formulaic parts of those ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, The Beverly Shores Town Council has previously authorized the
revision, rearrangement, restatement and amendment of its Town Code into book
format by American Legal Publishing Corporation, with the publication of which
to be known as the "Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, Code of Ordinances" which
proposed recodification is current as of Ordinance 2017-15;
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Beverly Shores Town Council, Indiana,
as follows:
   Section 1. The ordinances of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, as
previously adopted by the Beverly Shores Town Council are hereby revised,
rearranged, restated, amended, codified and compiled in book form and as
readopted shall constitute the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana Code of
Ordinances ("Town Code"), a copy of which is attached hereto and the same being
incorporated herein by reference as if set out fully herein and is hereby
ratified, confirmed and approved in all respects.
   Section 2. The official copy shall be filed with the Town of Beverly Shores
Clerk-Treasurer's office. A copy of the Town Code shall be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours in the office of the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to those subjects contained in
the Town Code shall hereby be deemed repealed and replaced by the Town Code
adopted by this Ordinance. Said repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
said Town Code, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying funds, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
authorizing franchises or granting special rights, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or the borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of property, granting or accepting easements,
plats, dedications of land to public use, the naming or vacating of streets,
alleys or other public places, nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature pertaining to subjects not contained in said Town Code.
   Section 4. All ordinances adopted after Ordinance 2017-15 shall be
incorporated into the Town Code, as revised herein.
   Section 5. The Town Code as herein adopted shall be deemed in effect as of
the date of the adoption of this Ordinance by the Beverly Shores Town Council.
The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Beverly Shores shall publish a copy of this
Ordinance.
   ALL OF WHICH IS PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Beverly Shores Town Council this
15 day of May, 2018.
   BEVERLY SHORES TOWN COUNCIL
   Donna Norkus /s/
   Donna Norkus, President
   Geof Benson /s/
   Geoff Benson
   Greg Brown /s/
   Greg Brown
   Catherine Matrona Malik /s/
   Catherine Matrona Malik
                                                          
   Brian O’Neil
ATTEST:
Ellen Hundt /s/
Ellen Hundt, Clerk-Treasurer
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-11
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BEVERLY SHORES TOWN COUNCIL REVISING, REARRANGING,
RESTATING, AMENDING AND RECODIFYING THE TOWN CODE
   WHEREAS, Indiana Code 36-1-5 grants municipalities the authority to codify,
revise, rearrange and compile ordinances into a complete, simplified code,
excluding the formulaic parts of those ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, The Beverly Shores Town Council has previously authorized the
revision, rearrangement, restatement and amendment of its Town Code into book
format by American Legal Publishing Corporation, with the publication of which
to be known as the "Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, Code of Ordinances" which
proposed recodification is current as of Ordinance 2018-02;
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Beverly Shores Town Council, Indiana,
as follows:
   Section 1. The ordinances of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, as
previously adopted by the Beverly Shores Town Council are hereby revised,
rearranged, restated, amended, codified and compiled in book form and as
readopted shall constitute the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana Code of
Ordinances ("Town Code"), a copy of which is attached hereto and the same being
incorporated herein by reference as if set out fully herein and is hereby
ratified, confirmed and approved in all respects.
   Section 2. The official copy shall be filed with the Town of Beverly Shores
Clerk-Treasurer's office. A copy of the Town Code shall be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours in the office of the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to those subjects contained in
the Town Code shall hereby be deemed repealed and replaced by the Town Code
adopted by this Ordinance. Said repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
said Town Code, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying funds, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
authorizing franchises or granting special rights, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or the borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of property, granting or accepting easements,
plats, dedications of land to public use, the naming or vacating of streets,
alleys or other public places, nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature pertaining to subjects not contained in said Town Code.
   Section 4. All ordinances adopted after Ordinance 2018-02 shall be
incorporated into the Town Code, as revised herein.
   Section 5. The Town Code as herein adopted shall be deemed in effect as of
the date of the adoption of this Ordinance by the Beverly Shores Town Council.
The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Beverly Shores shall publish a copy of this
Ordinance.
   ALL OF WHICH IS PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Beverly Shores Town Council this
20 day of November, 2018.
   BEVERLY SHORES TOWN COUNCIL
   Donna Norkus /s/
   Donna Norkus, President
   Geof Benson /s/
   Geoff Benson
   Greg Brown /s/
   Greg Brown
   Catherine Matrona Malik /s/
   Catherine Matrona Malik
    Brian O'Neil /s/
   Brian O’Neil
ATTEST:
Ellen Hundt /s/
Ellen Hundt, Clerk-Treasurer
ORDINANCE 2019-11
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BEVERLY SHORES TOWN COUNCIL REVISING, REARRANGING,
RESTATING, AMENDING AND RECODIFYING THE TOWN CODE
   WHEREAS, Indiana Code 36-1-5 grants municipalities the authority to codify,
revise, rearrange and compile ordinances into a complete, simplified code,
excluding the formulaic parts of those ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, The Beverly Shores Town Council has previously authorized the
revision, rearrangement, restatement and amendment of its Town Code into book
format by American Legal Publishing Corporation, with the publication of which
to be known as the "Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, Code of Ordinances," which
proposed recodification is current as of Ordinance 2018-11;
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Beverly Shores Town Council, Indiana,
as follows:
   SECTION 1. The ordinances of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, as
previously adopted by the Beverly Shores Town Council are hereby revised,
rearranged, restated, amended, codified and compiled in book form and as
readopted shall constitute the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana Code of
Ordinances ("Town Code"), a copy of which is attached hereto and the same being
incorporated herein by reference as if set out fully herein and is hereby
ratified, confirmed and approved in all respects.
   SECTION 2. The official copy shall be filed with the Town of Beverly Shores
Clerk-Treasurer's office. A copy of the Town Code shall be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours in the office of the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   SECTION 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to those subjects contained in
the Town Code shall hereby be deemed repealed and replaced by the Town Code
adopted by this Ordinance. Said repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
said Town Code, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying funds, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
authorizing franchises or granting special rights, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or the borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of property, granting or accepting easements,
plats, dedications of land to public use, the naming or vacating of streets,
alleys or other public places, nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature pertaining to subjects not contained in said Town Code.
   SECTION 4. All ordinances adopted after Ordinance 2018-11 shall be
incorporated into the Town Code, as revised herein.
   SECTION 5. The Town Code as herein adopted shall be deemed in effect as of
the date of the adoption of this Ordinance by the Beverly Shores Town Council.
The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Beverly Shores shall publish a copy of this
Ordinance.
   ALL OF WHICH IS PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Beverly Shores Town Council this
17 day of December, 2019.
   BEVERLY SHORES TOWN COUNCIL
   Donna Norkus /s/
   Donna Norkus, President
   Geof Benson /s/
   Geoff Benson
   Greg Brown /s/
   Greg Brown
   Catherine Matrona Malik /s/
   Catherine Matrona Malik
    Brian O'Neil /s/
   Brian O’Neil
ATTEST:
Ellen Hundt /s/
Ellen Hundt, Clerk-Treasurer
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL FINE SCHEDULE; GENERAL FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL FINE SCHEDULE; GENERAL FEE
SCHEDULE
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation
   
10.06   Definitions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   Repeal exclusions
   
10.18   Delegation of authority
Authorized Methods of Payment to and from Municipality
   
10.30   Definition
   
10.31   Authorized financial instruments, payments to the town
   
10.32   Procedures for payments to be uniform
   
10.33   Added authority related to acceptance of bank or credit cards
   
10.34   Authorized financial instruments, payments by the town
   
10.35   Authorized financial instruments, payments by the Clerk-Treasurer
   
10.97   General fine
   
10.98   Fine schedule
   
10.99   Fee schedule
Cross-reference:
   Finance, see §§
30.20 through
30.23
   Ordinance Violations Bureau, see Ch.
36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “town code,” for
which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be
substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code.
   (B)   All rules and regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code
shall remain in full force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to
the enactment of this code.
   (C)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (D)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between 2 or more sections.
   (E)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (F)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (G)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (H)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   This code shall be construed by the following rules unless the construction
is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or context of the provision.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
   (B)   Words giving joint authority to 3 or more persons shall be construed
as giving authority to a majority of the persons.
   (C)   Where a section requires an act to be done that, by law, an agent or
deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act by
an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
   (D)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
§ 10.06 DEFINITIONS.
   In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council. The rules
of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to
any section of this code that shall contain any express provisions excluding
such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may
be repugnant thereto.
   CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which any act as provided in this code
is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day is Sunday, it shall be excluded and the next day shall be
included.
   CORPORATE LIMITS or TOWN LIMITS. The legal boundaries of the Town of Beverly
Shores, Indiana, except as otherwise provided by law.
   COUNCIL or TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Beverly Shores.
   COUNTY. Porter County.
   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision appears requiring a
Commissioner or some other town officer to do some act or perform some duty, it
shall be construed to authorize a Commissioner or other officer to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the
duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
   GENDER. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to
females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
   HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
   I.C. The Indiana Code, as now or hereafter amended.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   MONTH. One calendar month.
   NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language. TECHNICAL WORDS are
words or phrases with a special meaning, used in a specific field of knowledge,
and shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   NUMBER. A word importing the singular NUMBER only may extend and be applied
to several persons and things as well as to 1 person or thing, and a word
importing the plural may extend to the singular.
   OATH. The term OATH shall be construed to include an affirmation, and the
terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and
"affirmed."
   OR, AND. The term OR may be read AND , and the term AND may be read OR if
the sense requires it.
   OWNER. The term OWNER , applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant,
or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes goods, chattels, evidences of debt, and things
in action.
   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
   PRESIDENT. The President of the Town Council.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street or highway, sidewalk, park, cemetery, schoolyard or
open space adjacent thereto, and any lake or stream.
   QUORUM. A majority of the members of a board, commission or committee
holding office, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REASONABLE TIME or REASONABLE NOTICE. In all cases where any provision shall
require any act to be done in a REASONABLE TIME or REASONABLE NOTICE to be
given to any person, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean
such time only as may be necessary in the prompt execution of such duty or
compliance with such notice.
   RESIDENT. Any person residing in the town, provided that the town is his or
her address of record for voting and filing income tax.
   SHALL, MAY. The term SHALL is mandatory; the term MAY is permissive.
   SIDEWALK. The part of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STATE, THE STATE or THIS STATE. The State of Indiana.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained, when any part of the way is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such
building or land, either alone or with others.
   TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   TOWN. The Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
   TOWN CODE. The Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, Code of Ordinances.
   TOWN COUNCIL MEMBER or MEMBER OF THE TOWN COUNCIL. A member of the Town
Council of Beverly Shores.
   TOWNSHIP. The township or townships in which the town is located.
   WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person's
mark.
   YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   ZONING CODE. Shall include all provisions and references to Title XV, and
chapters of Title XV, including but not limited to, Chapter
150. Flood Prevention; Flood Hazard Areas, Chapter
151. Unsafe Buildings and Structures, Chapter
152. Building Code, Chapter
153. Streets and Sidewalks, Chapter
154. Parking Lots, Chapter
155. Zoning and Subdivisions, Chapter
156. Comprehensive Plan.
Statutory reference:
   For definitions under state law, see I.C. 1-1-4-5
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a statute stating that the provisions of an act are
severable as provided in division (B) of this section does not affect the
operation of division (B) with respect to that act.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date of that ordinance or
subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former
section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section
or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any
section shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability
incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides.
   (B)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of
the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.17 REPEAL EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   All sections not herein provided for are expressly declared repealed
and invalid except that nothing in this code shall effect any section:
      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or
authorizing the issuance of any bond of the town or any evidence of the town's
indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the town, including,
but not limited to Ord. 84-27 (street lighting contract with NIPSCO) as
amended; park bond issue and special taxing district bonds as amended;
      (2)   Granting any right or franchise, including, but not limited to Ord.
84-13 (NIPSCO electric franchise) as amended; Ord. 84-14 (NIPSCO gas franchise)
as amended; Res. 96-02 (to induce a cable television franchise; Ord. 97-02
(cable television franchise) as amended;
      (3)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening,
paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in the town;
      (4)   Making any appropriation, including, but not limited to any and all
appropriations of bond proceeds; establishing or making any budget of the town;
      (5)   Levying or imposing taxes, creating or establishing or
reauthorizing any funds or fund programs; including, but not limited to Ord.
97-06 (cumulative capital development fund);
      (6)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the town;
      (7)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor;
      (8)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision or otherwise
relating to subdivisions not codified by this section;
      (9)   Extending, describing or contracting the boundaries of the town;
      (10)   Prescribing the number, classification benefits or compensation of
any town officers, elected officials, employees of the town or the town
utilities or departments establishing annual salary schedules and ordinances,
not inconsistent herewith;
      (11)   Pertaining to zoning which is not codified by this section or
within this code of ordinances;
      (12)   Adopted for purposes which have been consummated;
      (13)   Which is temporary, although general in effect;
      (14)   Which is special, although permanent in effect; or
      (15)   Relating to the master plan which is not codified in this section
or code of ordinances, including, but not limited to Ord. 84-28 and Ord. 84-34
(Comprehensive Plan), as amended, and the zoning map(s) made a part of Ord. 208
(Chapter
155) as amended; Comprehensive Plan as amended, and any and all of the maps
which are made a part of the plan.
   (B)   All like sections are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as is set out in length in this code. Like
sections are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 10.18 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or
some other town officer to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be
construed to authorize the head of the department, the Town Marshal, the Clerk-
Treasurer or the other officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty, unless the term
or terms of the provision, ordinance, section or sections specify otherwise.
   (B)   All elected and appointed officials, employees or agents of the town
engaged in enforcement, policing or inspection activities or performing a
specific function or task for the town has the express authority and right to
visit and inspect any structure, improvement or property by entering upon
private property at any reasonable time without obtaining warrants and as
provided for by state law.
AUTHORIZED METHODS OF PAYMENT TO AND FROM MUNICIPALITY
§ 10.30 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CREDIT CARD. Means:
      (1)   Credit card;
      (2)   Debit card;
      (3)   Charge card; or
      (4)   Stored value card.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 10.31 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, PAYMENTS TO THE TOWN.
   (A)   Payments may be made to the town and its utility, for any lawful
purpose, by any of the following financial instruments:
      (1)   Cash;
      (2)   Check;
      (3)   Bank draft;
      (4)   Money order;
      (5)   Bank card or credit card;
      (6)   Electronic funds transfer;
      (7)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH); and
      (8)   Any other financial instrument authorized by the fiscal body.
   (B)   If there is a charge to the town and its utility, for the use of a
financial instrument, a fee shall be collected equal to the amount of the
charge from the person who makes a payment by using the financial instrument
that results in the charge to the Town.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 10.32 PROCEDURES FOR PAYMENTS TO BE UNIFORM.
   In accepting payments under the provisions of this subchapter and I.C. 36-1-
8-11, the procedure authorized for a particular type of payment shall be
uniformly applied to all payments of the same type. The Clerk-Treasurer is
authorized to administer and enforce this Section and to promulgate written
guidelines consistent with its purposes.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 10.33 ADDED AUTHORITY RELATED TO ACCEPTANCE OF BANK OR CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   The Town and its utility may contract with any of the following:
      (1)   A bank card or credit card vendor for acceptance of bank cards or
credit cards; and
      (2)   A third party on-line collection service for acceptance of bank
cards or credit cards.
   (B)   The town and its utility may pay any applicable bank card or credit
card service charge associated with the use of a bank card or credit card under
§
10.33.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 10.34 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, PAYMENTS BY THE TOWN.
   (A)   Payments may be made by the town and its utility for any lawful
purpose by any of the following financial instruments:
   (1)   Cash;
   (2)   Check;
   (3)   Bank draft;
   (4)   Money order;
   (5)   Bank card or credit card;
   (6)   Electronic funds transfer;
   (7)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH); and
   (8)   Any other financial instrument authorized by the fiscal body.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 10.35 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS, PAYMENTS BY THE CLERK-TREASURER.
   (A)   Payments may be made by the Clerk-Treasurer for the town and its
utility for any lawful purpose by any of the following financial instruments:
      (1)   Warrant or negotiable order of withdrawal pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-5-4 et seq., I.C. 5-11-10 et seq., and I.C. 5-13-5 et
seq.; and
      (2)   Bank card or credit card. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the sole
responsible officer for the card.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-13-5-5, transactions or payments may be made by the
Clerk-Treasurer for the town for any purpose specified in division (C) of this
section, by any of the following financial instruments:
      (1)   Electronic funds transfer; and
      (2)   Wire funds or Automated Clearing House (ACH).
   (C)   In making payments under division (B) of this section the Clerk-
Treasurer shall maintain adequate documentation of the transactions so that
they may be audited as provided by law, and the use of the instruments set
forth in division (B) of this section shall be limited to the following
purposes:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:
         (a)   The United States government; or
         (b)   An agency or a political subdivision of the United States
government;
      (2)   Insurance premiums;
      (3)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;
      (4)   Federal grant programs if:
         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; and
         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced;
      (5)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;
      (6)   Lease agreements or rental agreements;
      (7)   Principal and interest payments on bonds;
      (8)   Payroll;
      (9)   State, federal, or county taxes; and
      (10)   Lawful purposes that may be identified by the Clerk-Treasurer and
authorized in writing by the town’s Chief Executive and not inconsistent with
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2011-05, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 10.97 GENERAL FINE.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to
the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Limitations on penalties, I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(8)–(10).
§ 10.98 FINE SCHEDULE.
   In order to allow for easy update and revision of fines for violation of
provisions of the town code this fine schedule is set forth below. It is made
part of the all provisions and ordinances of the town code as if specifically
set forth in the relevant code provisions or ordinance.
Subject Section No. Fine
Subject                          Section No.     Fine
Unlawful use of e-mail list for  30.07           $100
town residents
U-turns                          70.01           $85
Unlawful use of unlicensed motor 70.02           $100
vehicles
Frost law limitations            70.03           $100-$2,500
Open alcohol containers          70.04           $100-$2,500
Parking regulation violations    71.01           $80
                                                 ($100 if not paid timely)
Obstruction of fire lanes        71.02           $50
Damage to signs                  72.02           $50
Speed limits                     Ch. 73, Sch. I  $85
Stop intersections               Ch. 73, Sch. II $85
Nuisances                        91.01           $100
Open burning                     91.02           $100
Storage and registration of      91.03           $20 per day, not to exceed
watercraft violation                             $7,500
Personal watercraft violation    91.03           $200 per event
Discharge of firearms            130.01          $100
Discharge of bows/arrows         130.02          $100
Tree removal violations          155.064
-For each tree in diameter, up                   $250
to and including 8 inches
-For each tree in diameter over
8 inches, up to and including 12                 $500
inches
-For each tree in diameter over                  $1,000
12 inches
-Where tree diameter is not
determinable due to prior                        $1,000
removal, for remaining stump
-Where neither tree diameter nor
stump diameter is determinable                   $1,000
due to prior removal, regardless
of the size of the removed tree
 
(Ord. 08-06, passed 9-15-2008; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 09-
12, passed 11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 10-11, passed 11-30-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-10,
passed 11-19-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-5-2013)
§ 10.99 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   In order to allow for easy update and revision of fees for town
services and processes, this fee schedule is set forth below. It is made part
of the all provisions and ordinances of the Code of Beverly Shores as if
specifically set forth in the relevant code provision or ordinance.
   (B)   Fee provisions in this schedule override any specific fee references
in the town code that conflict with the fees set forth in this schedule,
regardless of whether or not the section providing for the fee is specifically
stated below.
Section No. Subject Fee
Section Subject                                                                            Fee
No.
30.04   Copying Town Information and Documents
        Documents (8-1/2 inches by 11 inches, 8-1/2 inches by 14 inches or 11 inches by 17 $0.25 per
        inches)                                                                            side
        Town address list                                                                  $25.00
        Town address list labels                                                           $25.00 per
                                                                                           set
        Document certification                                                             $1.00 per
                                                                                           set
30.05   Accident and investigation report - per report                                     $10    
30.06   Handgun licensing                                                                  See I.C.
                                                                                           35-47-2-3
34.05   Excess false fire and carbon monoxide alarm calls                                  $50
34.28   Vehicle identification verification                                                $5
34.29   Excess false burglar alarm calls                                                   $25
50.02   Water Access Fees; Fund
        This section has been removed and reserved. Fees applicable to Michigan City
        Department of Water Works are payable directly to Michigan City Department of
        Water Works, including but not limited to, grid extension.
51.01   Annual Garbage Collection, Disposal and Recycle
        Single-family residence                                                            $280
        Commercial units in a Commercial Zone will be required to contract with a disposal $280 for
        company for garbage, disposal and recycle services.                                first unit
                                                                                           $140 for
                                                                                           each
                                                                                           separate
                                                                                           living
                                                                                           unit in
                                                                                           addition
        Duplex dwellings and apartment units                                               to the
                                                                                           first
                                                                                           unit, for
                                                                                           which a
                                                                                           rental fee
                                                                                           is
                                                                                           collected
                                                                                           Applicable
                                                                                           unit
                                                                                           charge for
                                                                                           the
                                                                                           dwelling
                                                                                           type, with
        Outside users                                                                      an
        Single-family resident                                                             additional
        Multiple-family residences                                                         outside
                                                                                           user fee
                                                                                           of:
                                                                                           $100
                                                                                           $100 per
                                                                                           living
                                                                                           unit
                                                                                           $25 plus
                                                                                           attorney
                                                                                           fees and/
                                                                                           collection
        Late charge for payments not received on or before payment due date.               agency
                                                                                           fees
                                                                                           associated
                                                                                           with
                                                                                           collection
                                                                                           expenses
70.02   Owner of property or resident: cart                                                $30
        Parking Permits
71.06   Owner of property or resident: motor vehicle                                       $25
71.06   Employees, Town Council members, Board Commission and Committee members, active    1 pass no
        volunteer firefighters and Town Attorney                                           charge
71.06   Nonresident: annual motor vehicle                                                  $250
71.06   Nonresident: daily motor vehicle                                                   $50
71.06   Book of ten daily parking permits for guests                                       $50
                                                                                           $0.15 per
71.07   Rate for active charging                                                           kW/hour
        Parking fee for inactive charging                                                  $5 per
                                                                                           hour
91.03   Owner of property or resident: kayaks, sailboats, paddle boards, canoes, dingys,   $30
        Maui mats and party floats stored in approved areas on town beaches
91.03   Owner of property or resident: catamarans stored in approved areas on town beaches $50
91.21   Burning permit, outdoor wood-fired furnace                                         $100
                                                                                           annually
92.03   Parade license                                                                     None
110.11  Licenses to engage in certain trade                                                $100
111.04  Licenses for peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors                                  $50 per
                                                                                           license
        Permit to excavate, disturb, or install anything underground, including, but not
        limited to , a cable, pipe, tunnel, or other device, in, on, or under any town
        street, alley, right-of-way, easement or other town property.

        The fee shall not be charged for work done for the town.
153.04                                                                                     $100
        If the permit is not obtained before work, other than emergency work, begins as
        required by §
        153.04, as amended, the cost of the permit shall be twice the amount of the fee.
        This additional fee is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fine that may be
        imposed for violating the town code.
154.05  Parking lot annual fee                                                             $25
        Tree removal permit applications.
        The fee shall not be charged for work done by the town. The fee shall not be
        required for new construction permits. If the permit is not obtained before
155.064 removal, except for emergency removal due to imminent threat to humans, as         $50
        required by §
        155.064, as amended, the cost of the permit shall be twice of the amount of the
        fee. This additional fee is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fine that may
        be imposed for violating the town code.
155.040
and     1.   Application for site plan approval applies to all new construction projects$500
155.056 and all projects enlarging or modifying structures. Site plan approval is not      deposit
and     required for interior re-modeling projects.
155.065
        2.   Application for building permit, applies to new construction projects and/o 
        projects that increase the actual square footage* of existing structures.
           First application (site plan or building) requires nonrefundable administrati 
        fee.
           a.   Building permit administration fee (non-refundable).                 $200
           b.   Actual square footage* of structure (new construction or incremental $1.35/
        increase of actual square footage for existing structures) multiplied by the       square
        building permit fee rate.                                                          foot
           c.   Fence permit fee.                                                    $50
155.138    d.   Driveway permit (included in new construction).                      $100
           e.   Site permit.                                                         $250
           f.   Fees for mandatory inspections.                                       
                                                                                           $75/hour,
           g.   Fees for re-inspection of rejected work (must be prepaid).           $75
                                                                                           minimum
        3.   Pre-application conference.                                                 
        4.   Certificate of occupancy (inhabited buildings only).                       $50
155.034 5.   a.   Application to B.Z.A. for variance.                                $500
           b.   Steep slope engineer's fee.                                          At cost
        6.   Application to Plan Commission.                                            $100
                                                                                           Double fee
155.065 7.   Additional building permit(s) for an uncompleted project.                  of the
                                                                                           original
                                                                                           permit
*Actual square footage of a new or existing structure includes the actual square footage of any
garage, unfinished basement below grade, finished basement below grade and above grade living square
footage
155.067 Contractor Registration
        Contractor registration                                                            $100
        Contractor registration annual renewal                                             $100
155.139 Sign Permits
        Temporary - 60 day
           No permit or fee required for one (1) sign if 4 square feet or less in area. $15*
           No permit or fee required for signs initially posted during election period if
        removed within election period
        Temporary - 120 day
           No permit or fee required for one (1) sign if 4 square feet or less in area  $25**
           No permit or fee required for signs initially posted during election period if
        removed within election period
        Permanent (no occupancy permit required)
           No permit or fee for house numbers required by §
        153.02                                                                             $100
           No permit or fee required for up to three (3) signs, if each sign is 2 square
        feet or less in area
*Remove sign or renew permit after 60 days
**Remove sign or renew permit after 120 days
155.152 Filing fee for public hearing to consider subdivision                              $300
155.154 Subdivision application fee                                                        $300
        Miscellaneous Services Provided by Police Department
        Finger printing                                                                    $15
        Impound forms                                                                      $25
        Photo and Cd copies - unlimited number                                             $50
 
(Am. Ord. 06-06, passed 9-18-2006; Am. Ord. 08-04, passed 5-19-2008; Am. Ord.
08-11, passed 11-17-2008; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 09-08,
passed 9-21-2009; Am. Ord. 09-09, passed 10-19-2009; Am. Ord. 09-14, passed 9-
21-09; Am. Ord. 10-10, passed 11-30-2010; Am. Ord. 10-12, passed 11-30-2010;
Am. Ord. 11-01, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord. 11-03, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord.
2011-08, passed 7-18-2011; Am. Ord. 11-22, passed 11-21-2011; Am. Ord. 11-25,
passed 11-27-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-01, passed 4-16-2012; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed
2-17-2014; Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 5-16-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-02, passed 1-16-
2017; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 5-15-2018; Am. Ord. 2018-05, passed 7-17-2018;
Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-21-2018; Am. Ord. 2019-03, passed 2-19-2019; Am.
Ord. 2021-08, passed 6-15-2021; Am. Ord. 2023-06, passed 12-19-2023; Am. Ord.
2024-09, passed 12-17-2024; Am. Ord. 2025-07, passed 7-15-2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   PERSONNEL POLICY
      
32.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
33.   CLERK-TREASURER
      
34.   TOWN DEPARTMENTS, COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
      
35.   FUNDS
      
36.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Inventory
   
30.02   Updated zoning code provided to officials and appointees at no cost
   
30.03   Smoking prohibited in certain areas
   
30.04   Copying town information and documents
   
30.05   Accident and investigation report
   
30.06   Handgun licensing
   
30.07   Creation and use of an e-mail list to give notices, warnings and
information to residents
   
30.08   Mileage and travel reimbursement
   
30.09   Conflicts of interest in contracting with the town
   
30.10   Internal control standards
Finance
   
30.20   Purchasing agency
   
30.21   Purchasing rules
   
30.22   Petty cash fund
   
30.23   Cash change fund
   
30.24   Capital asset accounting policy
   
30.25   Credit card use policy
Cross-reference:
   Authorized methods of payment to and from municipality, see §§
10.30 through
10.35
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 INVENTORY.
   The Fire Department and Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain property and
equipment inventories.
(Res. 90-6, passed 8-27-1990)
§ 30.02 UPDATED ZONING CODE PROVIDED TO OFFICIALS AND APPOINTEES AT NO COST.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide yearly, updated copies of the Zoning Code,
without charge, to each newly elected official or appointed citizen serving the
town in any capacity involving the application, interpretation or review of the
Town Zoning Code, including but not limited to, elected or appointed members of
the Town Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Building Committee
and Site Committee.
(Res. 95-07, passed 11-13-1995)
§ 30.03 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   Smoking is hereby prohibited in both the Clerk-Treasurer’s office and
the public meeting room located in the Beverly Shores administration building.
   (B)   Efforts should be made to bring about voluntary compliance with the
smoking ban and “No Smoking” signs shall be conspicuously posted at the
entrances to areas where smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   Any person failing to comply with the smoking ban shall first be asked
to refrain from smoking. Any person who continues to smoke after being told of
this section commits a Class C infraction.
(Ord. 92-05, passed 6-22-1992)
§ 30.04 COPYING TOWN INFORMATION AND DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   If a person is entitled, under state law, to a copy of a town-owned
and maintained document or file, (including but not limited to computer files
of address lists and/or mailing labels), and the town has reasonable access to
a machine capable of reproducing the public records, then the town shall
provide at least 1 copy of the document or file to the person requesting same;
however, if the town does not have access to a machine capable of reproducing
the record, then the person shall be entitled only to inspect and manually
transcribe the record.
   (B)   From the effective date of this section forward, the Town of Beverly
Shores shall charge and collect fees, as set forth in the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99, which fees have been determined to be the actual cost of searching for,
accessing, copying, duplicating and/or certifying the documents.
      (1)   Costs and expenses for inspection and searches. Pursuant to I.C. 5-
14-3-8, no employee of the Town of Beverly Shores shall charge any fee to any
person to either inspect a public record or examine or review a record to
determine whether the record may be disclosed.
      (2)   Copying of documents. Twenty-five cents per side for each 8-1/2-
inch-by-11-inch, 8-1/2-inch-by-14-inch, or 11-inch-by-17-inch document.
      (3)   Copying of non-standard sized documents. All other public documents
in sizes other than those listed above which cannot be reasonably copied using
office machines located within the offices of the town and which must be taken
to an outside, commercial copying facility for reproductions shall be charged
at the commercial copying facilities rate.
      (4)   Production of complete town address list from computer files. As
set forth in the Town Fee Schedule.
      (5)   Production of set of adhesive backed town address labels from
computer files. As set forth in the Town Fee Schedule.
      (6)   Certification of any group of pages. Certification of any group of
pages, which can be reasonably affixed together into 1 package, as set forth in
the Town Fee Schedule.
   (C)   Elected and appointed officials of the town are excluded from this
requirement for documents requested and required in the normal exercise of
their office/appointment.
   (D)   All costs and expenses for the documents, records and files enumerated
herein must be paid in full at the time any document is requested and that all
documents must be picked up by the person requesting them from the
administration building during normal business hours within 10 working days of
production.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section is intended to, nor shall any part
of this section be construed as expanding, reducing, modifying or changing any
state law regarding access to public documents; the sole and exclusive purpose
of this section is to establish a reasonable and uniform schedule of fees and
charges associated with access to the town's public records.
(Ord. 05-04, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 30.05 ACCIDENT AND INVESTIGATION REPORT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of the law to the contrary, the Town
Marshal, from any information or reports in its files received by him or her
from any source whatever, shall promptly on demand therefore furnish to any
person who has sustained any loss or damage, by reason of the injury or death
of any person or damage to property caused by or resulting from the operation,
maintenance or use of any vehicle upon any public street or highway of this
state, the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner and operator of any vehicle
involved in the accident;
      (2)   The license number and description of any vehicle involved in the
accident;
      (3)   The time and place the accident occurred;
      (4)   The names and addresses of any persons injured or killed in the
accident; and
      (5)   The names and addresses of any persons who were witnesses to the
accident.
   (B)   In addition to the information requests provided for in division (A)
above, the Town Marshal, from any information or reports in his or her files
received by him or her from any source whatever, shall promptly on demand
therefore furnish to any person who has sustained any loss or damage, by reason
of the injury or death of any person or damage or loss to any property, the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of any person and the owner and operator of
any vehicle if any, involved in the accident or loss;
      (2)   The license number and description of any vehicle involved in the
accident;
      (3)   The time and place the accident or loss occurred; the names and
addresses of any persons injured or killed in the accident or loss; and
      (4)   The names and addresses of any persons who were witnesses to the
accident.
   (C)   Any person so entitled to the information may obtain the same from the
Town Marshal either in person or through his or her duly authorized agent or
attorney. The agent or attorney shall first file with the Town Marshal a
verified authorization therefore signed by the person so entitled to the
information.
   (D)   When the above-referenced information is furnished by means of a
duplicating machine copy of the investigator's report of the accident, the Town
Marshal shall be entitled to charge a fee in an amount set forth in the Town
Fee Schedule.
   (E)   The fee shall be deposited in a separate account to be known as the
accident report account and it may be expended at the discretion of the Town
Marshal of the department, for any department purposes reasonably related to
the keeping of accident reports and records or the prevention of street and
highway accidents.
   (F)   If the prosecuting attorney of the county wherein the accident or loss
occurred shall advise the department that in his or her opinion the information
should not be released to any person, and shall assign as his or her reason
therefore that criminal charges have been filed, or are in contemplation of
being filed, against any person as a result of the accident, the department
shall thereupon withhold any information until its release is approved by the
prosecuting attorney.
(Ord. 186, passed 2-15-1982 (84-30))
§ 30.06 HANDGUN LICENSING.
   (A)   A person who resides within the Town of Beverly Shores and who desires
a license to carry a handgun shall apply to the Beverly Shores Town Marshal.
   (B)   At the time the Town Marshal accepts an application for a handgun
license he or she shall collect an application fee, which may be amended from
time to time by the Town Council, in the amount provided by I.C. 35-47-2-3,
which fee shall be refunded if the license is not issued.
   (C)   The fee shall be as set forth in the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
      (1)   Deposited into the Police Department's firearms training fund or
other appropriate training activities fund; and
      (2)   Used by the Police Department exclusively for the purpose of
training law enforcement officers in the proper use of firearms or other law
enforcement duties. The State Board of Accounts shall establish rules for the
proper accounting and expenditure of funds collected under this division.
   (D)   The officer to whom the application is made shall ascertain,
concerning the applicant:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   Full address;
      (3)   Length of residence in the community;
      (4)   Whether or not his or her residence is located within the limits of
any city or town;
      (5)   Occupation;
      (6)   Place of business or employment;
      (7)   Criminal record, if any and convictions (minor traffic offenses
excepted);
      (8)   Age, race, sex, nationality, date of birth, citizenship, height,
weight, build, color of hair, color of eyes, scars and marks;
      (9)   Whether or not the applicant has previously held an Indiana license
to carry a handgun and, if so, the serial number of the license and year
issued;
      (10)   Whether or not his or her license has ever been suspended or
revoked, and if so, the year and reason for the suspension or revocation; and
      (11)   The applicant's reason for desiring a license.
   (E)   (1)   The officer to whom the application is made shall conduct an
investigation into the applicant's official records and verify thereby the
applicant's character and reputation, and shall in addition verify for accuracy
the information contained in the application, and shall forward this
information together with his or her recommendation for approval or disapproval
and 1 set of legible and classifiable fingerprints of the applicant to the
Superintendent of the Indiana State Police Department who may make whatever
further investigation he or she deems necessary.
      (2)   In addition, whenever disapproval is recommended, the officer to
whom the application is made shall provide the Superintendent and the applicant
with his or her complete and specific reasons, in writing, for the
recommendation of disapproval.
   (F)   A license to carry a handgun shall not be issued to any person who has
been convicted of a felony violation of I.C. 35-23-4.1 or who has been
convicted of a crime of violence, as defined in I.C. 35-2-4.1 et seq. in this
state or any other state or country. The Marshal shall prescribe all forms to
be used in connection with the administration of this licensing process. A
license to carry a handgun shall not be issued to any person who:
      (1)   Has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Has had a license to carry a handgun suspended, unless the person's
license has been reinstated;
      (3)   Is under 18 years of age;
      (4)   Is under 23 years of age if the person has been adjudicated a
delinquent child for an act that would be a felony if committed by an adult; or
      (5)   (a)   Has been arrested for a Class A or Class B felony, or any
other felony that was committed while armed with a deadly weapon or that
involved the use of violence, if a court has found probable cause to believe
that the person committed the offense charged.
         (b)   In the case of an arrest under division (F)(5)(a), a license to
carry a handgun may be issued to a person who has been acquitted of the
specific offense charged or if the charges for the specific offense are
dismissed. The Marshal shall prescribe all forms to be used in connection with
the administration of this chapter.
   (G)   Prosecutions for issuance of licenses, suspension and revocation and
appeal of denials shall be in accordance with the applicable law governing
administrative adjudication and court review and I.C. 35-47-2 et seq. as
amended.
(Ord. 184, passed 11-16-1981 (84-31))
§ 30.07 CREATION AND USE OF AN E-MAIL LIST TO GIVE NOTICES, WARNINGS AND
INFORMATION TO RESIDENTS.
   (A)   The Council President and Clerk-Treasurer are authorized and directed
to undertake the efforts necessary to create and properly maintain a listing of
all of the e-mail addresses of residents of the town who have them.
      (1)   The list of e-mail addresses of town residents shall be loaded into
the town's computer system in such a way that it can be readily accessible for
editing and use by the town for official business, but is not accessible or
useable by anyone else.
      (2)   The town shall contract with an e-mail service provider that
provides the most effective and efficient service for creating the e-mail
address list, properly securing it, and use thereof by the town.
   (B)   Any costs for the creation of the town's e-mail list and loading it
onto the town's computer system shall be paid from the town's CEDIT funds, and
any costs of operation shall be paid from the general fund.
   (C)   The town's e-mail address list shall be used for official town
business only; access to it shall be limited to the Council System
Administrator, Clerk-Treasurer, Town Marshal and Town Fire Chief, each of whom
shall make themselves available for training on how to use it; access to it
shall not be sold, traded, leased, licensed or otherwise provided to anyone
other than the town officials specified herein; and the list, as it exists from
time to time, shall not be sold, traded, leased, licensed or otherwise provided
to anyone.
   (D)   Non-emergency communications require Town Council approval.
   (E)   For their own safety and protection, all town residents who have an e-
mail address should forthwith provide such address(es), and any changes
thereto, to the Council System Administrator or Clerk-Treasurer so that a
comprehensive list of town resident e-mail addresses can be created, updated
and maintained by the town.
   (F)   Any unauthorized use or possession of, or access to, the town's e-mail
address list known to a town official shall be promptly reported to the
appropriate law enforcement authorities as, at a minimum, a theft or conversion
of town property.
       (1)   Any violation of this section shall be punished pursuant to §
10.98, Fine Schedule.
      (2)   The Town may pursue all other available legal and equitable
remedies to terminate the wrongful access, possession, and/or use of the list
and to recover any and all compensatory damages, losses, and expenses suffered
by the town.
      (3)   The wrongful use of the town's e-mail list constitutes a nuisance
and may be treated accordingly in all respects.
      (4)   Any town resident who is directly adversely affected by any
wrongful access, possession, and/or use of the list may take legal action to
stop such wrongful activity and recover any compensatory damages resulting
therefrom.
(Ord. 08-06, passed 9-15-2008)
§ 30.08 MILEAGE AND TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Town officers, employees, and individuals traveling on official town
business may be reimbursed for actual miles traveled in their own vehicles.
Reimbursement for mileage shall be at the current rate set or allowed by IRS
regulations.
   (B)   Reimbursed mileage shall not include travel to and from the officer's,
employee's or individual's home and the government office in which they work.
If 2 or more persons travel in the same motor vehicle, only 1 mileage
reimbursement is allowable.
   (C)   When traveling on official town business, the officer, employee, or
individual may be reimbursed for meals, lodging and other necessary traveling
expenses. A list of itemized expenses, supported by receipts from hotels,
restaurants, taxicabs, and parking garages or lots, should be submitted for
reimbursement.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 30.09 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST IN CONTRACTING WITH THE TOWN.
   (A)   This section applies to all offices, departments, and agencies of
Beverly Shores, Indiana (Town).
   (B)   As used in this section, ELECTED OFFICIAL means:
      (1)   A member of the Town Council; or
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   (1)   As used in this section RELATIVE means any of the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A parent or step-parent;
         (c)   A child or step-child;
         (d)   A brother, sister, step-brother or step-sister;
         (e)   A niece or nephew;
         (f)   An aunt or uncle; or
         (g)   A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (C), an adopted child of an
individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (C), the terms “brother” and “sister”
include a brother or sister by the half blood.
   (D)   The annual report filed by the town with the State Board of Accounts
under I.C. 5-11-13-1 must include a statement by the President of the Council
stating whether the town has implemented the policy created by this section.
   (E)   (1)   The town may enter into a contract or renew a contract for the
procurement of goods and services or a contract for public works with:
         (a)   An individual who is a relative of an elected official; or
         (b)   A business entity that is wholly or partially owned by a
relative of an elected official;
         only if the requirements of this division are satisfied and the
elected official does not violate I.C. 35-44-1-3.
      (2)   The town may enter into a contract or renew a contract with an
individual or business entity described in division (E)(1) of this section if:
         (a)   The elected official files with the Council and Clerk-Treasurer
a full disclosure, which must:
            1.   Be in writing;
            2.   Describe the contract or purchase to be made by the town;
            3.   Describe the relationship that the elected official has to the
individual or business entity that contracts or purchases;
            4.   Be affirmed under penalty of perjury;
            5.   Be submitted to the Council and be accepted by the Council in
a public meeting prior to the final action on the contract or purchase; and
            6.   Be filed, not later than 15 days after final action on the
contract or purchase, with:
               a.   The State Board of Accounts; and
               b.   The Clerk of the Circuit Court of Porter County, Indiana;
and
         (b)   The appropriate agency of the town:
            1.   Makes a certified statement that the contract amount or
purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid or offered; or
            2.   Makes a certified statement of the reasons why the vendor or
contractor was selected; and
         (c)   The town satisfies any other requirements under I.C. 5-22 or
I.C. 36-1-12.
      (3)   An elected official shall also comply with the disclosure
provisions of I.C. 35-44-1-3, if applicable.
      (4)   This section does not affect the initial term of a contract in
existence at the time the term of office of the elected official of the town
begins.
   (F)   Each elected official of the town shall annually certify in writing,
subject to the penalties for perjury, that the official is in compliance with
this section. An official shall submit the certification to the Council
President not later than December 31 of each year.
(Res. 2012-10, passed 6-18-2012)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 35-44-1-3 was repealed by P.L. 126-2012, Sec. 53, effective July 1,
2012.
§ 30.10 INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Internal control standards. The town adopts as its policy the Internal
Control Standards as set forth by the Indiana State Board of Accounts Uniform
Internal Control Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions Manual as
published by the Indiana State Board of Accounts (September 2015) and as
amended from time to time.
   (B)   In order to implement these standards, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
certify in writing that the town's personnel, as defined in I.C. 5-11-1-27,
have received the required training. All officers, elected officials and
employees are required to comply with the policy. Employees who fail to comply
with this policy are subject to discipline, including, without limitation,
termination of their employment.
(Ord. 2016-02, passed 4-18-2016)
FINANCE
§ 30.20 PURCHASING AGENCY.
   (A)   Powers and duties. The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and
duties authorized under I.C. 5-22, as may be supplemented from time to time by
ordinances adopted by the Town Council and policies adopted by the purchasing
agency and the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.
   (B)   Town-wide purchasing agency. The purchasing agency shall act as the
purchasing agency for every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission,
council, department or other establishment of the civil Town of Beverly Shores,
Porter County, Indiana.
   (C)   Purchasing agent designations.
      (1)   The purchasing agency may designate in writing any employee of the
town as a purchasing agent.
      (2)   For the day-to-day purchases and acquisitions of the town, the
Clerk-Treasurer is designated as the town's purchasing agent.
      (3)   For the purchases and acquisitions of the Police Department, the
Town Marshal is designated as the Police Department purchasing agent.
(Ord. 98-04, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 30.21 PURCHASING RULES.
   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all town
purchases and shall be purchased unless a purchasing agent of the town
determines that:
   (A)   Supplies are not manufactured in the United States in reasonably
available quantities;
   (B)   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds
by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured elsewhere;
   (C)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
   (D)   The purchase of the supplies manufactured in the United States is not
in the public interest.
(Ord. 98-05, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 30.22 PETTY CASH FUND.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall be the custodian of a petty cash fund that shall
not amount to more than $100 accumulation at any one time.
   (B)   The custodian shall account for the petty cash fund pursuant to I.C.
36-1-8-3, as amended.
(Ord. 07-02, passed 2-19-2007)
§ 30.23 CASH CHANGE FUND.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall be the custodian of a cash change fund, which
shall not amount to more than $100 accumulation at any one time.
   (B)   The custodian shall account for the cash change fund pursuant to I.C.
36-1-8-2, as amended.
      (1)   The custodian shall establish the fund by a warrant drawn on the
general fund in favor of the Town Clerk without need for appropriation
      (2)    The custodian shall account for said fund monies pursuant to I.C.
36-1-8-2.
(Ord. 07-03, passed 2-18-2007)
§ 30.24 CAPITAL ASSET ACCOUNTING POLICY.
   This policy is intended to define fixed, capital and non-capital assets, and
to provide guidance in their custody and accounting.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FIXED ASSETS. Assets the lives of which extend beyond a single fiscal
year. FIXED ASSETS may be either intangible (such as easements, water rights or
contracts with a monetary value), or tangible (such as land and improvements,
buildings and improvements, vehicles, equipment, machinery, furniture and
fixtures, and infrastructure assets such as roads, bridges, sanitary and storm
sewers and traffic signals, whether hosed in governmental or proprietary
funds).
         (a)   FIXED ASSETS subject to this section may be acquired in any of
the following ways:
            (1)   Purchased;
            (2)   Lease purchase/capital lease;
            (3)   Matured lien;
            (4)   Construction;
            (5)   Addition to an existing asset;
            (6)   Condemnation;
            (7)   Donation/contribution;
            (8)   Interfund transfer;
            (9)   Trade or barter;
            (10)   Annexation.
         (b)   FIXED ASSETS are divided into 2 broad classes:
            (1)   Governmental fund capital assets. FIXED ASSETS owned by 1 of
the town’s governmental funds, and meeting both cost and useful life criteria,
as outlined below, are to be both capitalized and reported in the town’s annual
financial statements at historical cost.
            (2)   Non-capital assets. FIXED ASSETS not meeting the cost and
useful life criteria described in division (C)(1). Such assets are to be
neither capitalized, depreciated nor reported in the town’s annual financial
statements but are to be expensed in the year purchased and annually
inventoried to assure their proper safekeeping and use.
         (c)   Separate records will be maintained in each of the town’s funds
for each of the above 2 asset classes.
      USEFUL LIFE. The period over which a capital asset will serve its
intended purpose.
   (B)   Acquisition documentation.
      (1)   The acquisition of all assets (not just capital assets) will be
recorded and at least annually reported to the Clerk-Treasurer using the
capital assets ledger prescribed by the SBoA, or some other acceptable form, to
ensure that acquired assets are properly reflected in town records.
      (2)   A separate ledger will be maintained within each town fund and
submitted for each asset class.
      (3)   Acquisition information reported to the Clerk-Treasurer will
include, at minimum, the following:
         (a)   A description of the item (all asset classes);
         (b)   The item’s asset category (all asset classes);
         (c)   The item’s serial tag or other identifying number (all asset
classes);
         (d)   The department acquiring the asset (all asset classes);
         (d)   Acquisition date (all asset classes);
         (e)   The item’s original cost, including the reasonable and necessary
cost of acquiring and placing it in service, as described in division (C)(4)
(capital assets only).
   (C)   Capitalization.
      (1)   Assets meeting both of the following criteria are to be
capitalized.
         (a)   Cost. Assets with an original cost or fair market value (if
acquired other than by purchase) of $5,000 or more;
         (b)   Useful life. Assets with useful lives in excess of 2 years.
      (2)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Items permanently installed/attached to a larger unit either at
or subsequent to the time of construction/acquisition, unlikely to be used
elsewhere and not meeting the cost criteria described in division (C)(1)(a) are
to be included in the cost of the larger unit.
         (b)   The reporting of assets acquired with grant funds and/or by a
department subject to more restrictive reporting requirements than those
contained in this section must comply with the more restrictive of the above
criteria or pertinent requirements.
         (c)   Planned maintenance functions that neither prolong a capital
asset’s life nor increase its functionality, but merely maintain its intended
functionality (such as repaving a street) are not to be capitalized, regardless
of cost.
         (d)   Functions that either prolong the life of an asset or increase
its functionality are to be capitalized, regardless of cost.
      (3)   Capitalization thresholds.
         (a)   General fixed assets. With the exception of land (all of which
is to be capitalized) the following assets will be capitalized if their value
is $5,000 or more.
            1.   Animals;
            2.   Buildings;
            3.   Furniture and fixtures;
            4.   Heavy equipment;
            5.   Improvements other than buildings;
            6.   Office and other equipment;
            7.   Outdoor equipment;
            8.   Vehicles.
         (b)   Infrastructure assets. All infrastructure assets will be
capitalized.
      (4)   Other costs. In addition to price, the reasonable and necessary
costs of acquiring and placing capital assets in service are to be capitalized.
This may include, but not be limited to the following:
         (a)   Title and documentation fees;
         (b)   Capitalized interest;
         (c)   Site preparation costs;
         (d)   Fees for related professional services;
         (e)   Transportation charges.
   (D)   Depreciation.
      (1)   Capital assets, except land and nonstructural improvements, will be
depreciated over their useful life using the straight-line method.
      (2)   Except where a lease or other contractual agreement contains
provisions for salvage or trade in value, no salvage value will be assumed.
      (3)   Depreciation will be calculated annually with a full year’s
depreciation allocated to an asset starting January 1 the year following its
being put in service.
      (4)   Each group of capital assets will be assumed to have the following
useful life:
         (a)   Ambulances: 12 years;
         (b)   Animals: 5 years;
         (c)   Bridges: 50 years;
         (d)   Buildings: 50 years;
         (e)   Catch basins, inlets, lift stations, manholes, and sewer pipes:
50 years;
         (f)   Communication equipment: 10 years;
         (g)   Computer equipment: 5 years;
         (h)   Curbing, gutters and sidewalks: 15 years;
         (i)   Fire and large trucks: 15 years;
         (j)   Fire fighting equipment (ladders, hoses): 12 years;
         (k)   Furniture and fixtures: 15 years;
         (l)   Grounds equipment (mowers, tractors): 10 years;
         (m)   Heavy equipment: 12 years;
         (n)   Improvements other than buildings: 20 years;
         (o)   Land improvements - structure (parking lots, athletic courts,
picnic shelters): 20 years;
         (p)   Office, computer and other equipment: 5 years;
         (q)   Outdoor equipment (playground equipment, radio towers): 15
years;
         (r)   Roadways paved (asphalt): 40 years;
         (s)   Roadways non-paved: 50 years;
         (t)   Street lights: 30 years;
         (u)   Traffic signals and signs: 20 years;
         (v)   Vehicles other than ambulances, fire and large trucks: 6 years.
   (E)   Inventory and disposition.
      (1)   All capital assets will be physically inventoried annually at the
department level by department heads and/or their designees. The Clerk-
Treasurer will conduct random inventory checks to ensure ongoing compliance
with this and other applicable town policies.
      (2)   The disposition of all assets (not just capital assets) will be
recorded and at least annually reported to the Clerk-Treasurer using the
capital assets ledgers described in divisions (B)(1) and (2).
      (3)   Disposition information reported to the Clerk-Treasurer will
include, at minimum, the following:
         (a)   A description of the item;
         (b)   The item’s asset category;
         (c)   The item’s serial, tag or other number;
         (d)   The department disposing of the asset;
         (e)   Disposition;
         (f)   Disposal date;
         (g)   Any monetary value received for the asset at disposition.
(Ord. 2019-07, passed 9-17-2019)
§ 30.25 CREDIT CARD USE POLICY.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to obtain up to 4 credit cards in
the name of the town and to use the town’s federal EIN for purchasing fuel by
the Beverly Shores Police Department.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer and Town Marshal are designated as the responsible
official and employee of the town for the issuance of credit cards to members
of the Beverly Shores Police Department, and the return of credit cards from
the members of the Beverly Shores Police Department.
   (C)   Use of a town credit card is authorized only for purchases of motor
vehicle fuel for Beverly Shores Police Department vehicles. Personal expenses
are not authorized. No other use other than the purchase of motor vehicle fuel
is authorized.
   (D)   Each credit card user must take measures to assure that sales tax is
not added to any purchase or charged to the town's credit card other than those
allowable by the State Board of Accounts. If sales taxes that are not allowable
by the State Board of Accounts are billed to the town on the credit card
statement, the user who incurred the disallowable taxes will be required to
reimburse the town for those taxes charged on the purchase.
   (E)   The credit card user is responsible for turning in the itemized
receipts of all credit card purchases to the Clerk-Treasurer within the billing
cycle. Any charges that appear on the credit card statement that do not have a
corresponding itemized receipt will be the responsibility of the credit card
user who incurred the charge. Any late fee that might be assessed to the town
by the credit card company due to untimely payment for lack of an itemized
receipt will be the responsibility of the credit card user.
   (F)   Each credit card user must immediately notify the Clerk-Treasurer and
the Town Marshal in the event a town credit card is lost or stolen. If a credit
card is lost due to negligence on the part of the credit card user or other
town employee, the responsible person shall be liable to the town for any and
all fraudulent expenses incurred on the lost credit card and paid by the town.
   (G)   Any misuse of the town credit card is subject to loss of credit card
privileges and possible disciplinary action by the Town Council.
   (H)   The Clerk-Treasurer and Town Marshal are responsible for keeping a log
or accounting system that tracks, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   Names of individuals who have used a town credit card;
      (2)   The position of each individual who has used a town credit card;
      (3)   Estimated amounts to be charged to a town credit card;
      (4)   Town fund and account numbers to be charged; and
      (5)   The date the card is issued and returned.
   (I)   The Clerk-Treasurer and Town Marshal must prepare and submit claims
for payment of credit card balances as they would any other lawful claim.
   (J)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to pay an annual fee for the town
credit card, if a card with an annual fee is determined to be the most
advantageous to the town.
(Ord. 2022-08, passed 8-16-2022)
CHAPTER 31: PERSONNEL POLICY
Section
   
31.01   Definitions
   
31.02   Holidays
   
31.03   Paid vacation leave for FT employees
   
31.04   Paid sick leave
   
31.05   Paid personal leave
   
31.06   Bereavement pay
   
31.07   Record keeping
   
31.08   Drug-free workplace and awareness program
   
31.09   Nepotism in hiring and employment
§ 31.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEES.
      (1)   A full-time EMPLOYEE (FT employee) is any town employee working 40
hours or more per week for a minimum of 26 consecutive weeks. FT employees are
eligible for paid leave, as set forth below.
      (2)   A part-time EMPLOYEE (PT employee) is any town employee working
fewer than 40 hours per week. PT employees are ineligible to receive paid
vacation leave, paid sick leave, paid personal days and paid bereavement leave,
and will receive only the benefits specified herein. PT employees may take non-
paid leave without loss of seniority rating if such leave is approved by the PT
employee’s supervisor.
   PROBATIONARY/REGULAR STATUS.
      (1)   New FT and PT employees are employed with the understanding that
the first 6 months of employment are PROBATIONARY, and the town is not
obligated to retain the employee during this period if the employee’s work is
unsatisfactory for any reason. An employee may resign without prejudice during
this period.
      (2)   Use of unused and bereavement leave during the FT employee’s
PROBATIONARY period is permitted only if the FT employee’s supervisor approves
it pursuant to the limits stated under the particular leave policies.
      (3)   REGULAR employees are employees who remain continuously employed
after the completion of the 6-month PROBATIONARY period. Status as a regular
employee does not constitute a contractual obligation or a guarantee of
continual employment.
(Ord. 02-05, passed 3-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.02 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   The town recognizes the following holidays:
      (1)   New Year’s Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday;
      (3)   Presidents Day;
      (4)   Memorial Day;
      (5)   Juneteenth;
      (6)   Independence Day;
      (7)   Labor Day;
      (8)   Veterans Day;
      (9)   Thanksgiving Day; and
      (10)   Christmas Day.
   (B)   If the designated holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday will
be the observed holiday. If the designated holiday falls on a Saturday, the
preceding Friday will be the observed holiday
   (C)   FT employees will be paid as if they worked the holiday, unless they
are under disciplinary action.
   (D)   FT employees, as salaried employees, may take their paid holiday on
another day when they work on a designated holiday. PT employees who must work
on a designated holiday will be paid time and a half for that day.
   (E)   FT employees absent on the last scheduled working day before a
holiday, or the first scheduled working day after a holiday, will not be paid
for that holiday unless the absence is authorized by their supervisor.
(Ord. 02-05, passed 3-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020; Am. Ord.
2022-06, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 31.03 PAID VACATION LEAVE FOR FT EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Accrual of vacation days.
      (1)   Beginning January 1, 2020, FT employees accrue paid vacation leave
on a calendar year basis of full, continuous employment, as follows:
         (a)   First year: 15 days;
         (b)   Fifth year: 20 days;
         (c)   Eighth year: 25 days;
         (d)   Twelfth year: 30 days.
      (2)   This works out to a monthly accrual of paid vacation leave as
follows: 1.25 days during years 1 through 4; 1.6 days during years 5 through 7;
2.08 days during years 8 through 11; and 2.5 days for 12 years and beyond. FT
employees are entitled to the increased number of days of paid vacation leave
on the January 1 in which they attain their fifth, eighth or 12th year of
continuous employment.
      (3)   At the discretion of the supervisor, an FT employee may take
vacation days that have not yet been accrued; however, paid vacation leave
taken during the employee’s probationary period cannot exceed five days.
   (B)   Limit on accruals. FT employees may accumulate up to 30 days of
accrued, unused vacation leave. Such accruals in excess of 30 days are
forfeited.
   (C)   Holiday or illness during vacation. If a holiday falls on an FT
employee’s regularly scheduled workday, the day is paid as a holiday and is not
counted against vacation balances. Illness during vacation is not counted as
sick leave, however the supervisor has discretion to consider sick leave if the
FT employee suffers a serious accident or illness that impairs the intended
benefits of vacation.
   (D)   Scheduling vacations. By the end of January, FT and PT employees will
plan vacation with their department heads with consideration to the needs of
the town. A request for specific vacation time can be denied if it could be
detrimental to the needs of the town or the efficiency of the department.
   (E)   Termination of employment. FT employees will be paid all accrued
unused vacation time upon termination of employment.
(Ord. 02-05, passed 3-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.04 PAID SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Accrual of sick leave. FT employees accrue 7 days of paid sick leave
per calendar year and will earn .6 hours of sick time per month. At the
discretion of the supervisor, an FT employee may use paid sick days that have
not yet accrued.
   (B)   Limit on accruals of paid sick leave. FT employees may accumulate up
to 30 days of accrued unused sick leave from year to year. Accruals in excess
of 30 days are forfeited.
   (C)   Employee responsibility. To qualify for sick leave pay, FT employees
must notify their supervisor before the start of the regular work shift that
they will be absent due to illness or injury and keep their supervisor informed
of the nature and extent of their illness or injury and of their anticipated
date of return to work.
   (D)   Right to physician statement. The town reserves the right to request a
physician statement from an FT employee who is off 3 or more days for illness
or injury.
(Ord. 02-05, passed 3-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.05 PAID PERSONAL LEAVE.
   (A)   Accrual of personal leave. FT employees accrue 3 days of paid personal
leave each calendar year. One day of personal leave will be granted as of each
January 1, May 1 and September 1. At the discretion of the supervisor, a FT
employee may take a paid personal day that has not yet been accrued.
   (B)   No carryover. Personal days will not be carried over from one calendar
year to the next.
   (C)   Prior notice and approval required. No FT employees may take a paid
personal day unless prior notice is given to the supervisor, and the supervisor
approves the request.
(Ord. 02-05, passed 3-18-2002; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.06 BEREAVEMENT PAY.
   Bereavement pay is designed to provide FT employees with paid time away from
work to grieve and handle matters related to a death in their family. In the
event of a death in the FT employee’s family, after discussion with his or her
supervisor, the FT employee may be granted up to 5 days of paid bereavement
leave. In unusual circumstances, additional paid or unpaid leave may be granted
at the discretion of the supervisor.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.07 RECORD KEEPING.
   The Clerk-Treasurer, with support of the Town Marshal, is responsible for
maintaining permanent records of leave granted, used and accumulated for
vacation, and sick and personal leave for each FT employee, and will present an
annual report of this information at the February meeting of the Town Council
consistent with laws governing employee confidentiality and privacy rights.
(Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.08 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE AND AWARENESS PROGRAM.
   (A)   Prohibitions and penalty.
      (1)   Prohibited conduct. The unlawful manufacture, distribution,
dispensation, possession or use of a controlled substance is prohibited in the
workplace by any employee of the town.
      (2)   Penalty for violation.
         (a)   Employees in the workplace in violation of any prohibition in
division (A)(1) above, shall be summarily discharged from their employment.
         (b)   Police officers are subject to disciplinary proceedings before
the Town Council as a Board of Safety pursuant to state statute.
   (B)   Program.
      (1)   Each employee shall be given a copy of a statement of the town’s
drug-free awareness program and each employee must sign a statement that they
have read the statement of the drug-free awareness program, that they will
abide by the terms of the statement and that they will notify the town of any
criminal drug statute convictions for a violation occurring in the workplace no
later than 5 days after conviction.
      (2)   The signed statement shall be kept by the Clerk-Treasurer in the
employee’s personnel
file.
(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 31.09 NEPOTISM IN HIRING AND EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   This section applies to all offices, agencies, and departments of the
town.
   (B)   An individual who is employed by the town on July 1, 2012 is not
subject to this section, unless the individual has a break in employment. The
following are not considered a break in employment with the town:
      (1)   The individual is absent from the workplace while on paid or unpaid
leave, including
vacation, sick, or family medical leave, or worker’s compensation; and
      (2)   The individual’s employment is terminated, but followed by
immediate reemployment
by the town, without loss of payroll time.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the performance of the duties of (1) a
precinct election officer (as defined in I.C. 3-5-2-40.1) that are imposed by
I.C. 3 or (2) a volunteer firefighter are not considered employment by the
town.
   (D)   As used in this section, DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION means an elected
officer or employee who is in a position to affect the terms and conditions of
another individual’s employment, including making decisions about work
assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement, or performance evaluation.
The term does not include the responsibilities of the executive or legislative
body, or fiscal officer of the town, as provided by law, to make decisions
regarding salary ordinance, budgets or personnel policies of the town.
   (E)   As used in this section, EMPLOYED means an individual who is employed
by the town on a full-time, part-time, temporary, intermittent, or hourly
basis. The term does not include an individual who holds only an elected
office. The term includes an individual who is a party to an employment
contract with the town.
   (F)   As used in this section, MEMBER OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT means the Fire
Chief or a firefighter appointed to the department.
   (G)   As used in this section, MEMBER OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT means the
Marshal or a police officer appointed to the department.
   (H)   (1)   As used in this section, RELATIVE means any of the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A parent or step-parent;
         (c)   A child or step-child;
         (d)   A brother, sister, step-brother, or step-sister;
         (e)   A niece or nephew;
         (f)   An aunt or uncle; or
         (g)   A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (H), an adopted child of an
individual is treated as a natural child of the individual.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (H), the terms “brother” and “sister”
include a brother or sister by the half blood.
   (I)   The annual report filed by the town with the State Board of Accounts
under I.C. 5-11-13-1 must include a statement by the Council President stating
whether the town has implemented the policy created by this section.
   (J)   Individuals who are relatives may not be employed by the town in a
position that results in one relative being in the direct line of supervision
of the other relative.
   (K)   (1)   This section applies to an individual who:
         (a)   Is employed by the town on the date the individual’s relative
begins serving a term of an elected office of the town; and
         (b)   Is not exempt from the application of this section under
division (B).
      (2)   Unless otherwise prohibited by the Town Council, an individual may
remain employed by the town and maintain the individual’s position or rank even
if the individual’s employment would violate division (J) of this section.
      (3)   An individual described in division (K)(2) may not (a) be promoted
to a position or (b) be promoted to a position that is not within the merit
ranks, in the case of an individual who is a member of a merit police
department or merit fire department, if the new position would violate division
(J).
   (L)   This section does not abrogate or affect an existing employment
contract between the town and an individual if such contract is in effect on
the date the individual’s relative begins serving a term of an elected office
of the town.
   (M)   Each elected officer of the town shall annually certify in writing,
subject to the penalties for perjury, that the town officer has not violated
this section. The town officer shall submit the certification to the President
of the Council not later than December 31 of each year.
(Res. 2012-09, passed 6-18-2012; Am. Ord. 2020-01, passed 2-18-2020)
CHAPTER 32: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
   
32.01   Elections
   
32.02   Terms of office
   
32.03   Regular meetings
   
32.04   Special meetings
   
32.05   Quorum
   
32.06   Organizational meeting
   
32.07   Order of business
   
32.08   Formal action
   
32.09   Parliamentary procedure
   
32.10   Document deliveries prior to Town Council meetings
§ 32.01 ELECTIONS.
   Five Town Council members shall be elected at large from among the qualified
voters of the town. All municipal elections shall be held in accordance with
applicable state law.
§ 32.02 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of office for Town Council members elected on the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November, shall be 4 years, and each shall serve from
January 1 following the election as provided by law.
(Ord. 99-04, passed 9-20-1999)
§ 32.03 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   Each newly elected Town Council member will, at their first meeting,
establish the dates of the month, the time and location of their regular
monthly meetings.
   (B)   Any regular or special meeting may be adjourned to a designated future
day and hour publicly announced at the regular or special meeting. At the
adjourned meeting any business may be transacted and the Council shall not be
limited to the completion of particular items of business which had actually
been entered upon and left unfinished at the prior meeting unless the order of
adjournment of the meeting expressly limits the work of the adjourned meeting.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.04 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings of the Town Council may be called at any time by any
of the Council members upon proper notice unless called at a regular or
adjourned meeting, the call of a special meeting shall be in writing and shall
specify therein the particular purpose for which the meeting is called.
   (B)   Call shall be signed by the Council member or members calling the
meeting, and countersigned by the Clerk-Treasurer. Copies of the call shall
where practicable be served by the Beverly Shores Police Department upon every
Council member not signing the call.
   (C)   The minute record shall show the issuance of the call and the service
of the notice. No business shall be transacted at special meetings unless the
subject thereof is so named in the call. Special meetings may be called at a
regular or adjourned meeting. Where the call is made at a like meeting, no
notice need be served on any Council member present at that meeting.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.05 QUORUM.
   The presence of 3 Council members shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.06 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.
   (A)   At the first meeting of each year, the Town Council shall elect a
President and a Vice President from its members. At the first meeting, any
Council member may take the chair for the limited purpose of accepting
nominations for Town Council President.
   (B)   A Council member may nominate any Council member including himself or
herself for President. Upon motion duly made, seconded and adopted, the
nominations shall be closed. Thereupon the Council member receiving the vote of
a majority of the entire membership of the Town Council, with the temporary
Chairperson entitled to vote, shall be elected Town Council President.
   (C)   The President shall immediately take the chair and preside over the
nomination and election of a Vice President, and the appointment of other
officials and employees as are necessary for the discharge of the Council's
duties.
   (D)   The Vice President may act as President during the absence or
disability of the President, and any Council member may act as President in the
absence or disability of the President and Vice President.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.07 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The President of the Town Council shall take the chair at the hour fixed for
the opening of the meeting and shall then proceed with the following order of
business:
   (A)   Call to order;
   (B)   Roll call and determination of quorum;
   (C)   Presentation of minutes of previous meetings, unless dispensed with;
   (D)   Financial statements;
   (E)   Claims;
   (F)   Petitions, presentations or comments of residents;
   (G)   Reports of officers and committees;
   (H)   Old business;
   (I)   New business;
   (J)   Communications;
   (K)   Meeting open for public discussion; and
   (L)   Adjournment.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.08 FORMAL ACTION.
   (A)   The President shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings and may
invoke the assistance of the Town Marshal in removing from a meeting any person
who interferes with the orderly proceeding of the meeting.
   (B)   Council action shall be effective only upon motion duly made, seconded
and adopted by a vote of 3 of the 5 Council Members, unless a greater vote is
required by statute.
   (C)   The President shall put all motions to a vote by first advising that a
motion has been made and seconded and asking “all in favor of the motion say
“Aye,” and “All opposed to the motion say “No.”
Any Council member may prior to the vote cause the motion to be read aloud to
clarify the substance of the motion before the Council.
   (D)   No ordinance may be enacted until after the successful adoption upon 2
readings.
   (E)   These rules may be altered, amended or suspended only by a vote of 2/
3 of the members present.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.09 PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE.
   Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the procedures and conduct of meetings
in all cases not specifically provided for herein when requested by any member
of the Council.
(Ord. 205A, passed 11-21-1983 (84-41))
§ 32.10 DOCUMENT DELIVERIES PRIOR TO TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   No later than 5:00 p.m. 5 business days prior to a Town Council
meeting, the President of the Town Council shall email to all members of the
Town Council, the Clerk-Treasurer and the Town Attorney:
      (1)   The agenda for the Town Council meeting;
      (2)   Proposed resolutions;
      (3)   Proposed ordinances; and
      (4)   All other proposals, agreements or matters that Town Council
members desire to be considered by the Town Council at the Town Council
meeting.
   (B)   No later than 5:00 p.m 3 business days prior to a Town Council
meeting, the Clerk-Treasurer shall email to all members of the Town Council and
the Town Attorney:
      (1)   The minutes of the Town Council meeting from the prior month;
      (2)   An accounts payable voucher identifying the claim payments that the
Town Council has pre-approved pursuant to § 33.05 (the fully itemized claims
may be delivered at the Town Council meeting);
      (3)   An accounts payable voucher identifying the claims that the Town
Council must authorize prior to payment pursuant to I.C. 5-11-10-2 together
with the fully itemized claims;
      (4)   Appropriations report;
      (5)   Funds report;
      (6)   Revenue report;
      (7)   Depository balance report;
      (8)   Reconciliation report of bank statements for the prior calendar
month;
      (9)   Proposed resolutions from the Clerk-Treasurer;
      (10)   Proposed ordinances from the Clerk-Treasurer;
      (11)   All other financial records, financial reports, proposals,
agreements or matters that the Clerk-Treasurer desires to be considered by the
Town Council at the Town Council meeting.
(Ord. 2013-03, passed 4-15-2013)
CHAPTER 33: CLERK-TREASURER
Section
   
33.01   Clerk-Treasurer to post bond
   
33.02   Term of office
   
33.03   Powers and duties
   
33.04   Deputies and employees
   
33.05   Clerk-Treasurer to make claim payments
   
33.06   Official files
§ 33.01 CLERK-TREASURER TO POST BOND.
   The Clerk-Treasurer, upon assuming the offices and duties thereof, shall
post with the town a bond, which may be amended from time to time by the Town
Council, in the sum of $15,000; conditioned that, if the Clerk-Treasurer shall
render a true account of his or her Office and of the doings therein to the
proper authority when required thereby, or by law, and shall promptly pay over
to the person or office entitled thereto, all money which may come into his or
her hands by virtue of the Office, and shall faithfully account for all the
balances of money remaining in his or her hands at the termination of his or
her Office, and shall hereafter exercise all reasonable diligence and care in
the preservation and lawful disposal of all money, books, papers, securities or
other property appertaining to his or her office and deliver them to his or her
successor, or to any person authorized to receive the same, and if he or she
shall faithfully and impartially, without fear, favor, fraud or oppression,
discharge all other duties now or thereafter required of his or her Office by
law, then the bond to be void, otherwise in full force and effect.
(Ord. 18, passed - - (84-3))
§ 33.02 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is an elected position whose term of office is for
4 years, beginning at noon on January 1 after his or her election and
continuing until a successor is elected and qualified.
Statutory reference:
   Clerk-Treasurer's term of office, I.C. 36-5-6-3
   Election of Clerk-Treasurer, I.C. 36-5-6-4.  
§ 33.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Oaths, depositions, and the like. The Town Clerk-Treasurer may
administer oaths, take depositions, and take acknowledgments of instruments as
required by law.
   (B)   Ex officio Councilmember. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the clerk of the
Town Council. Whenever the Town Council has an even number of members, the
Clerk-Treasurer is an ex officio member for the purpose of casting the deciding
vote to break a tie.
   (C)   Other duties. The Town Clerk-Treasurer may perform all duties
prescribed by law, which include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Receive and care for all town money and pay the money out only on
order of the Town Council.
      (2)   Keep accounts showing when and from what sources the Clerk-
Treasurer has received town money, and where and to whom the Clerk-Treasurer
has paid out town money.
      (3)   Prescribe payroll and account forms for all town offices.
      (4)   Prescribe the manner in which creditors, officers, and employees
shall be paid.
      (5)   Manage the finances and accounts of the town and make investments
of town money.
      (6)   Prepare for the legislative body the budget estimates of
miscellaneous revenue, financial statements, and the proposed tax rate.
      (7)   Maintain custody of the town seal and the records of the
legislative body.
      (8)   Issue all licenses authorized by statute and collect the fees fixed
by ordinance.
      (9)   Serve as clerk of the legislative body by attending its meetings
and recording its proceedings.
      (10)   Administer oaths, take depositions, and take acknowledgment of
instruments that are required by statute to be acknowledged, without charging a
fee.
      (11)   Perform all other duties prescribed by statute.
   (D)   Disaster recovery plan; tape backup. Each night there is to be a tape
backup of all programs in the Clerk-Treasurer's office computer system. Tape
backup is to be rotated every day and taken off site every night by an employee
of the Clerk-Treasurer's office. The tape backup should ensure the least amount
of down time in case of a disaster.
   (E)   Disaster recovery plan; disk backup. Disks backups are to be taken of
all programs in the Clerk-Treasurer's office once a month. One of these disk
backups is to be placed in safe and the other is to be taken off the work site
by an employee of the Clerk-Treasurer's office. At the end of the year, several
disk backups are required. One is placed on site in a safe. One is placed in
the town's safe in a bank. And 1 is taken off site by an employee of the Clerk-
Treasurer's office.
   (F)   Disaster recovery plan; forms. The Clerk-Treasurer will take a supply
of critical forms off site in order to be able to function on a temporary
basis.
   (G)   Disaster recovery plan; hardware vendor. The Clerk-Treasurer's office
will contact the hardware vendor immediately. Each employee of the Clerk-
Treasurer's office shall keep a copy of the hardware vendor and telephone
number off site.
   (H)   Logical security. Each employee in the Clerk-Treasurer's office has
their own identification passwords to provide sufficient access restrictions.
Each employee in the Clerk-Treasurer's office has the ability to change their
password every 30 days.
Statutory reference:
   Clerk-Treasurer authorized to administer oaths and related powers, I.C. 36-
5-6-5
   Clerk-Treasurer's role with regard to Town Council, I.C. 36-5-2-8
§ 33.04 DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer may appoint the number of deputies and employees
authorized by the Town Council.
   (B)   Deputies and employees so hired serve at the pleasure of the Clerk-
Treasurer.
Statutory reference:
   Clerk-Treasurer to appoint deputies and employees, I.C. 36-5-6-7
§ 33.05 CLERK-TREASURER TO MAKE CLAIM PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer of the town to make
claim payments for lawful town purposes, and certain kinds of expenses, as
follows in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer, being the town fiscal officer, may make
claim payments in advance of Town Council allowance for the following types of
expenses:
      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:
         (a)   The United States government; or
         (b)   An agency or a political subdivision of the United States
government.
      (2)   License fees or permit fees.
      (3)   Insurance premiums.
      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges.
      (5)   Federal grant programs if:
         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; and
         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security for the
amount advanced.
      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute.
      (7)   Maintenance agreements and service agreements.
      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements.
      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds.
      (10)   Payroll.
      (11)   State, federal or county taxes.
   (C)   Each payment of expenses under this section must be supported by a
fully itemized claim. The Town Council shall review and allow the claim at the
Council's next regular or special meeting following the preapproved payment of
the expense.
   (D)   The Town Council shall review and allow the claim at its next regular
or special meeting following the preapproved payment of the expenses.
(Ord. No. 92-2, §§ 1, 2, 7-8-1992)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, I.C. 36-4-18-4 
§ 33.06 OFFICIAL FILES.
   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer's personnel files shall be the official files.
   (B)   The department heads may keep satellite files that are copies of the
originals sent to the Clerk-Treasurer.
CHAPTER 34: TOWN DEPARTMENTS, COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Organizations Generally
   
34.01   Green Space Committee
   
34.02   Capital Planning Advisory Committee
   
34.03   Plan Commission
   
34.04   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
34.05   Fire Department
   
34.06   Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
Police Department
   
34.15   Safety Board
   
34.16   Membership
   
34.17   Regular meetings
   
34.18   Special meetings
   
34.19   Disciplinary power
   
34.20   Town Marshal
   
34.21   Departmental rules
   
34.22   Temporary rules and orders
   
34.23   Board Chairperson
   
34.24   Disciplinary process
   
34.25   Legal counsel
   
34.26   Replacement member
   
34.27   Number of deputy marshals to be employed
   
34.28   Verification fee for vehicle identification information
   
34.29   Excess false burglar alarm calls fee
Department of Parks and Recreation
   
34.39   Establishment of Town Department
   
34.40   Operation and maintenance of public parks and recreation
   
34.41   Powers and duties
   
34.42   Superintendent of Parks and Recreation
   
34.43   Creation of committees
   
34.44   Taxing district
   
34.45   Fund for improvements
   
34.46   Duty of officers in terms of bonds
   
34.47   Acquiring land
Department of Redevelopment
   
34.55   Purpose
   
34.56   Establishment; members
   
34.57   Redevelopment district
Redevelopment Authority
   
34.65   Establishment
   
34.66   Members
ORGANIZATIONS GENERALLY
§ 34.01 GREEN SPACE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Town Council shall appoint a Green Space Committee to encourage
and assist owners of undeveloped property in Beverly Shores to donate property
to the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, to protect natural and open areas and
add to public lands (Green Space) in Beverly Shores. The Town Council shall
initially appoint 5 residents, and may appoint up to 7 residents, no more than
1 of whom may be serving on the Town Council, to serve on the committee for 1-,
2- or 3-year terms, and, after the first terms expire, the subsequent
appointments will be for 3-year terms.
   (B)   The Committee members shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Advising potential donors of federal and state tax law procedures
for obtaining tax deductions for their land donations;
      (2)   (a)   The Committee shall discuss with all potential land donors
the benefits of allowing their donated land to be used as public parks in
Beverly Shores, but shall not make park use a criterion for acceptance.
         (b)   If a potential donor requests that his or her land be designated
as permanently protected green space rather than as public park land, and if
the Committee agrees that the land should be accepted with that designation,
the Committee shall make its recommendation to the Town Council that the land
be accepted as permanently protected green space. As a part of its
recommendation, the Committee shall advise the Town Council about land
stewardship needs for the donated land.
      (3)   Regularly submitting recommendations, based on criteria that the
Committee shall recommend to the Plan Commission for approval, to the Town
Council for acceptance of donated land parcels;
      (4)   After Town Council approval, registering the land titles of donated
property with the Porter County Recorder of Deeds;
      (5)   Ensuring that the town's title to the property is valid and
recorded with the Clerk-Treasurer; and
      (6)   Annually at the time of member appointment, the Town Council shall
review the Committee's activities to assure that the Committee is properly
conducting the business of the town in effectively acquiring and stewarding
non-parklands owned by the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
(Ord. 03-06, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 10-04, passed 6-21-2010; Am. Ord.
2021-06, passed 3-16-2021)
§ 34.02 CAPITAL PLANNING ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby created and continued in the town, a Capital Planning
Advisory Committee which shall consist of the Clerk-Treasurer and 6 other
members: 1 member from the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee, 1 member
from the Police Department and 1 member from the Fire Department, all of whom
shall serve a 4-year term. In addition, 1 member from the Town Council, 1
member from the Plan Commission who is not a member of the Town Council, and 1
at large resident shall initially serve for 2-year terms.
   (B)   All members shall be appointed by the Town Council, and after the
first 2 years, for 4-year terms.
   (C)   The Capital Planning Advisory Committee shall meet on an as-needed
basis to review and set priorities for expenditure of available capital funds,
to prepare a 5-year capital plan for the Town of Beverly Shores, and to report
its recommendations to the Town Council for its consideration in the
preparation of the town’s annual budget. The Committee shall elect a
Chairperson annually.
(Ord. 03-07, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.03 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Town of Beverly Shores is hereby authorized to and does hereby
establish a Plan Commission for the town, as provided in I.C. 36-7-1-100 et
seq., and not otherwise.
   (B)   The Plan Commission of the Town of Beverly Shores shall consist of 7
members. The Town Council shall appoint 3 persons in the town government as
members and the President of the Town Council shall appoint 4 citizen members,
not more than 2 of whom shall be of the same political party.
   (C)   The citizen members appointed by the President of the Town Council
shall serve 2 for a term of 3 years and 2 for a term of 4 years as the
President of the Town Council shall designate. The terms of the citizen members
shall expire on January 1 of the third and fourth year respectively following
their appointment. Thereafter as the terms expire each new appointment shall be
for a term of 4 years.
   (D)   The citizen members shall be qualified by knowledge and experience in
matters pertaining to the development of the town, shall hold no other office
in the town government, and shall be residents of the town.
   (E)   The powers and duties of the Plan Commission shall be determined and
limited, as permitted and provided in I.C. 36-7-1-100 et seq. and by the
amendments thereof as may be hereafter enacted by the General Assembly of the
State of Indiana.
(Ord. 34, passed 4-13-1956 (84-8))
§ 34.04 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   There is hereby reestablished an Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of 5 members.
   (C)   There shall be 3 citizen members appointed by the Town Council
President, 1 of whom must be a member of the Plan Commission, and 2 must not be
members of the Plan Commission.
   (D)   There shall be 1 citizen member appointed by the Town Council, who
must not be a member of the Plan Commission.
   (E)   There shall be 1 member appointed by the Plan Commission, who must be
a citizen member of the Plan Commission other than the Plan Commission member
appointed by the Town Council President.
   (F)   The members shall serve 4-year terms, with the current terms staggered
to end on the dates specified below, and the subsequent term beginning on the
next January 1, and continuing on 4-year terms thereafter:
      (1)   The terms for the Town Council President’s appointment from the
Plan Commission and the Town Council’s citizen appointment shall begin on
January 1, 2020 and expire on December 31, 2023;
      (2)   The current term for 1 of the Town Council President’s citizen
appointments shall expire on December 31, 2020;
      (3)   The current term for the Plan Commission’s appointment of 1 of its
citizen members shall expire on December 31, 2021; and
      (4)   The current term for the other 1 of the Town Council President’s
citizen appointments shall expire on December 31, 2022.
   (G)   The powers, organization, policies, and rules of procedure in front of
the Board shall be governed by I.C. 36-7-4-901 et seq., and §
155.034 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 35, passed 5-11-1956 (84-9); Am. Ord. 2020-02, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-2-3, the Town Council may organize fire
companies and regulate their government and provide all necessary apparatus for
the extinguishment of fires.
   (B)   In order to preserve the character of the Volunteer Fire Department
and in order to protect the substantial investment in building and equipment
which is being placed in the custody and care of the Department, and provide
for its proper use and maintenance by responsible individuals.
   (C)   In order to safeguard and protect the rights, life and property of the
citizens of the Town of Beverly Shores, the following regulations are hereby
adapted for the government of the Beverly Shores Volunteer Fire Department:
      (1)   The Beverly Shores Volunteer Fire Department Inc. shall comply with
all the provisions of the Indiana state statutes regulating corporations
including the submission of reports required by the Secretary of State. Proof
of compliance shall be presented to the Town Council in January of each year;
      (2)   All regular meetings of the Department shall be held in accordance
with Robert’s Rules of Order;
      (3)   No meetings of the Board of Directors and officers shall be held
unless each shall have been given at least 5-days’ notice in writing, and no
action shall be taken unless a quorum of the officers and directors be present;
      (4)   Written minutes be taken and preserved of all meetings and actions
taken by the Fire Department and a permanent record kept thereof. Records shall
be open to the public at any time as provided by law;
      (5)   At least once each year the Department shall provide the Town
Council with a certified, complete, itemized financial statement disclosing all
income and disbursements. The report to be signed and approved by a majority of
the officers and directors of the Fire Department;
      (6)   The officers and directors of the Fire Department shall be
responsible for enforcing these provisions; and
      (7)   Any requests for necessary apparatus and equipment made to the Town
Council shall be made in writing and accompanied by a certified copy of a
resolution indicating that the resolution was passed by a majority of the
officers and directors of the Fire Department and that proper and sufficient
notice of the meeting was given to the officers and directors.
   (D)   Fee for excess false fire and carbon monoxide alarm calls. A fee as
set forth in §
10.99 shall be charged to the owner of the property on which an electronic fire
and/or carbon monoxide alarm is installed for each automatically generated
false alarm call in excess of three such false alarm calls within a moving 12-
month period. Manually generated alarms shall not be counted toward this limit.
The fee shall be collected by the Clerk-Treasurer and any owner who fails to
timely pay the charge shall not be eligible for a parking permit until all such
fees are paid.
(Ord. 93, passed 12-27-1971 (84-19); Am. Ord. 2011-08, passed 7-18-2011)
§ 34.06 PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee. There is hereby created and
continued in the town, a Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee, consisting of
5 members. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee (“Parks Committee”) will
assist and advise, at the direction of the Town Council, on the oversight,
maintenance, and improvement of Lituanica Park, town-owned beaches, which
includes Rebora Plaza, and other town-owned land dedicated and open to
recreational use by the public. Issues related to social trails between Lake
Front Drive and Lake Michigan, town-owned unimproved roads, and maintenance of
Four Corners remain under the direct authority of the Town Council. The duties
and responsibilities of the Parks Committee include the following:
      (1)   Establishing a standard list of maintenance tasks, including a
schedule for maintaining existing and future structures, landscaping, and
grounds at Lituanica Park and town beaches. The Parks Committee will submit
this list annually to the Town Council for approval. The list shall be
submitted during the town’s annual budget preparation.
      (2)   Assist in maintenance tasks as the Town Council may direct.
      (3)   Develop and make recommendations for rules and regulations for use
of Lituanica Park and town-owned beaches, as necessary or appropriate, for
consideration and approval by the Town Council.
      (4)   Handle requests by town residents or town organizations for
specific use of Lituanica Park or town-owned beaches in accordance with the
procedures approved by the Town Council.
      (5)   Approve expenditures for those standard maintenance activities at
Lituanica Park and town-owned beaches, without prior Town Council approval,
consistent with the town’s budgeted appropriations. All other expenditures, and
requests for improvements, repairs, or other capital projects should be brought
to the Town Council for approval.
      (6)   Make other recommendations to assist the Town Council in developing
and preserving aesthetic, maintenance, recreational, and cultural values that
serve town residents. The Parks Committee may also perform such other related
duties as may be assigned by the Town Council, which may include, but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Compile data to assist the Town Council in optimizing
recreational use of these areas.
         (b)   Collaborate with other town government committees and other town
groups to devise a stewardship plan for the town’s greenspace and recreational
areas, including collaborating to make efficient use of town resources.
         (c)   Develop and make recommendations for capital improvements and
operations at Lituanica Park and town-owned beaches and Rebora Plaza
         (d)   Encourage fundraising efforts and donations for recreational
improvements to Lituanica Park or town-owned beaches with approval from the
Town Council.
   (B)   Membership. The Parks Committee shall consist of 5 members appointed
by the Town Council, all of whom are volunteer residents in town, except that
one member of the Parks Committee may be a member of the Town Council.
   (C)   Terms of office and filling vacancies.
      (1)   Any member of the prior Park Board whose term has not expired as of
January 1, 2024 will automatically be appointed by the Town Council to serve as
a member of the Parks Committee; any such member’s term on the Parks Committee
will run concurrently with what would have been the remaining term on the now
discontinued and dissolved Park Board. All other appointments to the Parks
Committee shall be for a 3-year term, with initial terms staggered so that no
more than 2 terms expire in the same calendar year.
      (2)   In the event of a vacancy on the Parks Committee, the Town Council
shall expeditiously fill any vacancy from volunteer applicants who will then
serve for the remaining term of the Committee member being replaced.
   (D)   Officers. Duly appointed members of the Parks Committee shall elect
from amongst themselves a chair, vice-chair, and secretary at the first meeting
after which the Committee is first appointed and thereafter annually.
   (E)   Duties of chair and vice-chair. The chair shall preside at all
meetings, set the agenda, ensure that the maintenance plan for Lituanica Park
and town-owned beaches is carried out; facilitate making recommendations to the
Town Council, and ensure recommendations approved by the town move forward. The
vice-chair shall perform the duties of the chair in the absence of the chair,
and such other duties as may be assigned by the chair.
   (F)   Duties of the secretary. The secretary shall keep an accurate record
of all Committee proceedings, including typed minutes and notes of all the
meetings. A copy of the approved minutes, signed by the chair of the meeting,
shall be given to the town’s Clerk Treasurer for record keeping and posting on
the town’s website in a timely manner.
   (G)   Succession of officers. Should an officer of the Parks Committee no
longer be able to serve in that capacity, or on the committee itself going
forward, the Parks Committee will elect a replacement officer from the
Committee’s other members.
   (H)   Quorum; meeting rules and procedures; number of meetings. Three (3) of
the 5 voting members of the Parks Committee shall constitute a quorum. The
Committee meetings shall include at least 1 regularly scheduled meeting per
month, unless canceled at the direction of the chair due to lack of committee
business or other good reasons. Meetings may be run informally in general
accordance with the latest edition of Robert’s Rules of Order.
   (I)   Removal. If a member of the Parks Committee fails to attend 3 meetings
during a calendar year, the Parks Committee may recommend to the Town Council
that the member be removed for cause. In addition, a member may be removed for
misconduct by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 34.15 SAFETY BOARD.
   There is hereby created the Beverly Shores Police Safety Board which shall
have jurisdiction over all matters and property related to the Beverly Shores
Police Department except for hiring or promotion of the Town Marshal, deputy
marshals and police employees and for determination of salary and employment
benefits, which matters shall be within the jurisdiction of the Town Council of
the Town of Beverly Shores.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.16 MEMBERSHIP.
   The membership of the Safety Board shall consist of the 5 members of the
Town Council.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.17 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Safety Board shall meet in regular session, unless there is no business
to be conducted, immediately following the regular meeting of the Town Council.
The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall give notice of regular meetings to the news
media as required by the Indiana Open Door Law.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.18 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Safety Board may be called by any Safety Board
member upon notice that complies with the Indiana Open Door Law.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.19 DISCIPLINARY POWER.
   The Safety Board shall have exclusive control over the dismissal, demotion,
suspension and other discipline of the Town Marshal, deputy marshals and police
employees; provided however, the Town Marshal shall have the authority, without
a hearing, to reprimand and/or suspend without pay deputy marshals and police
employees for a maximum of 5 working days pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3-4.1.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.20 TOWN MARSHAL.
   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, the Town Marshal shall have
exclusive control of the Police Department, subject to the departmental rules
and regulations and orders of the Safety Board.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.21 DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
   (A)   The Safety Board may adopt departmental rules and regulations as are
not inconsistent with I.C. 36-8-3-4.
   (B)   After adoption by the Safety Board, the departmental rules may be
amended in writing by a vote of the majority of the entire membership of the
Safety Board.
   (C)   All amendments shall be appended to the departmental rules.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.22 TEMPORARY RULES AND ORDERS.
   The Town Marshal shall have the authority to make temporary rules and orders
governing the Department not inconsistent with I.C. 36-8-3-4, which shall have
the same force and effect as the permanent departmental rules for a period of
not more than 30 days subject to extension, modification or repeal by the Town
Marshal or the Safety Board.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.23 BOARD CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   The Safety Board may discipline, reprimand, suspend, demote or dismiss
the Town Marshal, deputy marshals and police employees in accordance with the
procedures required by I.C. 36-8-3-4.
   (B)   The Town Council President shall serve as Chairperson of Safety Board
proceedings unless otherwise provided by vote of majority of the entire
membership of the Safety Board.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.24 DISCIPLINARY PROCESS.
   The sequence of events at any disciplinary hearing before the Safety Board
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Statement of the purpose of the hearing by the Chairperson of the
Safety Board;
   (B)   Statement of the position of the complaining party;
   (C)   Statement of the position of the defending party;
   (D)   Presentation of witnesses and evidence by the complaining party with
the right of the defending party to cross-examine witnesses;
   (E)   Presentation of the witnesses and evidence of the defending party with
the right of the complaining party to cross-examine witnesses;
   (F)   Rebuttal witnesses, if any, by complaining party;
   (G)   Rebuttal witnesses, if any, by defending party;
   (H)   Closing statement by complaining party; and
   (I)   Closing statement by defending party.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.25 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (A)   The Town Attorney shall act as counsel for the Safety Board and may
ask questions of all witnesses to assist the Safety Board in finding the facts
upon which the Board's decision shall be based.
   (B)   If a Safety Board member is the complaining party, that Safety Board
member shall not participate in the deliberations or decision of the Safety
Board on that case.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.26 REPLACEMENT MEMBER.
   Upon disqualification of a Safety Board member the remaining members of the
Safety Board shall appoint a replacement to participate as a member of the
Safety Board in that disciplinary proceeding.
(Ord. 199A, passed 5-16-1983 (84-40))
§ 34.27 NUMBER OF DEPUTY MARSHALS TO BE EMPLOYED.
   (A)   The Town Council shall fix the number of deputy marshals authorized
for employment by this section.
   (B)   The Beverly Shores Police Department shall employ no more than 13
deputy marshals to serve as law enforcement officers during any calendar year.
   (C)   (1)   The number fixed by this section may be suspended in
circumstances requiring the imposition of marshal law or during the declaration
of an emergency or disaster as otherwise provided for by law.
      (2)   Furthermore, nothing in this section shall preclude the appointment
or lawful establishment of a police auxiliary or reserve police officers for
the Town of Beverly Shores.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 6-30-1999)
§ 34.28 VERIFICATION FEE FOR VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
   A fee as set forth in §
10.99 shall be charged by the Beverly Shores Police Department to the owner of
a motor vehicle who requests that a member of the Police Department verify
vehicle identification and other information about the motor vehicle so that
the owner can obtain a license from the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles for
the vehicle.
(Ord. 11-01, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 34.29 EXCESS FALSE BURGLAR ALARM CALLS FEE.
   A fee as set forth in §
10.99 shall be charged to the owner of the property on which an electronic
burglar alarm is installed for each false alarm call in excess of 3 false alarm
calls within a moving 12-month period. The fee shall be collected by the Clerk-
Treasurer and any owner who fails to timely pay the charge shall not be
eligible for a parking permit until all such fees are paid.
(Ord. 11-03, passed 5-16-2011)
Cross-reference:
   Parking permits, see §
71.06
DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 34.39 ESTABLISHMENT OF TOWN DEPARTMENT.
   The Beverly Shores Department of Parks and Recreation is reestablished as a
department of the town and shall be composed of personnel as determined by the
Town Council.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.40 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION.
   The Town Council shall have full authority and responsibility to establish,
aid, maintain, and operate public parks and recreational areas and programs.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.41 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Town Council shall exercise all powers necessary to establish, aid,
maintain, and operate public parks, playgrounds, and recreational facilities,
including, but not limited to, park programs, funds, donations, rules,
regulations, and the like. In accordance with I.C. 36-10-3-28, all powers,
duties, liabilities, records, and property of the discontinued and dissolved
Park Board, including appropriations and other funds, are transferred to the
jurisdiction of the Town Council. Any amounts owed to the discontinued and
dissolved Park Board are now owed and payable to the town. Any legal
liabilities of the discontinued and dissolved Park Board are now liabilities of
the town.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.42 SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
   The Town Council may, in its discretion, hire a Superintendent of Parks and
Recreation. In the event the Town Council hires a Superintendent of Parks and
Recreation, the individual must be qualified by training or experience, as
required by I.C. 36-10-3-13, as amended or replaced. A Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation will have such duties, powers, and responsibilities as
determined by the Town Council.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.43 CREATION OF COMMITTEES.
   The Town Council may create a 5 member advisory committee composed of
residents of the town who are interested in parks and recreation, one of whom
may be a member of Town Council.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.44 TAXING DISTRICT.
   All territory included within the corporate limits of the town constitutes a
taxing district for the purpose of levying special benefit taxes for park and
recreation purposes as provided in this act.
(Ord. 85, passed 6-12-1971 (84-17); Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.45 FUND FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council hereby creates and continues a special non-reverting
capital fund for the purposes of acquiring land or making specific capital
improvements for park purposes.
   (B)   The Town Council may include from year to year an item and an
appropriation for park purposes in the town’s budget.
   (C)   Monies placed in the non-reverting capital fund shall not be withdrawn
except for the purposes for which the fund was created, unless the Town Council
repeals the ordinance. That repeal shall not be made under suspension of the
rules.
(Ord. 85, passed 6-12-1971 (84-17); Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.46 DUTY OF OFFICERS IN TERMS OF BONDS. 
   (A)   Each officer and each employee who may be charged with the duty of
handling any funds in the performance of his or her duties as authorized or
directed by the provisions of this subchapter shall execute an official bond
for the term of his or her office or employment before entering upon the duties
of his or her office or employment before entering upon the duties of his or
her office or employment or if the tenure is in determinate, then the bond
shall be for a term of 1 year and each year thereafter so long as the
employment continues.
   (B)   All bonds required shall be individual surety company public official
bonds conditioned on faithful performance of duties. The penal amounts of the
bonds shall be fixed by the Town Council and shall be approved by the
President.
   (C)   All like bonds shall be filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder as provided by statute.
(Ord. 85, passed 6-12-1971 (84-17); Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 34.47 ACQUIRING LAND.
   Whenever the Town Council shall deem it advisable to acquire land for any
park and recreation purposes it may do so through any process provided by law.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT
§ 34.55 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council deems it to be in the best interest of the town and its
citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for rehabilitation, redevelopment and/
or economic development of areas by private enterprise and the town by
establishing a department of redevelopment.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-17-2020)
§ 34.56 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Town Council hereby establishes a Department of Redevelopment to
be known as the Beverly Shores Redevelopment Commission (the “Redevelopment
Commission”), to be controlled by a board of 5 members.
   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14 and 36-7-25, the Town Council shall appoint 2
members of the Redevelopment Commission, and the President of the Town Council
shall appoint 3 members of the Redevelopment Commission.
      (1)   Members of the Redevelopment Commission shall be at least 18 years
of age and must be residents of the town. Members shall take and subscribe an
oath of office before beginning the duties thereof and shall execute a bond as
set forth in I.C. 36-7-14-7.
      (2)   The term of office of the members of the Redevelopment Commission
shall commence from the date of their appointment and expire on January 1,
2022, or as otherwise provided in I.C. 36-7-14-7.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-17-2020)
§ 34.57 REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14 and 36-7-25, all of the territory within the
corporate boundaries of the town will constitute a special taxing district to
be known as the Town of Beverly Shores Redevelopment District (the
“Redevelopment District”) for the purpose of levying and collecting special
benefit taxes for redevelopment and economic development purposes as provided
in I.C. 36-7-14 and 36-7-25. All of the taxable property within the
Redevelopment District will be considered to be benefitted by the redevelopment
projects and economic development projects carried out under I.C. 36-7-14 and
36-7-25 to the extent of the special taxes levied under the same.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 3-17-2020)
REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
§ 34.65 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Beverly Shores Redevelopment Authority (the “Redevelopment Authority”)
is hereby established for purposes of financing, constructing, reconstructing,
renovating, purchasing, equipping, acquiring, and/or leasing local public
improvements, along with other purposes provided for by I.C. 36-7-14.5-7.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 3-20-2020)
§ 34.66 MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Redevelopment Authority shall be governed by a board of 3 members
to be appointed by the President of the Council. Each member shall be a
resident of the town, shall take and subscribe an oath of office, with such
certificates of appointment to be filed with the records of the Council. No
member shall receive a salary, and no profit or money of the Redevelopment
Authority shall inure to the benefit of a member thereof. Any member can be
removed for cause by the Council.
   (B)   Following the appointment of members by the President of the Council,
the Redevelopment Authority shall hold an organizational meeting to elect
officers, including president, vice president, and secretary-treasurer.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called by the President of the Board of the
Redevelopment Authority or any two members of the Board as provided by I.C. 36-
7-14.5-7. A majority of the members of the Board of the Redevelopment Authority
shall constitute a quorum. The concurrence of a majority of the members of the
Board of the Redevelopment Authority is necessary to authorize any action.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 3-20-2020)
CHAPTER 35: FUNDS
Section
   
35.01   Parks and recreation
   
35.02   Appeal; Great Lakes transfer station
   
35.03   NLP real property tax loss recoupment
   
35.04   Special projects
   
35.05   Rainy day fund
   
35.06   Hazard mitigation; emergency power system
   
35.07   Cumulative capital development fund
   
35.08   Town promotion fund
   
35.09   Train station renovation
   
35.10   Bond and interest
   
35.11   Cumulative capital improvement fund
   
35.12   Major moves construction fund
   
35.13   Restricted non-reverting garbage and recycling fund
   
35.14   LOIT special distribution fund (Fund 257)
   
35.15   Gift fund
   
35.16   Local road and bridge matching grant fund (Fund 447)
   
35.17   Investments fund (555)
   
35.18   Investments fund (556)
   
35.19   Lake Michigan coastal program grant (Fund 223)
   
35.20   Roads and capital improvements fund (448)
   
35.21   ARP coronavirus local fiscal recovery fund (Fund 2407)
   
35.22   Lake Michigan coastal program grant fund (Fund 225)
   
35.23   Lituanica park improvement project grant fund (Fund 2409)
   
35.24   Lake Michigan coastal program grant fund (Fund 2408)
   
35.25   Town clean-up fund (Fund 2502)
§ 35.01 PARKS AND RECREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby established in the town a special non-reverting
operating fund for the use by the Parks and Recreation Department of the town
pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-18, as amended.
   (B)   The Town Council of Beverly Shores may accept gifts, donations and
subsidies for park and recreational purposes, including a gift or transfer of
property.
   (C)   Any gift or grant of money for town parks or recreational programs
accepted by the Town Council shall be deposited in a special non-reverting fund
by the Clerk-Treasurer. The Parks Committee may make recommendations on the
withdrawal of the funds to the Town Council. Any withdrawals of the funds shall
be made by the Town Council.
(Ord. 05-05, passed 8-15-2005; Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023)
§ 35.02 APPEAL; GREAT LAKES TRANSFER STATION.
   (A)   At its regular monthly meeting on November 21, 2005, the Town Council
voted unanimously to enter a legal appeal of IDEM's Nov 9, 2005 approval of a
solid waste facility permit for the proposed Great Lakes waste transfer station
to be constructed at 5535 N. County Line Road, LaPorte County, Indiana, and the
town needs to establish a non-reverting fund to account for funds donated to it
in support of the appeal.
   (B)   A separate non-reverting fund shall be established in the general fund
of the town to account for funds donated to the town in support of, and for
expenses relating to the town's appeal of the permit noted above.
(Ord. 05-09, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 35.03 NLP REAL PROPERTY TAX LOSS RECOUPMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a fund for the monies received by the town
from the federal government, Department of the Interior, National Lakeshore
Park for reimbursement of real property tax losses and to authorize the nature,
purposes and use of the disbursements of these funds. These funds may be used
in conjunction with any other funds ever received by the town from the National
Lakeshore Park or U.S. Department of Interior sources. This fund is to be known
by the following title and designation: National Park real property tax loss
recoupment fund.
   (B)   Revenue from the National Lakeshore Park, from the U.S. Department of
the Interior or from similar federal government sources and donated funds may
go into this fund. Transfers from existing town funds are permitted to the
extent authorized by law.
   (C)   This fund shall be a non-reverting fund of the town. It shall
terminate upon the enactment of a subsequent ordinance which determines the
existence of the fund is no longer needed because the disbursements are no
longer being made to the town and there is no expectation of receipt of
additional funds or because there are no longer monies in the fund.
   (D)   Funds received by the town from the National Lakeshore Park or U.S.
Department of the Interior or similar federal government source shall be
deposited into the fund.
   (E)   The Town Council hereby authorizes the disbursement of funds to pay
any and all general fund expenses incurred by the town or paid by the town.
   (F)   An accurate accounting shall be maintained of all disbursements and
credits and all transactions involving this fund shall be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer as an official record of the town. From the date of enactment
of this section, the money shall not be commingled with other monies of the
town.
   (G)   Be if further ordained, by the Town Council, that this fund
establishment and appropriation shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage and as otherwise provided for by law.
(Ord. 2000-05, passed - -)
§ 35.04 SPECIAL PROJECTS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a fund for the special projects of a capital
nature for the town. Currently, Build Indiana Monies are being distributed to
the town for the purpose of installing sidewalks on the east side of Broadway
from the fire station to Lake Front Drive.
   (B)   This fund may be used in conjunction with any other funds received by
the town from any and all sources. This fund is to be known by the following
title and designation: special project fund.
   (C)   Revenue from the State of Indiana, from the Build Indiana Funds, from
grants and donations may go into this fund. Transfers from existing town funds,
including the general fund, the cumulative capital development (CCD) fund and
the cumulative capital improvement (CCI) fund are permitted to the extent
authorized by law.
   (D)   This fund shall be a non-reverting fund of the town. It shall
terminate upon the enactment of a subsequent ordinance which determines the
existence of the fund is no longer needed because the sidewalks have been
installed and there is no expectation of receipt of special projects funds or
because there are no longer monies in the fund.
   (E)   Funds received by the town for sidewalks or from the Build Indiana
Funds of the state shall be deposited into the fund.
   (F)   The Town Council hereby authorizes the disbursement of funds to pay
the expenses incurred in relation to the installation of sidewalks or for all
similar expenses related to the purposes specified herein or for other similar
special projects or by the donors of specific gifts related to this fund.
   (G)   An accurate accounting shall be maintained of all disbursements and
credits and all transactions involving this fund shall be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer as an official record of the town. The money shall not be
commingled with other monies of the town.
(Ord. 2000-03, passed 4-17-2000)
§ 35.05 RAINY DAY FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby establishing a rainy day fund to receive transfers of
unused and unencumbered funds raised by a general or special tax levy on
taxable property within the town whenever the purpose of the tax levy has been
fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered balance remains.
   (B)   The funds on deposit in the rainy day fund may be used for the
operation of the town, when the town does not have sufficient levies or funds
to pay the costs including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, costs of
services, supplies, equipment, capital improvements, repairs and similar
expenditures.
   (C)    The Town Council may determine the amount, if any, of any unused and
unencumbered funds, permitted by law, from any fiscal year to the rainy day
fund. The Town Council may also transfer any other unobligated cash balances
from any fiscal year to the rainy day fund, subject to the requirements and
limitations in state law.
   (D)   The Town Council may authorize the expenditure of funds from the rainy
day fund by appropriation made in the same manner as other funds that receive
tax money, upon finding that the proposed use is consistent with the intent of
the fund.
(Ord. 01-06, passed 12-17-2001; Am. Ord. 2025-02, passed 2-18-2025)
§ 35.06 HAZARD MITIGATION; EMERGENCY POWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   There is hereby created a fund for the hazard mitigation emergency
power system grant fund for the town for the purpose of acquiring, installing,
operating and maintaining the emergency generator or emergency power system for
the town. These funds may also be used to pay the town's share of grant
contributions and to receive and disburse grant revenue from any and all
sources and to receive operating funds for the emergency generator from any and
all sources. This fund is to be known by the following title and designation:
emergency generator grant fund.
   (B)   Revenue from grants and donations may go into this fund. Transfers
from existing town funds, including the general fund and the cumulative capital
improvement (CCI) fund are permitted to the extent authorized by law.
   (C)   This fund shall be a non-reverting fund of the town. It shall
terminate upon the enactment of a subsequent ordinance which determines the
existence of the fund is no longer needed because the system has been installed
and is operating or because there are no longer monies in the fund.
   (D)   Funds received by the town for the emergency generator power system
shall be deposited into the fund.
   (E)   The Town Council hereby authorizes the disbursement of funds to pay
the town's share of acquisition and may pay expenses incurred in relation to
the installation, operation and maintenance of the emergency generator power
system or for all similar expenses related to the purposes specified herein or
by the donors of specific gifts related to this fund.
   (F)   An accurate accounting shall be maintained of all disbursements and
credits and all transactions involving this fund shall be maintained by the
Clerk-Treasurer as an official record of the town. The money shall not be
commingled with other monies of the town.
(Ord. 99-05, passed 8-6-1999)
§ 35.07 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   The Town Council hereby re-establishes the Cumulative Capital Development
Fund pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-41 et seq., to be used for the purposes allowed and
set forth in I.C. 36-9-15.5 et seq.
(Ord. 2011-07, passed 7-18-2011; Am. Ord. 2013-1, passed 3-18-2013; Am. Ord.
2014-03, passed 7-21-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-04, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 35.08 TOWN PROMOTION FUND.
   (A)   A fund entitled town promotion is hereby established. This fund is
established for the purpose of paying expenses of or to reimburse town
officials or to pay for expenses incurred in promoting the best interest of the
town including, but not limited to, those expenditures listed in division (B)
below.
   (B)   Expenditures from the town promotion fund may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   The rental of meeting places, meals, decorations, memorabilia,
awards, expense incurred in interviewing job applicants, expenses incurred in
promoting industrial, commercial and residential development, expenses incurred
in developing relations with other units of governments, in the promotion of
tourism and goodwill of the town's employees and any other expenses of a
specific or governmental nature deemed by the Town Council to be in the
interest of the town;
      (2)   For the cost, expenses and contributions incurred in the
participation in grants, grant-in-aid, grant applications, foundation awards,
matching fund participation and other costs, fees, expenses or contributions
made or incurred in joint participation with other units of government,
foundations, not-for-profit corporations and groups in the securing of funding
or participation in any manner in any program, application or commitment
whether in kind, of a matching nature or percentage basis which shall result in
infrastructure improvements to the town or the community or assets or property
within the community of a specific, quasi-governmental or governmental nature
deemed by the Town Council to be in the interest of the town; and
      (3)   Illustrative of the expenditures approved by this section, include,
but are not limited to the following: commemorative plaques, certificates or
objects such as commemorative keys; employee appreciation; and expenses
incurred due to the participation in local, regional, state and national
associations of a civic, educational or governmental nature which expense shall
have as its purpose the betterment of the town or the town's operations; and
expenses incurred due the participation in grant applications, grant-in-aid
applications with other governmental agencies, units of government,
foundations, not-for-profit agencies and groups to secure grants, grant-in-aid
or program participation of a civic, educational or governmental nature which
expense shall have as its purpose the betterment, improvement or acquisition of
town or community property, services or operations.
   (C)   This section establishing a promotional fund shall have no limiting
effect or otherwise upon any other fund of the town including printing and
advertising, meeting room rental, subscription and dues, traveling expenses and
any other similar fund, line item or account of the town.
(Ord. 96-05, passed 6-15-1996)
§ 35.09 TRAIN STATION RENOVATION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special non-reverting account for the use of
the town for the purposes of renovation, building, remodeling, furnishing,
equipping, decorating and funding the Beverly Shores train station, museum and/
or history room as a separate non-reverting fund known as the Beverly Shores
train station renovation fund.
   (B)   The Beverly Shores train station renovation fund is a donation fund
and shall be a non-reverting fund not subject to appropriations pursuant to
Indiana Code.
   (C)   Funds received by the town for train station renovation and related
purposes shall be deposited into the fund.
   (D)   The Town Council may accept and approve claims against the funds to
defray costs and pay expenses incurred in relation to train station renovation,
building, remodeling, furnishing, equipping, decorating and funding all aspects
of the train station, museum and/or history room and all related and similar
costs and uses including those stated within this section or for similar
expenses related to the purposes specified hereby or by the donors of the
specific gifts related to this fund.
   (E)   An accurate accounting shall be maintained for credits and approved
claims as debts and maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer as an official record of
the town. The money shall not be commingled with other monies of the town.
(Ord. 96-11, passed 12-16-1996)
§ 35.10 BOND AND INTEREST.
   (A)   There is hereby established among the various funds of the town a bond
and interest fund to be utilized by the town in the manner in which all other
funds of the town are used.
   (B)   All necessary disbursements and transfers necessary and consistent
with the use of the bond and interest fund are hereby approved and authorized
by the Town Council including that necessary for the debt services fund to be
closed.
   (C)   An accurate accounting shall be maintained for credits and approved
claims as debits and maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer of the town as an
official record of the town. Any funds placed into this bond and interest fund,
if any, shall not be commingled with other monies of the town.
(Ord. 97-04A, passed 3-17-1997)
§ 35.11 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   A cumulative capital improvement fund be continued together with a levy of
$0.05 on each $200 of taxable property to be used for the purposes allowed and
set forth in I.C. 6-7-1-31.1, 36-9-16-2 and 36-9- 16-3.
(Ord. 119, passed 5-19-1975 (84-23); Am. Ord. 2019-04, passed 4-16-2019)
§ 35.12 MAJOR MOVES CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   (A)   A cumulative major moves construction fund is hereby established.
   (B)   Such funds shall be funded by revenues distributed to the town in
accordance with I.C. 8-14-14-6(a)(3).
   (C)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall open an account named the major moves
construction fund for Beverly Shores.
   (D)   Funds received by the town as part of the major moves construction
fund shall be used and dedicated by the Town Council pursuant to I.C. 8-14-16-
5, including any amendments therein, as follows:
      (1)   Construction of highways, roads and bridges.
      (2)   As long as Porter County is a member of the Northwest Indiana
Regional Development Authority, fund money may be expended for any purpose for
which the Regional Development Authority may expend money under I.C. 36-7.5.
      (3)   Provide funding for economic development projects as defined in
I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.1(c)(1) or I.C. 6-3.5-7-13.1(c)(2)(A) through 6-3.5-7-13.1(c)
(2)(K).
      (4)   Provide matching funds for federal grants for any of these
permissible uses of major moves construction fund money.
      (5)   Provide funding for interlocal agreements under I.C. 36-1-7 for any
of these permissible uses of major move construction fund money.
(Ord. 06-09, passed 10-16-2006)
§ 35.13 RESTRICTED NON-REVERTING GARBAGE AND RECYCLING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a fund called the Beverly Shores Restricted
Non-Reverting Garbage and Recycling Fund (Fund) for the receipt of revenues and
payment of expenses related to the picking up and disposing of garbage and
recyclables.
   (B)   Beginning on January 1, 2012, all annual fees and any earnings thereon
be credited to that Fund.
   (C)   Any funds, and any earnings thereon, credited to the Fund shall only
be expended for the purpose of paying expenses related to or arising out of the
picking up and disposing of garbage and recyclables; the billing, collection,
receipting, and accounting of the Fund’s revenues and expenses; paying the
vendors retained by the town from time to time to pick-up and dispose of the
garbage and recyclables; and payment of vendors and consultants for services
related to accomplishing the purposes of the Fund.
   (D)   Any expenditures from the Fund must be appropriated by the Town
Council either in an annual budget or as an additional appropriation.
(Ord. 11-20, passed 3-19-2011)
§ 35.14 LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND (FUND 257).
   (A)   The LOIT special distribution fund (Fund 257) is hereby created for
the receipt of 75% of the one-time distribution of the local income tax
pursuant to Senate Enrolled Act 67.
   (B)   Funds deposited into the LOIT special distribution fund (Fund 257) may
only be used for the following purposes:
      (1)   Engineering, land acquisition, construction, resurfacing,
maintenance, restoration, or rehabilitation of both local and arterial road and
street systems;
      (2)   The payment of principal and interest on bonds sold primarily to
finance road, street, or thoroughfare projects;
      (3)   Any local costs required to undertake a recreational or reservoir
road project under I.C. 8-23-5;
      (4)   The purchase, rental, or repair of highway equipment; or
      (5)   Providing a local match for the INDOT Local Road and Bridge
Matching Grant.
(Ord. 2016-03, passed 5-16-2016)
§ 35.15 GIFT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created the “Town of Beverly Shores Gift Fund,” which
shall be a non-reverting fund. The fund shall be used to receive and hold all
money and other property which shall be received by the town as gifts, and
accepted by the Town Council.
   (B)   Any gifts which are restricted or designated to a certain purpose in
any manner shall be utilized only for such purpose and shall be maintained by
the Clerk-Treasurer of the town in separate ledger accounts to designate such
purpose or use. Pursuant to Indiana Attorney General Opinion No. 68 of 1961,
any such funds may be spent to satisfy a valid claim or voucher, without
additional appropriation. Any unrestricted gifts of money may be co-mingled
with all other general funds, and are subject to additional appropriation.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby specifically authorized to invest such
funds with, or separately from, the remainder of the general fund in any
suitable manner as is now provided by state statute and/or ordinance.
(Ord. 2016-07, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 35.16 LOCAL ROAD AND BRIDGE MATCHING GRANT FUND (FUND 447).
   (A)   There is hereby established a special fund to be designated as “Fund
447, Local Road and Bridge Matching Grant Fund.”
   (B)   The Town Council has determined that it has a surplus of funds in its
“Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund (409),” which funds are equivalent to the
amount for the local match, and desires to transfer said funds accordingly.
(Ord. 2017-03, passed 2-20-2017)
§ 35.17 INVESTMENTS FUND (555).
   There is hereby established a special fund to be designated as “Fund 555,
Investments Fund.” The fund shall be used to record the net price of the
investments.
(Ord. 2017-08, passed 9-18-2017)
§ 35.18 INVESTMENTS FUND (556).
   There is hereby established a special fund to be designated as “Fund 556,
Investments Fund.” The fund shall be used to record the net price of the
investments.
(Ord. 2017-09, passed 9-18-2017)
§ 35.19 LAKE MICHIGAN COASTAL PROGRAM GRANT (FUND 223).
   There is hereby established a special fund to be designated as Fund (223)
Lake Michigan Coastal Program Grant. Funds are hereby transferred from GO BOND
2017 to Lake Michigan Coastal Program Grant (223) in the amount of $17,000.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 1-15-2019)
§ 35.20 ROADS AND CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND (448).
   There is hereby established the Roads and Capital Improvements Fund (448)
for the purpose throughout the town of the cost of road improvements and
various other capital projects of the town.
(Ord. 2020-14, passed 8-18-2020)
§ 35.21 ARP CORONAVIRUS LOCAL FISCAL RECOVERY FUND (FUND 2407).
   (A)   The Town Council hereby creates Fund 2407 which shall be titled the
“ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery Fund.” This fund shall be a non-
reverting fund and shall be the designated fund for all assistance received by
the Town of Beverly Shores from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021.
   (B)   The Town Council hereby states that expenditures from Fund 2407 should
be used solely for the following purposes as permitted by § 603(c) of the
Social Security Act:
      (1)   To respond to the public health emergency with respect to the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) or its negative economic impacts, including
assistance to households, small businesses, and nonprofits, or aid to impacted
industries such as tourism, travel, and hospitality;
      (2)   To respond to workers performing essential work during the COVID-19
public health emergency by providing premium pay to eligible workers of the
metropolitan city, nonentitlement unit of local government, or county that are
performing such essential work, or by providing grants to eligible employers
that have eligible workers who perform essential work;
      (3)   For the provision of government services to the extent of the
reduction in revenue of such metropolitan city, nonentitlement unit of local
government, or county due to the COVID-19 public health emergency relative to
revenues collected in the most recent full fiscal year of the metropolitan
city, nonentitlement unit of local government, or county prior to the
emergency; or
      (4)   To make necessary investments in water, sewer, or broadband
infrastructure.
   (C)   (1)   The town’s plan for distribution of the grant funds are as
follows:
         (a)   The payments identified in the plan and future amendments to the
plan shall be authorized use of the grant funds.
         (b)   The plan may be amended to comply with the Act, any subsequent
amendments to the Act, rules adopted by the U.S. Treasury Department including
31 CFR Part 35, or at the discretion of the Council, to the extent provided by
the Act.
         (c)   The payment of all grant funds and any subsequent grant funds
received pursuant to the Act shall be subject to appropriation by the Council.
         (d)   The plan’s procedures and designated used for distribution of
the grant funds from the Act are stated as follows in the divisions below.
      (2)   Recovering lost revenue due to COVID-19.
         (a)   The Town Council elects to use the “standard allowance” as
indicated in the Final Rule by the US Treasury, up to the grant amount, not to
exceed $10,000,000 on government services.
         (b)   The list of permitted uses shall be as listed on page 11 of the
guide entitled Coronavirus State & Local Fiscal Recovery Funds: Overview of the
Final Rule (the Guide) issued by the US Department of Treasury in January 2022,
and any future guidance released by the US Department of Treasury.
         (c)   The Town Council shall exclude all ineligible uses listed in the
“Restrictions on Use” section of the Guide as listed on page 41 and 42.
         (d)   Funds are subject to change and amendments to the plan for the
use of loss revenue funds shall be considered by the Council upon request from
the administration of subject to the Act itself.
      (3)   Conclusion.
         (a)   Pursuant to the Act, the town shall only use grant funds
obligated prior to December 31, 2024.
         (b)   The period of performance for projects funded by the grant funds
shall conclude on December 31, 2026; all projects funded by grant funds must be
completed on or prior to the date.
         (c)   This section is subject to amendments as more permitted uses are
determined by the Act, United States Treasury Department guidance, and as
priorities for the town develop.
         (d)   This section shall be in full force and effective upon passage
and may be subsequently amended to conform with the Act.
(Ord. 2021-07, passed 4-20-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-03, passed 5-17-2022)
§ 35.22 LAKE MICHIGAN COASTAL PROGRAM GRANT FUND (FUND 225).
   (A)   The Town Council hereby creates Fund 225, which shall be titled the
“Lake Michigan Coastal Program Grant Fund.” This fund shall be a non-reverting
fund and shall be the designated fund for all assistance received by the Town
of Beverly Shores from the DNR under Contract #00052332.
   (B)   The Town Council hereby states that expenditures from Fund 225 should
be used solely for the purposes set forth in Contract #00052332, a copy of
which is attached to Ord. 2021-14.
(Ord. 2021-14, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 35.23 LITUANICA PARK IMPROVEMENT PROJECT GRANT FUND (FUND 2409).
   (A)   The Town Council hereby creates Fund 2409 which shall be titled the
“Lituanica Park Improvement Project Grant Fund.” This fund shall be a non-
reverting fund and shall be the designated fund for all assistance received by
the Town of Beverly Shores from the IHCDA under “Lituanica Park Improvement
Project.”
   (B)   The Town Council hereby states that expenditures from Fund 2409 should
be used solely for the purposes set forth in Lituanica Park Improvement
Project, a copy of which is attached to Ord. 2024-05.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 10-15-2024)
§ 35.24 LAKE MICHIGAN COASTAL PROGRAM GRANT FUND (FUND 2408).
   (A)   The Town Council hereby creates Fund 2408 which shall be titled the
“Lake Michigan Coastal Program Grant Fund.” This fund shall be a non-reverting
fund and shall be the designated fund for all assistance received by the Town
of Beverly Shores from the DNR under Contract #0000000000000000000088238.
   (B)   The Town Council hereby states that expenditures from Fund 2408 should
be used solely for the purposes set forth in Contract
#0000000000000000000088238, a copy of which is attached to Ord. 2024-08.
(Ord. 2024-08, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 35.25 TOWN CLEAN-UP FUND (FUND 2502).
   (A)   There is hereby established a separate and distinct fund to be known
as the "Town Clean- Up Fund" (hereinafter referred to as the "fund"). This fund
shall be maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with all applicable
laws and regulations governing the management of public funds.
   (B)   The purpose of the fund shall be to receive, hold, and expend
donations for the sole purpose of supporting and facilitating town-wide clean-
up initiatives within the Town of Beverly Shores.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 36: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
Section
   
36.01   Bureau established; Clerk-Treasurer designated
   
36.02   Admission or denial of violation; right to trial; fines
   
36.03   Election to prosecute as infraction
   
36.04   Schedule of fines adopted by reference
 
Cross-reference:
   General fine, see §
10.97
   Fine schedule, see §
10.98
§ 36.01 BUREAU ESTABLISHED; CLERK-TREASURER DESIGNATED.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 33-36-2-1 an Ordinance Violations Bureau is
established.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer or his or her designee shall be appointed
Violations Clerk of the Ordinance Violations Bureau to be the Administrator of
the Bureau.
   (C)   Sections 10.97 and 10.98 contain the schedule of fines for violations
of the Town Code of Ordinances that are subject to admission of violation
before the Violations Clerk and the amount of the fine to be assessed a
violator who elects to admit a violation under the provisions of the Town Code
of Ordinances.
(Ord. 94-06, passed 11-14-1994; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-19-2012; Am. Ord.
2013-02, passed 4-5-2013)
§ 36.02 ADMISSION OR DENIAL OF VIOLATION; RIGHT TO TRIAL; FINES.
   (A)   (1)   In the event a person charged with a speed limit, stop sign or
U-turn violation under the Town Code of Ordinances pays the appropriate fine
set forth in §
10.98 within 30 days from the date that person is cited, the violation will not
be reported to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
      (2)   In the event a person charged with a violation under the Town Code
of Ordinances does not pay the appropriate fine set forth in §§
10.97 or
10.98 within 30 days from the date that person is cited, the matter may be
filed as a complaint with the Porter County Superior Court unless that person
enters a written denial of the violation in accordance with division (C) below.
      (3)   Except for a speed limit, stop sign, U-turn or parking violation,
any subsequent violation of the same provision of the Town Code of Ordinances
by the same person may be subject to the general penalty provisions of §
10.97 of the Town Code.
   (B)   Fines shall be paid to, receipted and accounted for by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer under procedures provided for by the State Board of Accounts. Payment
of fines and penalties under this chapter may be made in person, by mail, or to
an agent or agents designated by the Town Council.
   (C)   Procedure to contest a violation.
      (1)   A person charged with an ordinance violation under this chapter who
contests the violation shall file a written denial of the violation with the
Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days after the date of the violation was issued. The
denial shall include the violation number, the name, address and telephone
number of the person charged, and the basis for the denial.
      (2)   The Town Council will review the denial of the violation and shall
notify the violator that the Town Council shall conduct a public hearing
concerning the denial of the violation and that the violator has the right to
appear at the public hearing and present evidence. After the public hearing,
the Town Council may either uphold the issuance of the violation, dismiss the
violation or continue the matter for further consideration and determination at
a later date.
      (3)   If the Town Council upholds the violation, a written notice will be
mailed to the person charged with the violation under the Town Code of
Ordinances and that person will have 30 days from the date of mailing to pay
the fine. If the person charged with a violation under the Town Code of
Ordinances does not pay the fine within 30 days after the date of the mailing
of the Town Council’s upholding the violation, the matter may be filed as a
complaint in the Porter County Superior Court.
(Ord. 94-06, passed 11-14-1994; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-19-2012; Am. Ord.
2013-02, passed 4-5-2013)
§ 36.03 ELECTION TO PROSECUTE AS INFRACTION.
   (A)   In the event a person charged with a violation for conduct which also
violates a state statute elects to contest that violation in a court of
competent jurisdiction, the Town Marshal is authorized to amend the Town Code
of Ordinances violation into a state statute violation.
   (B)   Thereafter, the amended violation shall be prosecuted, pursuant to
state law, by the County Prosecutor.
(Ord. 94-06, passed 11-14-1994; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-19-2012; Am. Ord.
2013-02, passed 4-5-2013)
§ 36.04 SCHEDULE OF FINES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The schedule of fines, copies of which are on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 94-06, passed 11-14-1994)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   WATER
      
51.   GARBAGE
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
   
50.01   Water supply distribution system
   
50.02   Access fees; fund
   
50.03   Storm water management runoff policy
 
Cross-reference:
   Town ownership of all inspected and approved street and water main
extensions, see §
155.182
§ 50.01 WATER SUPPLY DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
   (A)   There is no other water utility operating within the town and the
adjacent or nearest contiguous water utilities are the Michigan City Water
Utility and the Indiana American Water Company.
   (B)   As a matter of convenience and necessity the town should establish a
water supply distribution system and create a utility for this purpose.
   (C)   The town recognizes that the utility establishment, operation and rate
making will be subject to regulation by the Indiana Utility Regulatory
Commission, and the construction and operation is subject to regulation by the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management and the Federal Safe Drinking
Water Act.
   (D)   The Town Council declares that it will move forward to establish a
water distribution utility for the benefit of the community.
   (E)   The Town Council determines that it will take the following steps to
further progress toward establishing a water distribution utility for the Town
of Beverly Shores, Indiana, intended to culminate in the Confirmatory Ordinance
Declaring Public Convenience and Necessity to establish and construct a like
utility:
      (1)   The Town Council, by this section, does make a preliminary
determination that as a matter of public convenience and necessity the town
shall establish a water supply distribution utility;
      (2)   The Town Council will determine the appropriation of funds for
preliminary expenses;
      (3)   The town shall formulate a petition to the Indiana Utility
Regulatory Commission;
      (4)   The town will complete all engineering and other submissions and
undertakings necessary to obtain funds from the state revolving loan fund and
any and all other sources; and
      (5)   The town will undertake to contact NIPSCO and any other utility or
entity using easements or rights-of-way in the town to explore the coordination
of underground installations should construction of a water supply system
occur.
   (F)   The Town Council declares that this section makes a preliminary
determination of public convenience and necessity but a final determination
shall be made by a separate ordinance either confirming the declaration and
moving forward with construction and acquisition or to the contrary.
   (G)   The Town Council declares that the town water utility shall be removed
from the jurisdiction of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission for approval
of rates and charges, and of the issuance of stocks, bonds, notes or other
evidence of indebtedness.
(Ord. 00-08, passed 11-13-2000; Am. Ord. 08-01, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 08-
04, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 50.02 ACCESS FEES; FUND.
   (A)   There is created a special non-reverting account for the use of the
Town of Beverly Shores for the purposes a water distribution system and all
related expenses, the account to be a separate non-reverting fund known as the
Beverly Shores water system access fee fund (access fund).
   (B)   The water system access fund is a separate, stand-alone fund, and
shall be a non-reverting fund not subject to appropriations pursuant to the
Indiana Code.
   (C)   (1)   Funds received by the town for the privilege of tapping into the
water distribution system and related funds, including donations, shall be
deposited into the fund.
      (2)   The town receives quarterly reimbursements, calculated as 50% of
metered revenue less expenses, from Michigan City Department of Water Works
(MCDOWW). The installation and construction of the Town of Beverly Shores
municipal water system caused damage to roads within the town. Therefore,
monies recouped from MCDOWW are to be deposited in the Beverly Shores local
road and street fund instead of the Beverly Shores water system access fund.
   (D)   (1)   The Town Council establishes the initial schedule of access
fees, which may be amended from time to time by the Town Council, to require
receipt of a payment of $3,000 as an access fee, if received before August 1,
2003.
      (2)   After August 1, 2003, the fee will increase to $3,500 and will
continue to increase annually as set forth in the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to receive these payments and
deposit them in the fund established hereby.
      (4)   The amount is equivalent to the average to be paid by property
owners over 20 years.
      (5)   Homeowners have the option of up-sizing service, during
installation, from a 3/4-inch/5/8-inch meter to a 1-inch meter at a cost
determined by, and payable to, the Michigan City Municipal Water Department.
      (6)   A 1-inch meter is deemed to be useful for homes located at high
elevations or for those using large quantities of water outdoors.
      (7)   Upon proper application and approval by the town, a prospective
customer may have a water meter installed that is larger than 1 inch but not
larger than 6 inches as long as the town, after consultation with the Michigan
City Water Department, finds that there is sufficient capacity in the water
system at the proposed location of the meter installation so that the water
service to other town customers, both current and those that are reasonably
foreseeable, will not be adversely affected.
      (8)   Payments collected would be deposited in water access fund.
      (9)   The Town Council hereby establishes an access fee, as set forth in
the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99, for the Northern Indiana Commuter Transportation District (NICTD), which
owns and leases the train station to the town. The town uses a portion of the
train station as a gift shop, museum and art gallery.
   (E)   (1)   The Town Council may accept and approve claims against the funds
to defray costs and pay expenses incurred in relation to initial and/or all
other costs of putting a water distribution system into place and into
operation, and other similar or associated uses; including but not limited to,
engineering fees, consulting, legal, accounting, administration, construction
and/or acquisition fees, costs, charges and/or expenses, including appraisals
and for other or similar expenses related to the purposes specified herein or
by the donors of any specific gifts given to this fund.
      (2)   Administration costs are provided for as a legitimate expense that
may be paid by the funds in this account and shall include administrative,
clerical and labor costs.
      (3)   Clerical, administration and labor costs shall be evidenced by time
records to show the amount of time allocated to time spent on the water system
and the nature of work performed for these disbursements and outlay. The time
records need not be made or kept contemporaneously, but must fairly represent
and show time actually attributable to work, time and attention given to water
system matters.
      (4)   These funds may also be used for the capital cost of hooking up the
administration building of the Town of Beverly Shores (Town Hall building),
Lituanica Park, Rebora Plaza and Four Corners to provide a drinking water
connection to those sites.
      (5)   Allowance for payment of claims for administrative, clerical and
labor costs is effective for time retroactive to January 1, 2004.
      (6)   The debt service fund is to be lowered by making lease payments
from the Beverly Shores water system access fund, a non-reverting fund within
the funds of the town as recommended by the Indiana Department of Local
Government Finance (IDLGF). The lease payments from the debt service fund are
to begin in 2007. At least 1 lease payment will be reserved in the Beverly
Shores water system access fund.
   (F)   (1)   An accurate accounting shall be maintained for credits and
approved claims as debits and maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer as an official
record of the Town of Beverly Shores.
      (2)   The money shall not be commingled with other monies of the Town of
Beverly Shores.
   (G)   (1)   This fund is intended to be established in accordance with the
laws of the State of Indiana and the accounting directives of the Indiana State
Board of Accounts, and is intended to serve as a sinking, non-reverting fund
for the purposes of a water distribution system for the Town of Beverly Shores.
      (2)   The access fee is intended to be a just and equitable fee as
recommended by accounting and engineering consultants.
(Ord. 03-04, passed 6-1-2003; Am. Ord. 04-05, passed 10-18-2004; Am. Ord. 06-
06, passed 9-18-2006; Am. Ord. 08-04, passed 5-19-2008; Am. Ord. 11-22, passed
11-21-2011)
§ 50.03 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT RUNOFF POLICY.
   (A)   The Town Council resolves that the impact of storm water runoff from
all developed or developing territory located within the town should be
considered in public and private projects alike within the town by weighing the
risks, benefits and costs to the property owners affected and general public as
a whole.
   (B)   Furthermore, the town declares that the town’s code and enactments
shall be applied so that no erosion by wind or water, nor storm water run-off
shall be permitted that will carry objectionable substances onto neighboring
properties or threaten or cause damage to neighboring properties.
(Res. 2000-05, passed 12-12-2000; Am. Ord. 08-04, passed 5-19-2008)
CHAPTER 51: GARBAGE
Section
   
51.01   Fees and billing
   
51.02   User requirements in storage, collection and disposal
   
51.03   Fund for garbage and recycling revenues and costs
 
   
51.99   Penalty
§ 51.01 FEES AND BILLING.
   (A)   Establishment of user fees
      (1)   Beginning January 1, 1984, an equitable charge, which may be
amended from time to time by the Town Council, will be made to each taxpayer of
improved property within the civil town for the expense of garbage and refuse
removal as per division (B) below.
      (2)   Billings will be made by the town, to the address of record of each
improved property owner prior to January 1 and of the ensuing year. Bills shall
be paid in full within 30 days of the billing date.
      (3)   (a)   The Town Council will determine and establish, by ordinance,
fees for single- and multiple-family residences.
         (b)   Multiple-family residences will be charged the basic fee for a
single-family residence plus an additional fee for each additional living unit.
      (4)   All established rates will be reviewed annually and adjusted as
required for the following year. An administrative and maintenance cost is
included in the fee.
      (5)   A unit charge for single-family residents is hereby established per
the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
      (6)   Duplex dwellings and apartment units will be charged for the first
unit and for each additional living in addition to the first unit for which a
rental fee is collected, per the Town Fee Schedule.
      (7)   Commercial property located in an area of the town that is zoned
commercial shall be exempt from any liability to the town for the annual
garbage collection, disposal and recycling fee imposed under Town Ordinance 84-
38, as amended. Commercial units in a commercial zone will be required to
contract with a disposal company for garbage, disposal and recycling services.
      (8)   The waste disposal fees are based on ownership and not volume. In
all cases where a fee is charged the ultimate responsible party shall be the
property owner of record.
      (9)   Yearly fees for garbage and refuse service are set forth in the
Town Fee Schedule.
      (10)   Owners of residential property outside of the boundaries of the
civil town ("outside users") may be permitted to utilize the town's garbage and
recycling contract services, subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The property must be a single-family or multiple-family
residence;
         (b)   The property must have a "Beverly Shores" street address or be
immediately adjacent to the corporate boundaries of the town;
         (c)   The property owner or tenant must sign an agreement to pay the
applicable fees, including the additional fee for "outside users," as the Town
Council will determine and establish by ordinance;
         (d)   The property owner or tenant must pay the applicable fees; and
         (e)   The property owner or tenant must comply with the requirements
of §
51.02.
   (B)   Fee; billing, revenue and delinquency.
      (1)   Beginning January 1, 1983 an equitable charge will be made to each
taxpayer of improved property within the civil town for the expense of garbage
and refuse removal.
      (2)   The Town Council will determine and establish, by resolution fees
for single and multiple-family residences. Multiple-family residences will be
charged the basic fee for a single-family residence and the established fee, by
resolution for each additional living unit.
      (3)   (a)   Commercial units will not be charged a fee if they provide
proof of contract with a disposal company for the use of a dumpster to dispose
of garbage.
         (b)   When proof is not provided, the Town Council, by resolution,
will determine a unit rate for same and make it a matter of record. All
established rates will be reviewed annually at budget time and adjusted as
required for the following year.
      (4)   Billings will be made by the town, to the address of record of each
improved property owner prior to January 1 of the ensuing year.
      (5)   Bills shall be paid in full within 30 days of the billing date.
Delinquent payments will be subject to a penalty charge of 10% of the amount
due and a reasonable attorney's fee and may be recovered in a civil action in
the name of the Town of Beverly Shores as per I.C. 36-9-25-11 and I.C. 36-9-30-
21.
      (6)   (a)   Revenue from billings will be accrued in the general fund.
Payments of all costs incident to the service will be made from this fund.
         (b)   Any surplus or deficit accumulating in the fund will be applied
to the estimated costs for the ensuing year, and considered in setting the unit
charge for that year. The objective of this procedure is to liquidate all costs
in the revenue year and limit long term accrual in the fund.
(Ord. 94-06, passed 11-14-1994; Am. Ord. 194, passed 10-7-1982 (84-37); Am.
Ord. 207, passed 12-19-1983 (84-38); Am. Ord. 05-12, passed 12-19-2005; Am.
Ord. 09-11, passed 11-19-2009; Am. Ord. 10-10, passed 11-30-2010; Am. Ord.
2024-09, passed 12-17-2024)
§ 51.02 USER REQUIREMENTS IN STORAGE, COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and
unsightly conditions in the Town of Beverly Shores, caused by the deposit and
accumulation of refuse, garbage and rubbish.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONTAINER. A container for the storage of garbage, refuse or rubbish
which is:
         (a)   Provided with a handle and tight fitting cover;
         (b)   Watertight;
         (c)   Substantially made of galvanized iron or other non-rusting
material; and
         (d)   Of a size that may be conveniently handled by the collector, but
of a capacity not less than 10 gallons or more than 20 gallons.
      ENCLOSURE. 
         (a)   A wood, metal, plastic or natural vegetation (or combination of
same) structure.
         (b)   The sole purpose of the ENCLOSURE shall be to hold garbage
containers. It shall be constructed in a way so that:
            1.   Garbage containers can be easily removed by collectors;
            2.   It is pleasing to the eye and blends with adjacent structures
and surroundings; and so that no more than 25% of the garbage cans are visible
from the road or street obstructing the property on which the cans are located;
            3.   It is no more than 8 feet in length and 3 feet in both height
and width;
            4.   It is located no less than 4 feet from the edge of the
traveled portion of the street, but does not interfere with traffic and public
service;
            5.   It is designed to minimize unsanitary conditions; and
            6.   It is located in front of or adjacent to the owner's property
and in a manner so as not to interfere with an adjoining owner's use of his or
her property.
      GARBAGE. Includes all animal, fruit, vegetable and other waste resulting
from the preparation of food and drink.
      PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, corporation, trust or any other
organized group, or any governmental unit.
      REFUSE. Includes all garbage, rubbish, ashes or other substances
offensive to sight or smell, including but not limited to dead animals
including fish.
      RUBBISH. Includes all other refuse not falling within the term GARBAGE,
except those objects too large to be placed in cans.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of all owners and occupants of premises in the
Town of Beverly Shores to keep the same free at all times from other than
normal accumulations of refuse, garbage and rubbish, provided that the Police
Department will notify owners or occupants to remove other than normal
accumulations within a specified period of time and that failure to do so shall
be a violation of the terms and conditions of this section.
   (D)   No person shall permit garbage, refuse or rubbish to accumulate upon
premises owned or occupied by him or her unless it is stored and kept in
containers.
   (E)   All premises where garbage, refuse or rubbish accumulates shall be
provided by the owner or occupant thereof with containers. Containers shall be
kept covered and reasonably clean at all times.
   (F)   (1)   No containers (with or without garbage) shall be left along side
a street or alley, any other day except the day of garbage collection, unless
they are inside a permanently built enclosure.
      (2)   They shall be placed along side of, but not in, the alley or street
along which the collection truck will travel to collect the same and in a
position readily accessible to the collector, or at other locations as the
Street Commissioner shall designate.
   (G)   All out of the ordinary accumulations of refuse, such as those
resulting from the operation of a business, or from construction, repair or
remodeling shall not be handled by the town.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any items other than
ordinary household garbage and refuse into any receptacles provided by the
town.
   (I)   (1)   The town, at its discretion, shall pick up and remove other
types and classes of refuse too large to be placed in containers.
      (2)   Refuse shall include any items as would ordinarily be accumulated
by an average family living in an ordinary lot or plot of ground, provided the
refuse is placed in areas designated by the Town Council.
(Ord. 130, passed 8-30-1976; Am. Ord. 78, passed 4-16-1979; Am. Ord. 89-10,
passed 9-18-1989) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 FUND FOR GARBAGE AND RECYCLING REVENUES AND COSTS.
   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer hereby creates a fund called the Beverly
Shores Restricted Non- Reverting Garbage and Recycling Fund (the “fund”) for
the receipt of revenues and payment of expenses related to the pickup and
disposing of garbage and recyclables.
   (B)   Beginning on January 1, 2010, all annual fees and any earnings thereon
shall be credited to the fund.
   (C)   Any funds, and any earnings thereon, credited to the fund shall only
be expended for the purpose of paying expenses related to or arising out of the
picking up and disposing of garbage and recyclables; the billing, collection,
receipting, and accounting of the fund’s revenues and expenses; paying the
vendors retained by the town from time to time to pick-up and dispose of the
garbage and recyclables; and payment of vendors and consultants for services
related to accomplishing the purposes of the fund.
   (D)   Any expenditures from the fund must be appropriated by the Town
Council either in an annual budge or as an additional appropriation.
(Res. 11-06, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.97.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating or failing to comply with §
51.02(F) shall be guilty of an infraction and be liable for a penalty of $25.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any other terms or provisions of
§
51.02 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction be liable to
a penalty of a minimum of $10 and a maximum of $2,500, which may be amended
from time to time by the Town Council.
      (2)   Any violation continuing for more than 1 day shall be deemed a
separate and distinct violation for each day it continues and the violation of
each and every provision hereof shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct
offense.
(Am. Ord. 89-10, passed 9-18-1989; Am. Ord. 10-09, passed 11-30-2010)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; VEHICLE OPERATION
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS; VEHICLE OPERATION
Section
   
70.01   U-turns
   
70.02   Use of town roads by unlicensed motorized vehicles
   
70.03   Frost law limitations
   
70.04   Open alcoholic beverage containers
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 U-TURNS.
   (A)   No U-turn shall be permitted by any motor vehicle in, at or on the
intersection of Beverly Drive and Broadway in the Town of Beverly Shores.
   (B)   Five dollars of every fine collected as a result of a U-turn violation
shall be deposited into the Law Enforcement Education Fund.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1); Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-5-2013) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 70.02 USE OF TOWN ROADS BY UNLICENSED MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Cart defined. It shall be illegal to operate a motorized vehicle not
licensed for use on the highways of Indiana, hereinafter referred to as a CART
on the public rights-of-way of the town except in conformity with this section.
Off-road vehicles, ATVs, lawn mowers and the like are not permitted on town
roads.
   (B)   Drivers. No cart shall be operated on a town right-of-way:
      (1)   By any person who has not obtained an operator's license under I.C.
9-24-3 or a public passenger chauffeur's license under I.C. 9-24-4;
      (2)   By any person on any sidewalk or state or federal highway within
the town;
      (3)   At a speed greater than 25 mph;
      (4)   By any person after sunset and before sunrise unless the cart is
equipped with an operable headlight and tail lamp;
      (5)   By any person unless the cart is equipped with a “slow moving
vehicle sign” approved by the state and displayed in the rear, and a warning
flag between 8 feet and 12 feet high, and at least 60 square inches in size,
also displayed in the rear;
      (6)   By any person unless every person riding has a seat;
      (7)   By any person unless the cart is owned or leased by an improved
property owner, property owner holding a current valid building permit or
resident of the town. An improved property owner, property owner holding a
current valid building permit or resident shall register the cart annually with
the town and shall deliver proof of insurance and a serial number to the Clerk-
Treasurer’s office. A parking permit for such use is required for operating a
cart on a town right-of-way and shall be permanently affixed to the cart as
provided in division (D) below; and
      (8)   Without proof of liability insurance.
   (C)   Hand signals. All cart operators shall clearly signal their intentions
for the operation of their carts by universally utilized hand and arm signals
given from the left side of the cart as follows:
      (1)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed: hand and arm extended downward.
   (D)   Parking. No cart shall be permitted to park in those areas of the town
designated for “Parking by Permit Only” unless the vehicle is owned by an
improved property owner, property owner holding a current valid building permit
or resident of the town and displays a current Beverly Shores parking permit
issued by the Clerk-Treasurer's office. The parking sticker shall be displayed
in the same fashion as a motor vehicle or as determined by the Town Marshal.
   (E)   Traffic laws. The operator of a cart shall obey all traffic and
parking regulations currently in force and, in the event of a violation, the
operator shall be liable for the same fines and penalties as are provided for
other vehicles, and illegally parked carts shall be subject to being removed
and impounded.
(Ord. 89-4, passed 5-15-1989; Am. Ord. 10-02, passed 5-17-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-
01, passed 2-17-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 FROST LAW LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   At all times during a period of days (not to exceed 90 days in any 1
calendar year) which shall be those days as designated by the Town Council
when, in the opinion and judgment of the Council, it becomes necessary by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions to prohibit
the operation of vehicles or impose restrictions as to the weight of vehicles
to be operated on streets and highways within the town, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive, operate, cause to be operated or be in physical
control, upon any public road, street or highway within the town limits,
excepting therefrom any highways in the state highway system and the state
maintained routes thereof, any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles having
a maximum gross axle weight, with load, in excess of the following, unless a
written permit therefor shall have been obtained from the Street
Superintendent.
 
Rim Width               2-Tire Axle  4-Tire Axle
4.5 inches - 7 inches   3,200 pounds -
7.5 inches - 9 inches   5,200 pounds 9,000 pounds
9.75 inches - 13 inches 6,000 pounds 9,500 pounds
14 inches - 15 inches   8,000 pounds 9,500 pounds
 
   (B)   (1)   Any permit issued by the Street Superintendent shall specify and
direct in writing the streets and highways of the town that may be utilized by
the permittee.
      (2)   Permits shall be issued in triplicate; 1 copy to be retained in the
Clerk-Treasurer's office, 1 copy to be retained in the Town Marshal’s office
and 1 copy to be carried in the permitted vehicle.
      (3)   The maximum speed limit for all trucks, including special permits,
will be 20 mph.
   (C)   (1)   The limitations on gross axle weight heretofore described in
division (A) above shall be effective upon a directive signed by the majority
of the Town Council to the Street Superintendent to erect and maintain signs
designating gross weight limitations at the beginning of each road, street or
highway leading into the town and at other places or intersections as the
Street Superintendent determines necessary.
      (2)   The limitations heretofore described shall cease upon a written
directive signed by the majority of the Town Council to the Street
Superintendent to remove the signs.
(Ord. 89-1, passed 3-16-1989) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. The meaning set forth in I.C. 7.1-1-3-5.
      CONTAINER. The meaning set forth in I.C. 7.1.-1-3-13.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. The meaning set forth in I.C. 9-13-2-105, except that
motor vehicle as used in this section shall not include recreational vehicles,
as defined in I.C. 9-13-2-150 and which is designed to transport more than 10
passengers including the operator, or any chartered passenger vehicle licensed
to operate within the State of Indiana.
   (B)   Possession or consumption prohibited. A person who knowingly does the
following while in a motor vehicle that is being operated upon a public way,
public road, public highway or any other public highway or any other public
location with the town limits commits a violation of this section:
      (1)   Consumes an alcoholic beverage; or
      (2)   Possesses a container:
         (a)   That has been opened;
         (b)   That has a broken seal; or
         (c)   From which some of the contents have been removed.
   (C)   Violation by operator or owner of motor vehicle.
      (1)   A violation of this section occurs if the operator or owner of a
motor vehicle who is present, while the motor vehicle is in operation and keeps
or allows to be kept in an area of the motor vehicle that is accessible to the
operator or a passenger a container:
         (a)   That has been opened;
         (b)   That has a broken seal; or
         (c)   From which some of the contents have been removed.
      (2)   A violation of this section occurs when the operator of a
recreational vehicle or chartered passenger vehicle licensed to operate within
the State of Indiana, while the motor vehicle is in operation, knowingly keeps
or allows to be kept in any area of the motor vehicle that is within the reach
of the seated operator, a container:
         (a)   That has been opened;
         (b)   That has a broken seal; or
         (c)   From which some of the contents have been removed.
   (D)   Signs. Signs giving notice of this prohibition of open alcoholic
beverage containers shall be posted at all locations deemed appropriate by the
Town Marshal.
(Ord. 93-01, passed 2-8-1993) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   General regulations
   
71.02   Obstruction of fire lanes, driveways and the like
   
71.03   Vehicles over twenty-two feet in length
   
71.04   Parking spaces
   
71.05   Permit parking; limited class parking areas
   
71.06   Parking permits
   
71.07   Electric vehicles
 
   
71.98   Nuisance
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No motor vehicle shall be stopped or parked on any public street
within the town with the left side thereof to the curb or street line.
   (B)   All stopping and parking of motor vehicles shall be parallel to the
right-hand curb or street line, except where marked parking stalls clearly
indicate and provide for angle parking.
   (C)   Where parallel parking is required, the entire right side of the
vehicle shall be within 10 inches of the curb, if a curb exists, or as near the
right side of the right-of-way as conditions permit, where there is no curb,
provided no vehicle shall be parked on the traveled portion of any street.
   (D)   No vehicle shall be double parked on any public street in the town,
nor shall any motor vehicle be parked or be permitted to remain standing on any
public street or alley of the town for any length of time whatever, unless the
same is equipped with and displays properly issued current license plates, nor
shall any vehicle be parked within 20 feet of any street intersection.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02 OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE LANES, DRIVEWAYS AND THE LIKE.
   No motor vehicle shall be parked within the town so as to obstruct any
private driveway, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk, fire lane or established public
carrier parking area.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 VEHICLES OVER TWENTY-TWO FEET IN LENGTH.
   No vehicle having a length in excess of 22 feet shall be parked in the town,
except in a parking area so specifically designated, or off the traveled
portion of a street in front of property controlled by the owner of the vehicle
or a guest of the occupant of the property.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 PARKING SPACES.
   No vehicle shall be parked within the town in a manner so that a vehicle
extends across any line or marking established by the Town Council to indicate
parking spaces.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05 PERMIT PARKING; LIMITED CLASS PARKING AREAS.
   The Town Council, shall, upon motion duly passed, designate permit only and
limited class parking areas, in which only certain types of vehicles are
permitted to park, and the Town Council may, upon motion duly passed, eliminate
existing or later established limited class parking areas deemed unnecessary.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1))
§ 71.06 PARKING PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally required. In addition to the prohibitions and provisions of
other sections of this title, there shall be no parking on any public street,
road, lot or other public place in the town except by permit and only in those
areas designated “Parking by Permit Only” by signs or yellow markings on the
pavement, street or curb. No operator of any vehicle that does not have a
parking permit in compliance with this section shall stop, stand or park or
leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended in Rebora Plaza or in
any other location designated as “Parking by Permit Only”. Provided however, it
shall not be a violation of this section for Beverly Shores residents or owners
of real estate located in Beverly Shores, or their guests, to park their motor
vehicles off the traveled portion of the road directly in front of the
resident’s or owner’s residence or real estate.
   (B)   Permits for residents and property owners holding current building
permits.
      (1)   The town shall make available to each resident, improved property
owner and property owner holding a current valid building permit, parking
permits for 2 motor vehicles upon payment of the proscribed fee set out in the
Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
      (2)   Proof that the current year’s garbage bill and all other town fees
or fines have been paid in full for any improved property owned or occupied by
the applicant must be provided.
      (3)   The permit shall be in the form of a sticker which must be
permanently affixed to the lower left hand corner of the rear window of each
vehicle and is non-transferable and which shall be good for the current year
only.
      (4)   For issuance of more than 2 permits to any resident, improved
property owner or property owner holding a valid building permit, vehicle
registrations will be required for the additional motor vehicles along with
information sufficient to establish that the legal owner of the vehicle is a
resident, improved property owner or property owner holding a current valid
building permit, provided, however, that if it is a company owned vehicle, a
letter from the company is required indicating that the resident, improved
property owner or property owner holding a current valid building permit has
been issued a company car and that he or she is authorized to drive it for
personal use.
   (C)   Permits for town employees. One (1) yearly parking permit will be
available free of charge to the following persons: Town Council members,
appointed members of the Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Building and Site Committees, the Parks and Recreation Committee; active
volunteer firefighters, the Town Attorney, and other town employees, and other
persons as the Town Council may direct from time to time.
   (D)   Guest permits. The Clerk-Treasurer may issue no more than two books of
ten daily parking permits to a resident, an improved property owner or a
property owner holding a current valid building permit for guests of the
resident or property owner upon payment of the proscribed fee as set forth in §
10.99. The daily parking permit will set forth the specific date for which the
daily parking permit is valid. These daily parking permits for guests will not
be issued for renters, busies, campers and/or recreational vehicles.
   (E)   Non-residents. A non-resident of the town may purchase an annual
parking permit or a daily parking permit upon payment of the proscribed fee as
set forth in §
10.99. The daily parking permit for a non-resident will set forth the specific
date for which the daily parking permit is valid.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1); Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 7-15-1996; Am. Ord.
2014-01, passed 2-17-2014; Am. Ord. 2015-08, passed 12-21-2015; Am. Ord. 2016-
01, passed 5-16-2016; Am. Ord. 2023-08, passed 12-19-2023) Penalty, see §
71.99
Cross-reference:
   Ineligibility for permit because of unpaid excess false alarm burglar calls
fee, see §
34.29
§ 71.07 ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
   There shall be no parking of any vehicle within any area marked for the
exclusive use as an electric vehicle charging station, unless such vehicle is
an electric vehicle which is connected to the charging station.
   (A)   Active charging. The town shall be entitled to collect a reasonable
rate for the use of any charging station that is either owned by the town or
for which the town is the party responsible for the electric utility bills.
This rate shall be established by contract with the third party operating the
charging station. The initial rate shall be $0.15 per kilowatt-hour. This rate
is subject to change at the discretion of the Town Council.
   (B)   Inactive charging. Any vehicle connected to a charging station, which
is owned by the town or a station where the town is the party responsible for
the electric utility bills, and not actively charging shall be assessed a
parking fee at the applicable rate set forth in §
10.99 of the Town Code. A vehicle will be considered not actively charging 30
minutes after the vehicle is completely charged. Any vehicle parked in an area
marked for the exclusive use as an electric vehicle charging station and not
connected to the charging station shall be subject to the nuisance and penalty
provisions of §§
71.98 and
71.99. For the purposes of this section, “not connected” means a vehicle that
does not have the cable from the charging station connected to or plugged into
the electric vehicle’s on-board charger.
(Ord. 2016-08, passed 10-17-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-05, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 71.98 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to
constitute a nuisance. That nuisance may be abated by the removal and
impoundment of the vehicle by the Police Department.
   (B)   The vehicles shall be released to the owner thereof upon payment of
storage and towing costs, if any, and other fines, penalties or costs as may be
imposed by law.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
72.01   Erection of signs
   
72.02   Damage to signs
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   At locations and areas determined by the Town Council to prevent special
traffic conditions or hazards, the Town Marshal, with the approval of the Town
Council, upon motion duly made, seconded and adopted by it, may from time to
time erect or cause to be erected, or remove or cause to be removed, additional
parking and traffic signs in areas as may be deemed necessary for the
regulation, control and inspection of the parking and operation of vehicles. It
shall be unlawful to disregard or disobey those signs.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1))
§ 72.02 DAMAGE TO SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deface, injure, tamper
with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any traffic
or parking signs within the town.
(Ord. 179, passed 4-20-1981 (84-1)) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
(Ord. 88-1, passed 8-15-1988)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
      
II.   Stop intersections
      
III.   Truck weight limits
      
IV.   Vehicle weight restrictions
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Violators shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
Street Location Speed Limit
Street                 Location                                  Speed Limit
Beverly Drive          -                                         30 mph
Broadway               From Beverly Drive to Lake Front Drive    30 mph
Broadway               From Highway 12 to Beverly Drive          35 mph
Central Avenue         -                                         30 mph
Interior Roads         -                                         15 mph
Lake Front Drive       -                                         25 mph
Lake Shore County Road -                                         25 mph
Lake Shore County Road Between U.S. Highway 12 and Beverly Drive 35 mph
State Park Road        -                                         30 mph
State Park Road        From Highway 12 to Waverly Road           20 mph
State Park Road        From Waverly Road to Lake Front Drive     20 mph
 
   (B)   Five dollars of every fine collected as a result of a speed limit
violation shall be allocated to the Law Enforcement Education Fund.
(Ord. 90-2, passed 4-16-1990; Am. Ord. 98-03, passed 5-18-1998; Am. Ord. 2012-
10, passed 11-19-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-5-2013)
SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Violators shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
Intersection Stop
Intersection                                                Stop
Beverly Drive and Central Avenue                            4-way
Brightwater and St. Clair                                   2-way
Broadway and Beverly                                        4-way
Drexwood and Wilson                                         3-way
Dunbar and W. Lake Front Drive                              3-way
Lake Front Drive and Broadway                               3-way
Lake Front Drive and Crestlane                              3-way
Lake Front Drive and Lake Shore County Road                 3-way
Lake Shore County Road, Merrivalle Avenue and Beverly Drive All-way
St. Clair and Idler                                         4-way
 
   (B)   Five dollars of every fine collected as a result of a stop sign
violation shall be allocated to the Law Enforcement Education Fund.
(Ord. 99-02, passed - -; Am. Ord. 90-2, passed 4-16-1990; Am. Ord. 98-04,
passed 5-18-1998; Am. Res. 02-04, passed 4-15-2002; Am. Ord. 2012-07, passed 9-
17-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-10, passed 11-19-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 4-5-
2013)
SCHEDULE III. TRUCK WEIGHT LIMITS.
   Excepting emergency vehicles and government-owned vehicles, trucks shall be
subject to the following weight limits on town roads and streets. Violators
shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
 
Street        Location                             Licensed Gross Weight Limit
Beverly Drive East Derby Avenue to East State Park more than 6,000 pounds
              Road
 
(Ord. 2010-01, passed 2-15-2010)
SCHEDULE IV. VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Frost Law regulations for vehicles in excess of 10 tons.
      (1)   During a period, not to exceed 90 days in any 1 calendar year,
which shall be those days designated by the Town Council, when in the opinion
and judgment of the Street Commissioner, it becomes necessary by reason of
deterioration due to rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, to impose
restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated on streets and
highways within the town limits, any motor vehicle having a combined total
gross weight, including load, of 10 tons or more shall not be operated on those
designated street and highways.
      (2)   The period described in subdivision (A)(1) shall be the "Frost Law
period".
      (3)   This restriction shall not apply to highways in the state highway
system and the state maintained routes.
      (4)   A vehicle weighing 10 tons or more may be operated on those
designated streets and highways during the 90 day Frost Law period, after
receiving a written permit from the town's Street Commissioner.
   (B)   Written permits. Any permit issued by the town's Street Commissioner,
as referred to in division (A) above, shall specify and direct in writing the
streets and highways of the town that may be used by the permittee.
   (C)   Signs. The limit on gross vehicle weight during the Frost Law period,
as referred to in division (A) above, shall be effective upon a directive from
the Town Council to the Street Commissioner to erect and maintain signs
designating said gross weight limitation at each end of that portion of the
street or highway affected by the order, and at any intersecting roads,
streets, or highways. The limitation shall cease upon the directive from the
Town Council to remove the signs, or the expiration of 90 days in a calendar
year, whichever is earlier.
   (D)   Penalty. A violation of this section shall be an ordinance violation
subject to the penalty and fine provision in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
(Ord. 2018-12, passed 12-18-2018)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
      
92.   PARADES
      
93.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Keeping of certain animals prohibited
   
90.02   Regulation of dogs
   
90.03   Regulation of cats
   
90.04   Impoundment of unlawful animals
   
90.05   Feeding of deer prohibited
§ 90.01 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that, as determined by an
enforcement officer, constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other
animals, or any animal that is known to have attacked or injured a person or
other animal on a previous occasion.
      FARM ANIMALS. Cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine, lambs, goats, poultry
and any other animals generally used in agriculture.
      NOISY ANIMALS. One that by loud and frequent barking, howling, yelping or
other animal noises disturbs the peace and quiet or which shall disturb or
interrupt other persons in the full use and enjoyment of their property.
      WILD ANIMAL. One that cannot be purchased or obtained legally or that
requires a special permit, or any animal that would not be harbored by any
person were it not for the animal’s capture.
   (B)   Unlawful animals.
      (1)   It is unlawful to keep, harbor, maintain or possess dangerous,
vicious, farm, noisy or wild animals in the Town of Beverly Shores.
      (2)   It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance to keep, harbor, maintain
or possess dangerous, vicious, farm, noisy or wild animals in the Town of
Beverly Shores.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 12-20-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02 REGULATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any resident to be a keeper of a dog
within the Town of Beverly Shores unless he or she shall first procure a
license therefore from the Pine Township Trustee or as otherwise provided for
by law.
      (2)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, non-residents or part-time
residents of Beverly Shores are exempted from the license provision if their
dog wears an identification tag showing the name and address of the keeper.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for full-time and part-time residents and for
nonresidents to keep a dog in Beverly Shores without the keeper possessing a
valid certificate of rabies inoculation for the dog.
   (B)   Leashes, muzzles and the like required. It shall be unlawful, and the
same is hereby declared to be a nuisance, for the owners, keeper, custodian or
possessor of any like animal to permit or take the animal upon any public
highway, street, alley or ground unless that animal shall be securely and
effectively controlled by means of a leash, muzzle, halter, collar or other
means as the size and type of animal shall dictate.
   (C)   Roaming at large. It shall be unlawful, and the same is hereby
declared a nuisance, for the owner, keeper, custodian or possessor of any dog
to permit an animal to roam or run at large in the town. These animals may be
captured, impounded and destroyed consistent with the provisions of §
90.04.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 90.03 REGULATION OF CATS.
   (A)   Cats allowed to roam off the premises of their owners must be neutered
or spayed.
   (B)   It is unlawful and a nuisance for the owner, keeper, custodian or
possessor of any unaltered cat to allow it to roam or run at large in the town.
These animals may be captured, impounded and destroyed consistent with the
provisions of §
90.04.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 90.04 IMPOUNDMENT OF UNLAWFUL ANIMALS.
   (A)   The Porter County Animal Control Officer or any police officer of the
town shall have the right to capture and impound any animal in violation of
this chapter. Notice of impoundment shall be given immediately to the owner if
known and if the owner can be found.
   (B)   As part of the process of removing a vicious or dangerous animal from
town, any pet that bites or inflicts injury upon a human being shall be
confined and observed for a period of time established by procedures of the
Porter County Animal Control.
   (C)   While any animal is being held by the Porter County Animal Control
Officer or by any police officer of the town, the owner thereof may redeem it
upon presenting proof of current and valid ownership, immunization and animal
license tag papers necessary under the laws of the state. However, if the
animal has been transferred to the custody of the Porter Animal Control
pursuant to any contract, then the conditions of release of the animal shall be
established by the rules established by that agency.
(Ord. 04-02, passed 12-20-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 FEEDING OF DEER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      LARGE SCALE FEEDING. Placing food stuff into the open so that it is
accessible to deer on a scale that any quantities more than a wheel barrow or
bushel constitutes LARGE SCALE FEEDING .
   (B)   Prohibited conduct; penalties.
      (1)   Any person who knowingly creates and/or maintains a low-level
feeder (less than 5 feet high) open or ground feeder, salt or mineral blocks,
engages in large scale feeding of deer (1 bushel or more), shall be subject to
a fine of $50 first offense, $100 for each subsequent offense thereafter.
      (2)   Any person who knowingly feeds deer on a town road right-of-way
shall be subject to a fine of $50 first offense, $100 for each subsequent
offense thereafter.
      (3)   Each violation of this section shall be fined an amount not to
exceed $2,500 every day any violation of this section occurs. Each day
constitutes a separate violation of this section and a separate offense. Each
violation of this section in a court prosecution shall result in a minimum fine
of $250. The fine provided for in this division (B)(3) shall be the maximum
fine which shall be imposed in those cases where other provisions provide for a
minimum fine but do not provide for a maximum fine.
(Ord. 13-05, passed 7-15-2013)
CHAPTER 91: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Defining nuisances
   
91.02   Open burning
   
91.03   Public beaches regulations
   
91.04   Litter control
Outdoor Wood-fired Furnaces
   
91.15   Purpose
   
91.16   Applicability
   
91.17   Definitions
   
91.18   General prohibition on open burning, outdoors burning and refuse
burning
   
91.19   Materials that may not be burned
   
91.20   Outdoor wood-fired furnaces
   
91.21   Burning permits
   
91.22   Liability
   
91.23   Right of entry and inspection
   
91.24   Enforcement
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINING NUISANCES.
   (A)   Definition. A NUISANCE is the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful
use of one's property in a manner that substantially interferes with the
enjoyment or use of another individual's property, or an act or omission that
obstructs, damages or inconveniences the rights of the community. A NUISANCE
shall consist of that class of wrongs that arises from the unreasonable,
unwarrantable or unlawful use by a person of his or her own property, either
real or personal, or from the person's own improper, indecent, unreasonable or
unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction of or to the right of
another, or of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort or hurt that the law will presume a consequent damage.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to commit a nuisance within the corporate limits
of the town.
   (C)   It is hereby declared a nuisance to violate any of the provisions of
the town ordinances pertaining to safety; health; building; sanitation;
parking, the operation of motor vehicles; the use of streets and alleys; the
use of public beaches: parking lots; regulations concerning disposal of refuse
and use of garbage containers.
   (D)   It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person or persons, firm or
corporation to violate any of the provisions of the laws or regulations of the
State of Indiana or any of its agencies applicable to the Town of Beverly
Shores regulating hotels, rooming houses, business enterprise of any kind
whatsoever, rules and regulations of the State Board of Health, rules and
regulations of the State Fire Marshal and any law or regulation of the State of
Indiana or its duly authorized agencies governing the conduct of any business.
   (E)   In addition to what is declared in this chapter to be a public
nuisance, those offenses known to the common law and statutes of Indiana as
public nuisances may be treated as such and be proceeded against as is provided
in this chapter or in accordance with any other provision of law.
(Ord. 39, passed 2-8-1957 (84-11)) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   The following types of fires are permitted in the Town of Beverly
Shores:
      (1)   Camp fires;
      (2)   Controlled burns instigated and supervised by the United States
Department of the Interior, in order to facilitate National Park Service Fire
Management Plan for the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore.
   (B)   (1)   Only wood products shall be burned unless otherwise stated
above.
      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely extinguished.
      (3)   If fires create an air pollution problem, a nuisance or a fire
hazard, they shall be extinguished.
(Ord. 88-3, passed 10-17-1998) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 PUBLIC BEACHES REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. The following regulations apply to the Beverly Shores
beaches.
      (1)   Disturbing the peace. It is unlawful for any person or persons to
be loud, boisterous or behave in a manner so as to disturb the peace on any
public beach or adjacent parking area or the vicinity thereof in the Town of
Beverly Shores, Indiana after the hours of 11:00 p.m. and until sunrise.
      (2)   Public intoxication. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person
or persons in any picnic or beach party to be intoxicated or for any person or
persons in any party to behave in a manner to be offensive to the public on any
public beach or beaches in the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
      (3)   Fireworks. The use of fireworks shall be in accordance with the
laws of the State of Indiana.
      (4)   Throwing, depositing or leaving garbage or refuse. It shall be
unlawful to throw, deposit or leave any refuse, papers, garbage, bottles or
glass upon any beach in the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
      (5)   Vending or peddling. It shall be unlawful for any street vendor or
peddler to sell soft drinks or any drinks of any kind, or to sell candies, ice
cream, sandwiches or any other ware or article upon any public beach or street
in the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, without a permit issued by the Town
Council.
      (6)   Picnic or beach party upon a private beach. It is declared unlawful
for any person or persons to picnic or have a beach party upon any private
beach, excepting owners or upon having written permission of the owners.
      (7)   Glass container, bottle, jar or other receptacle. No person or
persons shall have, take or cause to be taken, any glass container, bottle, jar
or other receptacle made either in part or all of glass upon, over, into or any
public beaches or parks in the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
   (B)   Watercraft.
      (1)   Signage. All watercraft storage areas shall be identified as such
by the Park Department, as well as their boundaries, by signage on posts
installed on the beach at approximately the line where vegetation begins coming
up from the water and at the property line boundaries.
         (a)   These signs will be of a natural styles (for example, wood
planks) with the words "Boats" routed or painted and an arrow pointing left or
right. All of the boundary markers will be mounted on sturdy wood or similar
posts.
         (b)   Pairs of these signs will be installed at the edges of the
designated watercraft storage areas. This will typically be at the beach edge
of the marram grass and at either end of the town's property line with the
National Park Service.
         (c)   The Park Department has the right to open, close and move
watercraft storage areas based on the condition of the individual beaches at
any time.
         (d)   No watercraft may be stored outside of the designated watercraft
storage area at any time. If the number of watercraft seeking storage exceeds
the available storage space at any time, watercraft will be stored on a first
come, first served basis.
         (e)   A warning sign, advising of these ordinances and the maximum
fine for each violation thereof, is to be posted in plain view of the boat
storage area.
      (2)   Boat storage areas.
         (a)   A boat storage area shall be designated on all of the Town of
Beverly Shores’ beaches.
         (b)   Sign posts shall be installed and maintained on the beach at the
vegetation line to designate boat storage areas. All registered watercraft must
be stored, with registration visible, between the boat storage area signs on
the open sand, north of the signs and off of any marram grass, regardless of
weather conditions, beach conditions, water level, number of watercraft
present, or any other circumstances. The Park Department has the right to
remove any watercraft (registered or non-registered) or personal property
stored outside of the designated boat storage area at any time. The Town
Marshal and the Park Department have the right to cut locks and cables in order
to remove any illegally-stored watercraft or personal property. The town, Town
Marshal, and the Park Department shall not be liable for the cost of the lock
or cable to the owner, or any damage caused during the removal of any
illegally-stored watercraft or personal property.
         (c)   The Park Department may erect storage racks on town beaches to
store the following watercraft types: kayaks, canoes, and stand up paddleboards
(SUP). No other types of watercraft may be stored on or around these racks. All
watercraft stored in the racks must be removed on or before November 1 per
division (B). No personal property may be stored at these racks. Watercraft
types allowed in the racks may be stored in the rack and must not be stored in
the marram grass. The Park Department has the right to remove any watercraft
that is not allowed to be stored in the racks from the racks. A registered
watercraft that is removed from the racks shall be placed in the boat storage
area, and the owner shall be assessed a fine pursuant to § 10.98 of the Town
Code. Non-registered watercraft and personal property stored on the racks shall
be subject to citation and removal under division (B)(4) of this section. The
Town Marshal and Park Department have the right to cut locks and cables in
order to remove any illegally-stored watercraft and personal property. The
town, Town Marshal, and the Park Department shall not be liable for the cost of
the lock or cable to the owner, or any damage caused during the removal of any
illegally-stored watercraft or personal property.
      (3)   Registration.
         (a)   All watercraft stored on town beaches shall be registered
through the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
         (b)   Registration is to be demonstrated by a sticker, which must be
affixed to the watercraft, and shall be provided upon completion of the
registration application and payment of any required fee.
         (c)   Registration shall be annual on a calendar-year basis, with the
fee to be determined annually. For current registration fee, see §
10.99, Fee Schedule.
         (d)   Appropriate receipts will be issued and records kept of all
funds received, and all such funds shall be deposited in the Park Department’s
fund.
         (e)   Registration for watercraft is only available to an improved
property owner, property owner holding a current valid building permit or a
resident of the town, and a registration may only be issued upon the applicant
demonstrating by documentation that their garbage bill and all other town fees
have been paid in full, including any penalties.
         (f)   All registrants will sign a disclaimer at the time of
registration, relieving the town of any liability for any loss or damage caused
by, arising out of, or resulting from the use of a town boat storage area or
damage sustained in the removal of illegally-stored watercraft or personal
property.
      (4)   Non-registered and illegally-stored watercraft.
         (a)   Non-registered watercraft stored anywhere on the beach or
registered watercraft stored in violation of the terms of this division will be
cited with a warning to remove the watercraft or otherwise cease violation of
division (B) within 15 days.
         (b)   After such 15-day period, all watercraft still in violation of
division (B) may be confiscated by the Town Marshal or other authority.
      (5)   Seizure and removal of non-registered or illegally-stored
watercraft and personal property.
         (a)   No watercraft (including catamarans) or personal property may be
stored on a town beach between November 1 and April 1. All registered
watercraft shall be removed from the beach storage area and any town beach on
or before November 1 of each year.
         (b)   Any watercraft and personal property illegally-stored on the
beaches at any time shall be subject to seizure by the Town Marshal pursuant to
division (B)(4) above.
         (c)   Any watercraft and personal property not removed by November 1
of each year or stored on the beaches before April 1 of each year, shall be
subject to seizure by the Town Marshal.
         (d)   Seizure, removal, transportation and storage expenses will be
borne by the owner and/or registrant, and if any such item is unclaimed after
December 31 of the year in which it is seized, it may be auctioned off to
recover expenses incurred by the town in seizing, removing, transporting,
storing and selling the item.
   (C)   Motorized watercraft prohibited.
      (1)   Motorized watercraft shall not be eligible for registration with
the town.
      (2)   Motorized watercraft may not be stored on any town beach.
      (3)   A written warning sign, advising of this prohibition and the
maximum fine for each violation thereof, is to be posted in full and plain view
at each beach access point and boat storage area, with phone numbers of law
enforcement agencies included to facilitate reporting of violations of this
division.
   (D)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MOTORIZED WATERCRAFT.
         (a)   Defined pursuant to I.C. 14-8-2-169 as a watercraft propelled
by:
            1.   An internal combustion, steam, or electrical inboard or
outboard motor or engine; or
            2.   Any mechanical means.
         (b)   This definition includes sailboats that are equipped with a
motor or engine or personal watercraft as defined in I.C. 14-8-2-202.5.
      TOWN. The Town of Beverly Shores.
      WATERCRAFT. Defined pursuant to I.C. 14-8-2-305 as any instrumentality or
device in or by means of which a person may be transported upon the public
water of Indiana. The term includes, but is not limited to, a motorboat,
sailboat, catamaran, rowboat, skiff, dinghy, kayak, standup paddleboard (SUP)
or canoe: whether or not used to carry passengers for hire.
   (E)   Penalty.
      (1)   For current fines, see §
10.98.
      (2)   Each day on which a violation of division (B) exists shall be
deemed a separate violation.
      (3)   A motorized watercraft that violates the prohibitions of divisions
(B) and (C) shall be deemed to have committed two separate violations.
(Ord. 4, passed 7-21-1947; Am. Ord. 20, passed 8-21-1950 (84-2); Am. Ord. 88-1,
passed 8-15-1988; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 2012-06, passed 6-
18-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 7-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-17-
2014; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 12-18-2018) Penalty, see §
91.99
Cross-reference:
   For parking permits, see §
71.06
§ 91.04 LITTER CONTROL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to
control littering in the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words
shall have the meanings stated herein.
      LITTER. Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has been
discarded, whether made of metal, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other
natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including, but not
limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any
bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or
glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal,
plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction material.
      LITTER RECEPTACLE. A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any area that is used or is held out for use by the public,
whether owned or operated by public or private interests.
   (C)   Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or
otherwise place any litter of any nature upon any highway, road, street, alley,
public right of way, beach, lake, stream, waterway or on ice over these waters
or on other public place or private property other than in a litter receptacle,
or having done so, to allow such litter to remain. A landlord shall also be
liable if its tenant throws, drops, discards or otherwise places any litter of
any nature upon any highway, road, street, alley, public right of way, beach,
lake, stream, waterway or on ice over these waters or on other public place or
private property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow
such litter to remain.
      (2)   Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from
a vehicle in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or both, of the
motor vehicle shall also be deemed to have violated this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep litter into or deposit
it on any highway, road, street, alley, public right of way, or other public
place from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway.
      (4)   No person shall drive or move any commercial truck or other
commercial vehicle within the town unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded
as to prevent load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
highway, road, street, alley, public right of way or other public place, nor
shall any person drive or move any commercial vehicle or commercial truck
within the town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
highway, road, street, alley, public right of way or other public place, mud,
dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter of any kind, excluding any
public road construction.
      (5)   The owner or persons in control of any private property or public
place shall use reasonable efforts to maintain the property free of litter;
provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter
in litter receptacles for collection. Litter receptacles placed at the roadside
for collection shall be removed within 24 hours after such collection.
   (D)   Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department.
(Ord. 2013-04, passed 7-15-2013) Penalty, see § 91.99
OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED FURNACES
§ 91.15 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare
and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of
the citizens of Beverly Shores due to the air pollution and fire hazards of
outdoor wood-fired furnace burning.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.16 APPLICABILITY.
   Applicability. This subchapter applies to all outdoor wood-fired furnaces
burning within incorporated Beverly Shores.
   (A)   This subchapter does not apply to grilling or cooking using charcoal,
wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances.
   (B)   This subchapter docs not apply to burning in a stove, furnace,
fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal
habitation unless the material being burned includes refuse as defined in §
91.17.
   (C)   This subchapter does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene,
natural gas. gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating,
construction or maintenance activities.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the applicable jurisdictional Fire Department or
other person authorized by the Fire Chief.
   OUTDOOR BURNING. Open burning or burning in an outdoor wood-fired furnace.
   OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED FURNACE. A wood-fired furnace, stove or boiler that is
not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic
animals.
   REFUSE. Any waste material except clean wood.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.18 GENERAL PROHIBITION ON OPEN BURNING, OUTDOORS BURNING AND REFUSE
BURNING.
   General prohibition on outdoors burning and refuse burning. Open burning,
outdoor burning, and refuse burning are prohibited in Beverly Shores unless
this subchapter or state statute specifically permits the burning.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 MATERIALS THAT MAY NOT BE BURNED.
   Unless a specific written approval has been obtained from the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management, the following materials may not be
burned in an open fire, incinerator, burn barrel, furnace, stove or any other
indoor or outdoor incineration or heating device.
   (A)   Rubbish or garbage including but not limited to food wastes, food
wraps, packaging, animal carcasses, paint or painted materials, furniture,
composite shingles, construction or demolition debris or other household or
business wastes.
   (B)   Waste oil or other oily wastes except used oil burned in a heating
device for energy recovery subject to the restrictions in Indiana
Administrative Code 326-IAC-4.
   (C)   Asphalt and products containing asphalt.
   (D)   Treated or painted wood including but not limited to plywood,
composite wood products or other wood products that are painted, varnished or
treated with preservatives.
   (E)   Any plastic material including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers.
   (F)   Rubber including tires and synthetic rubber-like products.
   (G)   Newspaper, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper and
other materials that must be recycled in accordance with the recycling
ordinance.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED FURNACES.
   An outdoor wood-fired furnace may be installed and used in Beverly Shores
only in accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be installed and used only on a
building site having a minimum of ten acres;
   (B)   The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall not bum any of the prohibited
materials listed in §
91.19;
   (C)   The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be located at least 500 feet from
the nearest residential building and at least 300 feet from any building, which
is not on the same property as the outdoor wood-fired furnace;
   (D)   The outdoor wood-fired furnace shall have an insulated chimney that
extends at least 15 feet above the ground surface. If there are any residences
within 500 feet, the chimney shall also extend at least as high above the
ground surface as the height of the roofs of all such residences. The
jurisdictional Fire Chief and the Building Commissioner may approve a lesser
height on a case-by-case basis if necessary to comply with manufacturer’s
recommendations and if the smoke from the lower chimney height does not create
a nuisance for neighbors; and
   (E)   The owner of the outdoor wood-fired furnace shall obtain an annual
permit from the Beverly Shores Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.21 BURNING PERMITS.
   (A)   The owner or occupant of the properly shall obtain an annual burning
permit for each outdoor wood-fired furnace before using the outdoor wood-fired
furnace. The fee for each annual burning permit shall be as set forth in §
10.99. An annual permit expires on August 1st of each year.
   (B)   When weather conditions warrant, the Fire Chief or the Department of
Natural Resources may declare a burning moratorium on all open burning and
temporarily suspend previously issued burning permits for open burning.
   (C)   A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance
with all applicable provisions of this subchapter and any additional special
restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety.
   (D)   Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter. Any violation of this subchapter or the burning
permit shall void the permit.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.22 LIABILITY.
   A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor wood-fired furnace shall be
responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting
from damage caused by the use of the wood-fired furnace.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.23 RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION.
   The Plan Commission President, the jurisdictional Fire Chief, the Building
Commissioner of Beverly Shores or any authorized officer, agent, employee or
representative of Beverly Shores who presents credentials may inspect any
property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   The jurisdictional Fire Chief and Building Commissioner of Beverly Shores
are authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
   (B)   Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of §
91.04 shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $250 nor less than
$100 for the first violation and a fine in an amount not to exceed $1,000 nor
less than $500 for any subsequent violation. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be fined as such.
   (C)   The penalty for a violation of any portion of §§
91.15 through
91.24 shall be a forfeiture of not less than $100 or more than $1,000 plus the
cost of prosecution. Penalties are doubled for second and subsequent offenses.
Each day a violation continues shall be an additional violation.
(Am. Ord. 2012-02, passed 4-16-2012; Am. Ord. 2013-04, passed 7-15-2013)
CHAPTER 92: PARADES
Section
   
92.01   Definition
   
92.02   Exemption
   
92.03   Permit required; applications; fees
   
92.04   Standards for permit issuance
   
92.05   Denial; alternative
   
92.06   Contents; revocation; compliance
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, bike-a-thon
or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street or
other public place.
(Ord. 96-04, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 92.02 EXEMPTION.
   This chapter shall not apply to funeral processions.
§ 92.03 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid form or start any
parade without a parade permit issued by the Town Marshal.
   (B)   (1)   A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with
the Town Marshal on forms provided by the Marshal.
      (2)   The application shall be filed not less than 7 days nor more than
60 days before the date on which it is to proposed to conduct the parade.
      (3)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
         (b)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or
by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters
of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
         (c)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
responsible for its conduct;
         (d)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
         (e)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point;
         (f)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which will constitute the parade; and the type of animals and description of
the vehicles;
         (g)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
         (h)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
         (i)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade;
         (j)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any assembly area or areas;
         (k)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
         (l)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file
with the Town Marshal a communication in writing from the person proposing to
hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or
her behalf; and
         (m)   Any additional information which the Town Marshal shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
      (4)   The Town Marshal, where good cause is shown therefore, shall have
the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than 7
days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted.
   (C)   Fees. See Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99
(Ord. 96-04, passed 5-13-1996) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 STANDARDS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   The Town Marshal shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of
the application from other information as may otherwise be obtained he or she
finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of this town to properly police the line of movement
and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to this
town;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
town other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   (F)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance;
   (G)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and with unreasonable delays en route; and
   (H)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
(Ord. 96-04, passed 5-13-1996) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 DENIAL; ALTERNATIVE.
   (A)   Notice of permit denial. If the Town Marshal disapproves the
application for a parade permit, he or she shall mail to the applicant within 3
days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his or
her action.
   (B)   Alternative permit.
      (1)   The Town Marshal, in denying an application for a parade permit,
shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time
or over a route different from that named by the applicant.
      (2)   An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within 5
days after notice of the action of the Town Marshal, file a written notice of
acceptance with the Town Marshal.
      (3)   An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of,
and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this subchapter.
(Ord. 96-04, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 92.06 CONTENTS; REVOCATION; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Contents of permit. Each parade permit shall state the following
information:
      (1)   Starting time;
      (2)   Minimum speed;
      (3)   Maximum speed;
      (4)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
      (5)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by
the parade; and
      (6)   Other information as the Town Marshal shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this subchapter.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. The Town Marshal shall have the authority, after
a hearing affording due process, to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder
upon application of the standards of issuance as set forth in this subchapter.
   (C)   Compliance with laws and regulations. A person holding a parade permit
shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable
laws and ordinances.
(Ord. 96-04, passed 5-13-1996)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98. See the Fine Schedule, §
10.98, for fee violations.
CHAPTER 93: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
93.01   Purpose
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Exceptions
   
93.04   Responsibility of owner
   
93.05   Vehicles in possession of person other than owner
   
93.06   Reserved
   
93.07   Removal of abandoned vehicles
   
93.08   Disposal of abandoned vehicles
   
93.09   Towing contracts
   
93.10   Liability for loss or damage
§ 93.01 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council finds that abandoned vehicles are a public nuisance and a
safety and health hazard.
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;
      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being moved for 24 hours;
      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in a manner so as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic on a public right-of-way;
      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours;
      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission or differential has
been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or inoperable and left
on public property;
      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or the town
upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance other than this
chapter, if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or
the owner’s agent within 20 days of the vehicle’s removal;
      (7)   A vehicle that is at least 3 model years old, is mechanically
inoperable and is left on private property continuously in a location visible
from public property for more than 20 days. For purposes of this division (7),
a vehicle covered by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl, rubber, cloth, or
textile covering is considered to be visible; and
      (8)   A vehicle:
         (a)   That was repaired or stored at the request of the owner;
         (b)   That has not been claimed by the owner; and
         (c)   For which the reasonable value of the charges associated with
the repair or storage remain unpaid more than 30 days after the date on which
the repair work is completed or the vehicle is first stored.
(I.C. 9-13-2-1)
   AUTOMOBILE SCRAPYARD. A business organized for the purpose of scrap metal
processing, automobile wrecking or operating a junkyard.
(I.C. 9-13-2-8)
   BUREAU. Unless otherwise indicated, the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles.
(I.C. 9-13-2-16)
   FISCAL BODY. The Town Council.
(I.C. 9-13-2-63)
   OFFICER. The Town Marshal, his or her designee or a member of the Town
Police Department. (I.C. 9-22-1-2)
   OWNER. The last known record titleholder of a vehicle, according to the
records of the State Bureau under I.C. 9-17.
(I.C. 9-13-2-121(c))
   PARTS. All components of a vehicle that, as assembled, do not constitute a
complete vehicle.
(I.C. 9-13-2-122)
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All property other than public property.
(I.C. 9-13-2-136)
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. A public right-of-way, street, highway, alley, park or
other state, county or municipal property.
(I.C. 9-13-2-144)
   TOWING SERVICE. A person that engages in moving or removing abandoned or
disabled vehicles and, once the vehicles are moved or removed, stores or
impounds the vehicles.
(I.C. 9-13-2-179)
   VEHICLE. An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor,
bus, school bus, recreational vehicle or motorized bicycle.
(I.C. 9-13-2-196(d))
§ 93.03 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed
for operation on privately owned raceways;
   (B)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of
the United States who is on active-duty assignment;
   (C)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot;
   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile
scrapyard;
   (E)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18-12 as an antique
vehicle;
   (F)   A golf cart; or
   (G)   An off-road vehicle.
(I.C. 9-22-1-1)
§ 93.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   (A)   The owner of an abandoned vehicle or parts is responsible for the
abandonment and is liable for all of the costs incidental to the removal,
storage and disposal of the vehicle or the parts under this chapter.
   (B)   The costs, which may be amended from time to time by the Town Council,
for storage of an abandoned vehicle may not exceed $1,500.
   (C)   If an abandoned vehicle is sold by a person who removed, towed or
stored the vehicle, and proceeds from the sale of the vehicle covered the
removal, towing and storage expenses, any remaining proceeds from the sale of
the vehicle shall be returned to the previous owner of the vehicle if the
previous owner is known.
(I.C. 9-22-1-4(a), (b), (e))
§ 93.05 VEHICLES IN POSSESSION OF PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER.
   (A)   When an officer discovers a vehicle in the possession of a person
other than the owner of the vehicle, and the person cannot establish the right
to the possession of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be taken to and stored in a
suitable place determined by the officer.
(I.C. 9-22-1-5)
   (B)   If:
      (1)   The owner or lienholder under division (C) of this section does not
appear and pay all costs; or
      (2)   The owner of vehicle cannot be determined by a search conducted
under §
93.08;
the vehicle is considered abandoned and must be disposed of under this chapter.
(I.C. 9-22-1-7)
   (C)   If the properly identified person who owns or holds a lien on a
vehicle appears at the site of storage before disposal of the vehicle or parts
and pays all costs relating to a tow, the storage of the vehicle, and all
allowable fees, as applicable, the vehicle or parts shall be released.
      (1)    A towing service or storage yard may not charge an inspection fee
to an owner, a lienholder, or an insurance company representative to inspect a
vehicle or retrieve items from the vehicle.
      (2)   (a)   A towing service or storage yard must accept payment made by
any of the following means from a person seeking to release a vehicle under
this section:
            1.   Cash;
            2.   Certified check;
            3.   Insurance check; and
            4.   Money order.
         (b) A towing service or storage facility may elect to accept payment
by means of a credit card or debit card.
      (3)   Upon receiving payment of all costs relating to a tow, the storage
of a vehicle, and all allowable fees, as applicable, a towing service or
storage yard shall provide to the person making payment an itemized receipt
that includes the information set forth in I.C. 24-14-5, to the extent the
information is known or available.
      (4)   A towing service or storage yard must be open for business and
accessible by telephone during regular office hours. A towing service or
storage yard must provide a telephone number that is available on a 24-hour
basis to receive calls and messages from callers, including calls made outside
of regular office hours. All calls made to a towing service or storage yard
must be returned within 24-hours from the time received. However, if adverse
weather, an act of God, or an emergency situation over which the towing service
or storage yard has no control prevents the towing service or storage yard from
returning calls within 24-hours, the towing service or storage yard shall
return all calls received as quickly as possible.
      (5)    A towing service or storage yard shall, if required, notify the
appropriate public agency of all releases under this section. The notification
must include:
         (a)   The name and address of:
            1.   The person that owns or holds a lien on the vehicle; and
            2.   The insurance company that insures the vehicle, if the vehicle
was released to a representative of the insurance company;
         (b)   The signature of the individual to whom the vehicle was
released;
         (c)   A description of the vehicle or parts;
         (d)   Costs paid; and
         (e)   The date of release.
      (6)   A towing service or storage yard shall release property to a
properly identified person who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle not later
than 24 hours after the towing service’s or storage yard’s receipt of:
         (a)   Payment of 75% of the amount of the invoice;
         (b)   Proof of a bond obtained by the owner for the remaining 25% of
the amount of the invoice, payable in the event the owner does not comply with
a court order under division (C)(9); and
         (c)   A copy of a complaint filed with the attorney general alleging a
violation of I.C. 24-14 under I.C. 24-14-10-1.
      (7)   The owner shall file a civil complaint in the appropriate
jurisdiction not later than 30 days after providing the items required to
release the vehicle under division (C)(6) if the disputed invoice amount has
not been resolved. A towing service or storage yard may bring a civil complaint
in an appropriate jurisdiction at any time within the same 30-day period asking
the court to resolve the disputed invoice amount.
      (8)   A civil complaint filed under division (C)(7) must include the
amounts in the invoice that are disputed and the reasons those amounts are
disputed. A copy of the invoice and any evident reasonableness or
unreasonableness must be filed with the complaint.
      (9)   After a civil complaint is filed under division (C)(7), the court
shall make a determination as to whether the amount charged by the towing
service or storage yard is reasonable. If the court determines that the amount
is reasonable, the court shall order the owner to pay the amount of the
invoice, minus the amount paid under division (C)(6)(a). If the court
determines that the amount charged was unreasonable, the court shall determine
a reasonable amount and order the owner to pay that amount minus the amount
paid under division (C)(6)(a). If the reasonable amount determined by the court
is less than the amount paid under division (C)(6)(a), the court shall order
the towing service or storage yard to pay the owner the difference in those
amounts. The court may also require either party to pay or refund any
additional amount and may impose any monetary penalties that the court
determines to be appropriate.
      (10)   Nothing in this section creates, implies, or otherwise grants
insurance coverage for the amount billed by a towing service or storage
facility that is not within the owner’s automobile insurance policy or other
policy of insurance.
(I.C. 9-22-1-8)
§ 93.06 [RESERVED].
§ 93.07 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   An officer who finds or is notified of a vehicle or parts
believed to be abandoned shall attach in a prominent place a notice tag
containing the following information:
         (a)   The date, time, officer’s name, Town Police Department and
address and telephone number to contact for information;
         (b)   That the vehicle or parts are considered abandoned;
         (c)   That the vehicle or parts will be removed after:
            1.   Thirty-six hours, if the vehicle is located on or within the
right-of-way of an interstate highway or any highway that is designated as part
of the state highway system under I.C. 8-23-4; or
            2.   Except as provided in division (A)(2), seventy-two hours, for
any other vehicle.
         (d)   That the person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible
for all costs incidental to the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle;
and
         (e)   That the person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by removal
of the vehicle or parts within:
            1.   Thirty-six hours, if the vehicle is located on or within the
right-of-way of an interstate highway or any highway that is designated as part
of the state highway system under I.C. 8-23-4; or
            2.   Seventy-two hours, for any other vehicle.
      (2)   This division applies only to an abandoned vehicle as defined in
I.C. 9-13-2-1(2). The legislative body of a consolidated city may adopt an
ordinance that establishes a different waiting period for the removal of an
abandoned vehicle, which must be at least 72 hours but not more than 14 days,
for the purpose of allowing a person to park their vehicle that is registered
to their residence on the street outside of that residence.
(I.C. 9-22-1-11)
   (B)   If a vehicle or a part tagged under division (A) of this section is
not removed within the applicable period, the officer shall prepare a written
abandoned vehicle report of the vehicle or parts, including information on the
condition and missing parts. Photographs may be taken to describe the condition
of the vehicle or parts.
(I.C. 9-22-1-12)
   (C)   (1)   If the vehicle is a junk vehicle and the market value of an
abandoned vehicle or parts is less than $1,000, the towing service shall
immediately transfer the vehicle to a storage yard.
      (2)   A copy of the abandoned vehicle report and photographs, if
applicable, relating to the abandoned vehicle shall be provided to the storage
yard.
      (3)   A towing service or storage yard may dispose of the abandoned
vehicle not less than 30 days after the date on which the towing service
removed the abandoned vehicle.
      (4)   The Police Department or Town Marshal shall retain the original
records and photographs for at least 2 years.
(I.C. 9-22-1-13(a), (b))
   (D)   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the abandoned
vehicle or parts is at least $1,000, the officer, before placing a notice tag
on the vehicle or parts, shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain the person
who owns the vehicle or parts or who may be in control of the vehicle or parts.
Except as provided in division (A)(2), after 72 hours, the officer shall
require the vehicle or parts to be towed to a storage area.
(I.C. 9-22-1-14)
   (E)   Upon complaint of a person who owns or controls private property that
a vehicle has been left on the property for at least 48 hours without the
consent of the person who owns or controls the property, an officer shall
follow the procedures set forth in divisions (A) through (D) of this section.
(I.C. 9-22-1-18)
§ 93.08 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Within 3 business days after removal of a vehicle to a storage yard or
towing service under §
93.07, the Police Department, Town Marshal or towing service shall conduct a
search of National Motor Vehicle Title Information System or an equivalent and
commonly available data base, to attempt to obtain the last state of record of
the vehicle in order to attempt to ascertain the name and address of the person
who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle.
   (B)   A public agency or towing service obtains the name and address of the
owner of or lienholder on a vehicle shall, not later than 3 business days after
obtaining the name and address, by certified mail, notify the owner of the
vehicle and any lienholder on the vehicle, as indicated by the certificate of
title or discovered by a search under division (A), of the following:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the public agency or
towing service;
      (2)   That storage charges are being accrued and the vehicle is subject
to sale if the vehicle is not claimed and the charges are not paid; and
      (3)   The earliest possible date and location of the public sale or
auction.
The notice must be made by certified mail or a certificate of mailing or by
means of an electronic service approved by the bureau. Notwithstanding §
93.04, a public agency or towing service that fails to notify the owner or
lienholder on the vehicle, as set forth in this division, may not collect
additional storage costs incurred after the date of receipt of the name and
address obtained.
(I.C. 9-22-1-19)
§ 93.09 TOWING CONTRACTS.
   To facilitate the removal of abandoned vehicles or parts, the town may
employ personnel; acquire equipment, property and facilities; and enter into
towing contracts for the removal, storage and disposition of abandoned vehicles
and parts.
(I.C. 9-22-1-31)
§ 93.10 LIABILITY FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE.
   The following are not liable for loss or damage to a vehicle or parts
occurring during the removal, storage or disposition of a vehicle or parts
under this chapter:
   (A)   A person who owns, leases or occupies property from which an abandoned
vehicle or parts are removed;
   (B)   The town;
   (C)   A towing service;
   (D)   An automobile scrapyard; and
   (E)   A storage yard.
(I.C. 9-22-1-32)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING
      
111.   PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING
Section
   
110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain trades, businesses or
professions
   
110.02   Application for license
   
110.03   Standards; issuance of license
   
110.04   Date and duration of license
   
110.05   License not transferable
   
110.06   License certificate to be displayed
   
110.07   Revocation or suspension
   
110.08   Appeal and review
   
110.09   Exemptions
   
110.10   Liquor retailers
   
110.11   Fee
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN CERTAIN TRADES, BUSINESSES OR
PROFESSIONS.
   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses or professions for
which licenses are required by any provision of this code or any other
ordinance of the town without first applying for and obtaining a license from
the Clerk-Treasurer or other duly authorized issuing authority.
Penalty, see §
10.97
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be made to the Clerk-Treasurer in writing upon forms to be
furnished by him or her and shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and of each officer, partner or business
associate;
      (2)   His or her present occupation and place of business;
      (3)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (4)   The period of time for which the license is desired;
      (5)   A description of the merchandise to be sold, if for a vendor; and
      (6)   Other information concerning the applicant and his or her business
as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the license
desired.
   (B)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in good
standing upon the original application, unless otherwise provided.
   (C)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall deposit
the fee required for the license requested.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly make any false statement or
representation in the license application.
Penalty, see §
10.97
§ 110.03 STANDARDS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, accompanied by the
proper fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith deposit the fee in the general fund of the town
and issue to the applicant a proper license certificate signed by the Clerk-
Treasurer and any other appropriate town official. If for any reason the
license is not issued, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant’s
business reputation and moral character shall be made.
   (C)   The application shall be approved unless investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant’s business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare.
Tangible evidence of any of the following will constitute valid reasons for
disapproval of an application:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude;
      (2)   The applicant has made willful misstatements in the application;
      (3)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors and the like;
      (4)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.
§ 110.04 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein
specified and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31
of the year issued. However, at any time after December 14, licenses may be
issued for the ensuing calendar year. Unless otherwise specified, the full
annual fee will be required of licensees irrespective of the date of issue of
the license.
   (B)   In no event shall a license be granted to any business or any person
for a longer time than 1 year.
§ 110.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
Penalty, see §
10.97
§ 110.06 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted in
a prominent place upon the licensed premises the license certificate. Other
licensees shall carry their license certificates at all times and whenever
requested by any officer or citizen, shall exhibit the license.
Penalty, see §
10.97
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any of
the following reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any law involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in a way so
as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general welfare of
the public.
§ 110.08 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
110.03 or
110.07 shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council. The appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Town Council, within 14 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to the person’s last known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Town Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for the hearing shall be given to the
person by mail at his or her last known address, at least 10 days prior to the
date set for the hearing.
   (B)   The order of the Town Council after the hearing shall be final and
appealable per the laws of the State of Indiana.
§ 110.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business, occupation
or profession which is exempt from municipal licensing or license taxes
pursuant to state or federal law. Further, the provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to any business, occupation, or profession which is operated by a
resident in their primary residence. If a business required to obtain a license
has more than one location in Town the business only needs to apply for one
license.
(Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 110.10 LIQUOR RETAILERS.
   Liquor retailers’ permits may be issued in respect to premises located
within the corporate limits of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, to
applicants duly qualified to receive permits under the statutes and laws of the
State of Indiana.
(Ord. 28, passed 12-18-1953 (84-7))
§ 110.11 FEE.
   The fee shall be in accordance with the town fee schedule, §
10.99.
(Ord. 2017-13, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
(Ord. 2017-13, passed 11-20-2017)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definition
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   Application
   
111.04   Fee
   
111.05   Issuance
   
111.06   Term of license
   
111.07   Exhibition of license required
   
111.08   Restrictions
   
111.09   Exemptions
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLERS, HAWKERS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND SOLICITORS. Includes any transient
person who shall engage temporarily in the making or selling of any goods,
wares or merchandise of any kind whatsoever, including the sale, or soliciting
for sale of photographs and magazine subscriptions within the town, regardless
of whether the goods, wares or merchandise are peddled from house to house,
sold or hawked upon the streets or other public places, or sold from any room,
building, structure or lot rented or leased for the purpose of carrying on that
business, for present or future delivery, by telephone or otherwise.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler, solicitor or other itinerant
vendor in goods, wares or merchandise, to offer the same for sale in Beverly
Shores without having first obtained a license therefore.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 APPLICATION.
   Not less than 24 hours prior to the issuance of any license by the Clerk-
Treasurer, as provided herein, an applicant for a license, as a condition
precedent to the issuance of a license, shall furnish to the Clerk-Treasurer a
completed application furnished by the town.
§ 111.04 FEE.
   The fee shall be in accordance with the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
§ 111.05 ISSUANCE.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall make out all licenses granted to peddlers,
hawkers, itinerant vendors and solicitors under this chapter and each license
shall be properly signed by the Clerk-Treasurer and the Chief of Police, upon
the Clerk-Treasurer having received from the applicant the proper sum for the
license and all other terms of this section having been complied with.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 111.06 TERM OF LICENSE.
   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for up to nine months from
the date of issuance, but shall expire no later than December 31 of the
calendar year in which the license is valid. However, at any time after
December 14, licenses may be issued that are valid for the ensuing calendar
year.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991; Am. Ord. 2017-13, passed 11-20-2017)
§ 111.07 EXHIBITION OF LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor, solicitor or
other person to refuse to show his or her license when requested to do so by
any person to whom he or she shall offer to sell any goods, wares or
merchandise, or to any police officer when so requested.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08 RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor, solicitor or
other person to sell, or solicit for sale any goods, wares or merchandise
within the town except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of each
weekday and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturday of each week.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers by
commercial travelers or to government agencies or officers, not to yard, garage
or community rummage sales, nor shall they apply to the sale of newspapers by
one who has a regular and established route for sale of same.
(Ord. 91-03, passed 7-1-1991)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   WEAPONS
      
131.   CURFEW FOR MINORS
CHAPTER 130: WEAPONS
Section
   
130.01   Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions
   
130.02   Bows and arrows; discharge regulations
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The town declares the discharge of firearms and projectile missiles
within the town limits to be a prohibited activity and a nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, rifle,
handgun or projectile missile within the corporate limits of the town.
   (C)   The provisions of division (B) above shall not apply to:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers while they are engaged in the performance
of their official duties;
      (2)   Members of the armed forces of the United States or the national
guard while they are engaged in the performance of their official duties; or
      (3)   Persons while they are exercising their lawful rights of defense of
self or property.
   (D)   It shall not be necessary to fire a shot to be in violation of this
section.
(Res. 02-02, passed 2-18-2002) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 BOWS AND ARROWS; DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
   No person shall hunt by the discharge of bows and arrows or use archery
devices of any kind except during the following times and under the following
conditions.
   (A)   During the regular state hunting season, as promulgated by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, or other state authority.
   (B)   During the deer reduction zone hunting season, in each year that the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or applicable state authority,
includes the town within a deer reduction zone.
   (C)   All state hunting regulations shall apply.
   (D)   There shall be no field dressing of any deer within the town.
   (E)   No discharge of bows shall be permitted during the following times:
      (1)   The Saturday and Sunday preceding October 31;
      (2)   October 31;
      (3)   Thanksgiving Day - the first Sunday following Thanksgiving Day; and
      (4)   December 23 - January 3.
   (F)   No discharge of bows on Saturdays or Sundays, except on properties of
two acres or more.
   (G)   No discharge of bows within 300 feet of any town park, including, but
not limited to Lituanica Park.
   (H)   During the applicable hunting season, discharging of bows is permitted
from a half hour before sunrise until a half hour after sunset, unless a more
limited window is prescribed by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or
other state authority.
   (I)   Bow discharge permit regulations and qualifications:
      (1)   All prospective bowmen must submit the following in order to
receive a bow discharge permit from the Town Marshal:
         (a)   Mandatory hunter education or bow hunter education certificate;
         (b)   Proof of proficiency testing administered by hunter education
instructor or conservation officer;
      (2)   Upon receipt of the required documentation, the Town Marshal shall
issue a bow discharge permit. The total number of permits issued, and any
expiration period, shall be subject to the Marshal's sole and absolute
discretion. However, there may be no more than ten bowmen in town and utilizing
a permit on any given day. Each permit must be returned to the town at the time
of expiration;
      (3)   Bowmen must register with the Town Marshal arrow identification and
vehicle registration; and
      (4)   The Town Marshal may, in his or her sole and absolute discretion,
cancel and invalidate any existing permits for safety purposes or violations of
state or local law.
   (J)   Bow discharge regulations:
      (1)   Discharge of bow sites must consist of 30,000 square feet; two or
more contiguous property owners may combine to establish 30,000 square feet;
      (2)   Each bowman must have a signed permission slip by the owner of the
property and also signed by the bowmen;
      (3)   Each bowman must submit a copy of their signed permission slip to
the Town Marshal. Along with this, the bowmen must submit a copy of a plot map
showing property boundaries proving 30,000 square feet and designation of where
the discharge of bows will take place on the property;
      (4)   Discharging of bows allowed only in rear and side yards;
      (5)   No discharging of bows within 50 feet of neighbor's property
without a signed permission slip;
      (6)   Tree-stand discharge only, unless terrain and hunting conditions
dictate otherwise; and
      (7)   No discharging of bows at a deer at a distance of more than 15
yards.
   (K)   Violation of any of the above regulations will result in the bowmen
and/or the property owner losing the privilege to discharge bows on their
property, in addition to other potential penalties and fines.
(Res. 05-11, passed - -; Res. 04-08, passed 1-6-2004; Am. Ord. 2016-4, passed
9- -2016) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW FOR MINORS
Section
   
131.01   Curfew established
   
131.02   Exemptions
   
131.03   Enforcement against juveniles
   
131.04   Enforcement against parents
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 CURFEW ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   (1)   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16 or 17 years of age
to be in a public place:
         (a)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
         (b)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday; or
         (c)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or
Friday.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take a child
into custody based on a violation of this division (A) unless the law
enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering
the facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:
         (a)   The child has violated this section; and
         (b)   There is no legal defense to the violation.
(I.C. 31-37-3-2)
   (B)   (1)   It is a curfew violation for a child under 15 years of age to be
in a public place after 11:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take a child
into custody based on a violation of this division (B) unless the law
enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering
the facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:
         (a)   The child has violated this division (B); and
         (b)   There is no legal defense to the violation.
(I.C. 31-37-3-3)
Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child was
emancipated at the time that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct:
      (1)   Under I.C. 31-37-19-27 or I.C. 31-6-4-15.7 (before its repeal);
      (2)   By virtue of having married; or
      (3)   In accordance with the laws of another state or jurisdiction.
   (B)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the child’s parent, guardian or custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child’s parent, guardian
or custodian;
      (3)   Participating in, going to or returning from:
         (a)   Lawful employment;
         (b)   A school sanctioned activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child’s rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article 1, § 31 of the Constitution of the State of Indiana, or both, such as
freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
         (f)   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training or other care under the supervision of
1 or more adults.
      (4)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location
outside the state to another location outside the state.
(I.C. 31-37-3-3.5)
§ 131.03 ENFORCEMENT AGAINST JUVENILES.
   The town shall report all curfew violations to the County Juvenile Officer
for processing under appropriate juvenile law.
Statutory reference:
   Curfew violations; delinquent children, see I.C. 31-37-2-5 and 31-37-6-6
§ 131.04 ENFORCEMENT AGAINST PARENTS.
   A parent, guardian or custodian of a child who permits or causes a child to
be in a public place during curfew hours in violation of §
131.01 shall punished as provided in §
131.99.
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to §
10.97 and I.C. 31-37-1 et seq.
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   FLOOD PREVENTION; FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
      
151.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
      
152.   BUILDING CODE
      
153.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
154.   PARKING LOTS
      
155.   ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
CHAPTER 150: FLOOD PREVENTION; FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Statutory authorization
   
150.02   Findings of fact
   
150.03   Statement of purpose
   
150.04   Objectives
   
150.05   Definitions
   
150.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
150.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
150.08   Establishment of floodplain development permits
   
150.09   Compliance
   
150.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
150.11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
150.12   Interpretation
   
150.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
150.30   Designation of Administrator
   
150.31   Permit procedures
   
150.32   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
150.45   Floodplain status standards
   
150.46   General standards
   
150.47   Specific standards
   
150.48   Specific standards for coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE)
   
150.49   Standards for subdivision proposals and other new developments
   
150.50   Critical facility
Variance Procedures
   
150.65   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board
   
150.66   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board
   
150.67   Variance procedures
   
150.68   Conditions for variances
   
150.69   Variance notification
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions, and in I.C.
36-1-4-11 the power to adopt ordinances. Therefore, the Town Council of the
Town of Beverly Shores does hereby adopt the following floodplain management
regulations.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Beverly Shores are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas;
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.04 OBJECTIVES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.05 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area
of 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as
the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure; an accessory structure specifically excludes structures
used for human habitation.
      (1)   Accessory structures are considered walled and roofed where the
structure includes at least two outside rigid walls and a fully secured roof.
      (2)   Examples of accessory structures include but are not necessarily
limited to two-car detached garages (or smaller), carports, storage and tool
sheds, and small boathouses.
      (3)   The following may have uses that are incidental or accessory to the
principal structure on a parcel but are generally not considered to be
accessory structures by the NFIP:
         (a)   Structures in which any portion is used for human habitation,
whether as a permanent residence or as temporary or seasonal living quarters,
such as a detached garage or carriage house that includes an apartment or guest
quarters, or a detached guest house on the same parcel as a principal
residence;
         (b)   Structures used by the public, such as a place of employment or
entertainment; and
         (c)   Development that does not meet the NFIP definition of a
structure for floodplain management purposes. Examples includes, but are not
necessarily limited to, a gazebo, pavilion, picnic shelter, or carport that is
open on all sides (roofed but not walled).
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   ALTERATION OF WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in
channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the
channel or the channel capacity, or any other modification which may alter,
impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water
during conditions of the base flood.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land within a community subject to a
1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The base flood may also be referred to as the 1% annual chance
flood or 100-year flood.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the base flood in
relation to a specified datum, usually the North American Vertical Datum of
1988.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD LAYER (BAFL). Floodplain studies and any corresponding
floodplain maps prepared and/or approved by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources which provide base flood elevation information floodplain limits,
and/or floodway delineations for flood hazards identified by approximate
studies on the currently effective FIRM (Zone A) and/or for waterways where the
flood hazard is not identified on available floodplain mapping.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the structure.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone V1-30, VE, VO, or V.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous
materials or hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. For floodplain management purposes means:
      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads, or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements; etc.;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of boat lifts, docks, piers,
and seawalls;
         (g)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (h)   Storage of materials; or
         (i)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A FEMA form that is routinely reviewed and approved
by the White House Office of Management and Budget under the Paperwork
Reduction Act, that is encouraged to be used to collect certified elevation
information.
   ENCLOSED AREA (ENCLOSURE). An area of a structure enclosed by walls on all
sides.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR and ENCLOSED AREA.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FILL. For floodplain management purposes, means any material deposited or
placed which has the effect of raising the level of the ground surface above
the natural grade elevation. Fill material includes but is not limited to
consolidated material such as concrete and brick and unconsolidated material
such as soil, sand, gravel, and stone.
   FLOOD or FLOODING.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of any inland or tidal waters;
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation, or runoff of surface waters
from any source;
         (c)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of
normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and
deposited along the path of the current.
      (2)   Flood or flooding also includes the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or similar body of water as a result of erosion or
undermining caused by waves or current of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels that result in a flood as defined above.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Areas subject to the one percent annual chance flood. See
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, and
the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. See FLOOD or FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The BFE plus two feet at any given location in
the SFHA. For sites within a SFHA designated as “Zone AO,” the BFE is
equivalent to the flood depth specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map,
measured from the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth is specified, two
feet is used as the minimum depth. See FREEBOARD.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. See FLOOD.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion
control ordinance), and other applications of police power which control
development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local
regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for flood
damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for non-
residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulative increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE or FLOOD FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HARDSHIP. As related to variances of this chapter, the exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Town of
Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of
one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.
All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by (a)
an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or (b)
directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. Analyses performed by a
professional engineer licensed by the State of Indiana, in accordance with
standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency
floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood
profiles.
   INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL-EVALUATION SERVICE (ICC-ES) REPORT. A document
that presents the findings, conclusions, and recommendations from a particular
evaluation. ICC-ES reports provide information about what code requirements or
acceptance criteria were used to evaluate a product, and how the product should
be identified, installed.
   LATTICE WORK. See BREAKAWAY WALL.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They are broken down into the following categories: They include Letter
of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map
Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are presented below:
      (1)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). FEMA’s comment on a
proposed project that would, upon construction, result in modification of the
SFHA through the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
      (2)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (CLOMR-F). A
letter from FEMA stating that a proposed structure that will be elevated by
fill would not be inundated by the base flood.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the
currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in
a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.
      (4)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT OUT AS SHOWN (LOMA-OAS). An official
determination by FEMA that states the property or building is correctly shown
outside the SFHA as shown on an effective NFIP map. Therefore, the mandatory
flood insurance requirement does not apply. An out-as-shown determination does
not require elevations.
      (5)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.
      (6)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). FEMA’s modification
of the SFHA shown on the FIRM based on the placement of fill outside the
existing regulatory floodway.
    LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. For floodplain management purposes, the lowest elevation
described among the following:
      (1)   The lowest floor of a building;
      (2)   The basement floor;
      (3)   The garage floor, if the garage is connected to the building;
      (4)   The first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or pillars;
      (5)   The floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement, below an
elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to
the flow of floodwaters. Designs for meeting the flood opening requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following criteria:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood;
         (b)   At least two opening are designed and maintained for the entry
and exit of floodwater; and these openings provide a total net area of at least
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of all
such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher. Doorways
and windows do not qualify as openings; and
      (6)   The first floor of a building elevated on pilings or columns in a
coastal high hazard area (as that term is defined in 44 CFR 59.1), as long as
it meets the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATURAL GRADE. For floodplain management purposes means the elevation of the
undisturbed natural surface of the ground. Fill placed prior to the date of the
initial identification of the flood hazard on a FEMA map is also considered
natural grade.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of floodplain management, any structure
for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date
of the community's first floodplain ordinance or other floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993, is a
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community's FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PREFABRICATED BUILDING. Is a building that is manufactured and constructed
using prefabrication. It consists of factory-made components or units that are
transported and assembled on-site to form the complete building.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of
sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides
and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal
dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively
steep slope to a mild slope.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure, less land value, is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet of less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as permanent dwelling, but as
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
150.07 of this chapter. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the terms "base
flood,” "1% annual chance flood", and "100-year flood".
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SAND DUNES. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the storage or
disposal of non-liquid, non-soluble materials ranging from municipal garbage to
industrial wastes that contain complex and sometimes hazardous substances.
Solid waste also includes sewage sludge, agricultural refuse, demolition
wastes, mining wastes, and liquids and gases stored in containers.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHAs). See also “areas of special flood hazard”
and floodplain. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the town of Beverly
Shores subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special
flood hazard areas are designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Insurance Studies, as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-
30, A99, or VE. The SFHA includes areas that are flood prone and designated
from other federal, state or local sources of data including but not limited to
best available flood layer maps provided by or approved by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, historical flood information reflecting high
water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone soils associated
with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. For the purposes of floodplain management, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above
ground. The term includes a manufactured home, as well as a prefabricated
building. The term also includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a
site for more than 180 consecutive days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “repetitive loss”
or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship, and consistent with
the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
   WALLED AND ROOFED. A building that has two or more exterior rigid walls and
a fully secured roof and is affixed to a permanent site.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Beverly Shores, as identified in §
150.07, including any SFHA annexed by the Town of Beverly Shores.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of Beverly Shores, delineated
as an “AE Zone” on the Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2022, shall be determined from the one-
percent annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Porter
County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM) dated September 29, 2022, as well as any subsequent updates,
amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date. Should the floodway limits not be delineated on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map for a studied SFHA designated as an “AE Zone”, the
limits of the floodway will be according to the best available flood layer as
provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation for the SFHAs of Lake Michigan,
delineated as a “VE Zone” on the Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas
Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2022, shall be the highest
elevation specified on the FIRM among all flood zones affecting the proposed
development, as well any subsequent updates, amendments or revisions, prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (C)   The regulatory flood elevation for the SFHAs of Lake Michigan,
delineated as a “AE Zone” on the Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas
Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2022, shall be the highest
elevation published on the Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2022, among all flood zones affecting
the proposed development, as well as any subsequent updates, amendments, or
revisions prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date.
   (D)   The regulatory flood elevation for each studied SFHAs within the
jurisdiction of Town of Beverly Shores, delineated as an “AH Zone” on the
Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated
September 29, 2022, shall be that elevation published on the Porter County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 29,
2022, as well as any subsequent updates, amendments, or revisions prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
   (E)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each
of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of Beverly Shores, delineated
as an "A Zone" on the Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood
Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2022 as well as any future updates,
amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date, shall be according to the best available flood layer
as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the
upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best available flood layer, the party needs
to replace existing data with better data that meets current engineering
standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved.
   (F)   The regulatory flood elevation for each SFHA within the jurisdiction
of the Town of Beverly Shores delineated as an "AO Zone" shall be that
elevation (or depth) published on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Porter
County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated September 29, 2022, as well as any
subsequent updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date. If no depth is specified on the
FIRM, the community shall use two feet as the minimum depth.
   (G)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best available flood layer as provided by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is
greater than one square mile.
   (H)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard (SFHA).
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.09 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered within the SFHAs without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.
   (B)   Where an existing or proposed structure or other development is
affected by multiple flood zones, by multiple base flood elevations, or both,
the development activity must comply with the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the most restrictive flood zone and the most conservative
(highest) base flood elevation affecting any part of the existing or proposed
structure; or for other developments, affecting any part of the area of the
development.
   (C)   No land or stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.11 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) with base flood elevations provided (riverine or lacustrine Zone AE or
Zone AH) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided
on the profiles or table of still water elevations shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the natural grade elevation of the site in question is at or above
the base flood elevation and a LOMA or LOMR-FW is obtained, the floodplain
regulations will not be applied provided the LOMA or LOMR-FW is not
subsequently superseded or invalidated.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the Town of Beverly Shores, the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results
from reliance on this chapter, or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 150.30 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Council of the Town of Beverly Shores hereby appoints the Building
Commissioner to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is
herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.31 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator for all development activities located wholly within,
partially within, or in contact with a SFHA. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or their authorized agent, herein referred to as the
application, prior to the actual commencement of such construction or
development on a form furnished for that purpose. Such applications shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials
or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
   (A)   Application stage.
      (1)   A description of the proposed development;
      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams;
      (3)   A legal description of the property site;
      (4)   For the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or improvement of an
existing structure, or an addition to an existing building, a detailed quote
and description of the total work to be completed including but not limited to
interior work, exterior work, and labor as well as a certified valuation of the
existing (pre-improved or pre-damaged) structure;
      (5)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed development
locations and existing and proposed land grades;
      (6)   A letter from a licensed professional surveyor or engineering
noting that an elevation reference benchmark has been established or confirmed
for those projects requiring elevations to be met;
      (7)   Verification that connection to either a public sewer system or to
an approved on-site septic system is available and approved by the respective
regulatory agency for proposed structures to be equipped with a restroom,
kitchen or other facilities requiring disposal of wastewater;
      (8)   Plans showing elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed structures in Zones A, AE, AH. In Zone AO,
plans must show the height of the top of the lowest floor above the highest
adjacent grade. In Zones V or VE, plans must also show the elevation of the
bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal member. Elevation should be in NAVD
88;
      (9)   Plans showing elevation (in NAVD 88) to which any non-residential
structure will be floodproofed;
      (10)   Plans showing location and specifications for flood openings for
any proposed structure with enclosed areas below the flood protection grade;
      (11)   Plans showing materials to be used below the flood protection
grade for any proposed structure are flood resistant;
      (12)   Plans showing how any proposed structure will be anchored to
resist flotation or collapse;
      (13)   Plans showing how any electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities are designed and/or
located. Elevation should be in NAVD 88;
      (14)   Certification of structural design and methods of construction for
VE zone construction as required by §
150.48;
      (15)   Certification of breakaway wall design, when applicable, as
provided in §
150.48);
      (16)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis is required, and any watercourse changes submitted to DNR
for approval. Once DNR approval is obtained, a FEMA Conditional Letter of Map
Revision must be obtained prior to construction (see § 150.32(B)(6) for
additional information);
      (17)   Any additional information, as requested by the Floodplain
Administrator, which may be necessary to determine the disposition of a
proposed development or structure with respect to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Construction stage.
      (1)   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated structure or
structure constructed on fill, or the placement of lowest supporting horizontal
member in V zones, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator an elevation certification for the structure under
construction. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the elevation
certificate. Any deficiencies detected during the review shall be corrected by
the applicant before work is allowed to continue. Failure to submit the survey
or elevation certificate, or failure to make said corrections required hereby
shall be cause to issue a stopwork order for the project. Any work undertaken
prior to submission of the elevation certification shall be at the applicant's
risk.
      (2)   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a floodproofed
structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer and
certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the floodproofing
certification submitted). The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected
by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit
the floodproofing certification or failure to make correction required shall be
cause to issue a stopwork order for the project.
   (C)   Finished construction.
      (1)   Upon completion of construction of any structure requiring
certification of elevation, an elevation certificate which depicts the “as-
built” lowest floor elevation, lowest supporting horizontal member for
structures in Zones V or VE, and other applicable elevation data is required to
be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator. The elevation
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor and certified by the same.
      (2)   Upon completion of construction of an elevated structure
constructed on fill, a fill report is required to be submitted to the
Floodplain Administrator to verify the required standards were met, including
compaction.
      (3)   Upon completion of construction of a floodproofing measure, a
floodproofing certificate is required to be submitted by the applicant to the
Floodplain Administrator. The floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer or architect
and certified by same.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.32 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter,
which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Review all floodplain development permit applications for permits
to develop in SFHAs to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have
been satisfied.
      (3)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
      (4)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
      (5)   Advise permittee that additional federal, state and/or local
permits may be required. If specific federal, state and/or local permits are
known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file
with the floodplain development permit.
      (6)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
      (7)   For applications to improve structures, including alterations,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions,
rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial
damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures,
the Floodplain Administrator shall:
         (a)   Verify and document the market value of the pre-damaged or pre-
improved structure;
         (b)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement; or the cost to
repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition; or, the combined costs
of improvements and repair, if applicable, to the market value of the pre-
damaged or pre-improved structure. The cost of all work must be included in the
project costs, including work that might otherwise be considered routine
maintenance. Items/activities that must be included in the cost shall be in
keeping with guidance published by FEMA to ensure compliance with the NFIP and
to avoid any conflict with future flood insurance claims of policyholders
within the community;
         (c)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination
requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as
specified in the definition of “substantial improvement” for proposed work to
repair damage caused by flood, the determination requires evaluation of
previous permits issued to repair flood-related damage as specified in the
definition of substantial damage; and
         (d)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the applicable general and specific standards in §§
150.45 through
150.50 are required.
      (8)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA.
      (9)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§
150.45(A), (C)(1), and (D) and maintain a record of such authorization (either
copy of actual permit/ authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment).
      (10)   Verify the upstream drainage area of any proposed development site
near any watercourse not identified on a FEMA map to determine if §
150.32(B)(9) is applicable.
      (11)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in
accordance with §
150.31.
      (13)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with §
150.31.
      (14)   Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with §
150.31(B) and (C).
      (15)   Coordinate with insurance adjusters prior to permitting any
proposed work to bring any flood-damaged structure covered by a standard flood
insurance policy into compliance (either a substantially damaged structure or a
repetitive loss structure) to ensure eligibility for ICC funds.
      (16)   Ensure that an approved connection to a public sewer system or an
approved on-site septic system is planned for any structures (residential or
non-residential) to be equipped with a restroom, kitchen or other facilities
requiring disposal of wastewater.
      (17)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
      (18)   Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke
permits and take corrective actions in accordance with §
150.32(C).
      (19)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHAs maps, Letters of Map Change
(LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit
documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings
constructed subject to this chapter §
150.32(C).
      (20)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and associated FEMA follow-
up in accordance with §
150.32(C)(6).
      (21)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or Physical
Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community.
      (22)   Request any additional information which may be necessary to
determine the disposition of a proposed development or structure with respect
to the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Administrative procedures.
      (1)   Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit
progresses, the floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the
work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the
provisions of the local ordinance and terms of the permit. In exercising this
power, the administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credential,
to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable
hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
         (a)   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that all
applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been
satisfied;
         (b)   The first upon the establishment of the flood protection grade
reference mark at the development site;
         (c)   The second upon the establishment of the structure's footprint/
establishment of the lowest floor; and
         (d)   The final inspection upon completion and submission of the
required finished construction elevation certificate.
      (2)   Stop work orders.
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall
state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (3)   Revocation of permits.
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval,
issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Floodplain management records.
         (a)   Regardless of any limitation on the period required for
retention of public records, records of actions associated with the
administration of this chapter shall be kept on file and maintained under the
direction of the Floodplain Administrator in perpetuity. These records include
permit applications, plans, certifications, Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letter
of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits;
determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or
repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation
of elevations required by this chapter; notifications to adjacent communities,
FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the
flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained;
documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for
issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this
chapter.
         (b)   These records shall be available for public inspection at the
Beverly Shores Town Hall located at 500 Broadway, Beverly Shores, IN 46301.
      (5)   Periodic inspection. Once a project is completed, periodic
inspections may be conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to ensure
compliance. The Floodplain Administrator shall have a right, upon presentation
of proper credential, to enter on any premises within the territorial
jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
      (6)   Map maintenance activities. To meet NFIP minimum requirements to
have flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the Town of
Beverly Shores flood maps, studies and other data identified in §
150.07 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
         (a)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
            1.   For all development proposals that impact floodway
delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that
technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months
of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals
include:
               a.   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
               b.   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed
structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special
flood hazard area;
               c.   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and Subdivision or large-scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations.
            2.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have required
technical data for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map
Revision and submitted to FEMA. The Indiana Department of Natural Resources
will review the submittals as part of a partnership with FEMA. The submittal
should be mailed to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources at the address
provided on the FEMA form (MT-2) or submitted through the online Letter of Map
Change website. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be
the responsibility of the applicant.
            3.   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit
for proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation.
            4.   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map
Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to this section.
         (b)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator
may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that
does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations,
such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include
appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the Town Council
President of the Town of Beverly Shores and may be submitted to FEMA at any
time.
         (c)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the Town
of Beverly Shores have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed
authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the
Porter County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map
accurately represent the Town of Beverly Shores boundaries, include within such
notification a copy of a map of the Town of Beverly Shores suitable for
reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for
which the Town of Beverly Shores has assumed or relinquished floodplain
management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 150.45 FLOODPLAIN STATUS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Floodways (riverine). Located within SFHAs, established in §
150.07 are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. Under the provisions of the
Flood Control Act (I.C. 14-28-1) a permit for construction in a floodway from
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance
of a local building permit for any excavation, deposit, construction, or
obstruction activity located in the floodway. This includes land preparation
activities such as filling, grading, clearing and paving undertaken before the
actual start of construction of the structure. General licenses and exemptions
to the requirements of the Flood Control Act (I.C. 14-28-1 and 312 IAC 10) may
apply to qualified additions/improvements to existing lawful residential
structures, rural bridges, logjam removals, wetland restoration, utility line
crossings, outfall projects, creek rock removal, and prospecting.
      (1)   If the site is in a regulatory floodway as established in §
150.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources and apply for approval for construction in a
floodway, provided the activity does not qualify for a general license or
exemption (I.C. 14-28-1 or 312 IAC 10).
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
approval has been granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for
construction in the floodway, or evidence provided by an applicant that the
development meets specified criteria to qualify for a general license or
exemption to the requirement of the Flood Control Act. The floodplain
development permit shall meet the provisions contained in this chapter.
      (3)   The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive than
an approval issued for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, or the specified criteria used to qualify for
a general license or exemption to the Flood Control Act for a specific site/
project. However, a community’s more restrictive regulations (if any) shall
take precedence.
      (4)   In floodway areas identified on the FIRM, development shall cause
no increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge
without first obtaining a Conditional Letter of Map Revision and meeting
requirements of §
150.32(C)(6). A Conditional Letter of Map Revision cannot be issued for
development that would cause an increase in flood levels affecting a structure
and such development should not be permitted.
      (5)   In floodway areas identified by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources through detailed or approximate studies but not yet identified on the
effective FIRM as floodway areas, the total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development,
shall not adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity
of the floodway. This adverse effect is defined as an increase in the elevation
of the regulatory flood of at least fifteen-hundredths of a foot as determined
by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that
under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
      (6)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees) the town shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping standard
regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.
   (B)   Fringe (riverine). If the site is in the fringe (either identified on
the FIRM or identified by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources through
detailed or approximate studies and not identified on a FIRM), the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in this chapter have been met.
   (C)   SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or floodways/
fringes (riverine).
      (1)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of
the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.
         (b)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
written approval from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources (approval for
construction in a floodway, letter of authorization, or evidence of general
license qualification) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing
the one-percent annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood
protection grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
         (c)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper
written approval, evidence of general license qualification, or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development from the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, a floodplain development permit may be
issued, provided the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not
less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources and the provisions contained in this section have been met.
      (2)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of
the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area
upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the
limits of the floodplain and one-percent annual chance flood elevation for the
site.
         (b)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in this
chapter have been met.
   (D)   SFHAs not identified on a map.
      (1)   If a proposed development site is near a waterway with no SFHA
identified on a map, the Floodplain Administrator shall verify the drainage
area upstream of the site. If the drainage area upstream of the site is
verified as being greater than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all
pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review and comment.
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
written approval from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources (approval for
construction in a floodway, letter of authorization, or evidence of general
license qualification) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing
the one-percent annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood
protection grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper written
approval, evidence of general license qualification, or floodplain analysis/
regulatory assessment approving the proposed development from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, a floodplain development permit may be issued,
provided the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not less
restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources and the provisions contained in this chapter have been met.
   (E)   Coastal high hazard areas. Areas in/around Lake Michigan are
designated as coastal high hazard areas as established in §
150.07. These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave wash. A
person, other than a public or municipal water utility, may not place, fill, or
erect a permanent structure in; remove water from; or remove material from a
navigable waterway without a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources (I.C. 14-19-1). Once a permit or approval has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
the local floodplain development permit provided the applicable provisions in
this chapter have been met.
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.46 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHA the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction, reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive
loss structure, and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG;
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements must incorporate methods
and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be located at/above the FPG for
residential structures. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be located at/above
the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone
lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be
located below the FPG;
   (E)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter;
   (I)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres;
   (J)   Where an existing or proposed structure or other development is
affected by multiple flood zones, by multiple base flood elevations, or both,
the development activity must comply with the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the most restrictive flood zone and the highest base flood
elevation affecting any part of the existing or proposed structure; or for
other developments, affecting any part of the area of the development;
   (K)   Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures to be constructed on slopes in areas of shallow
flooding, designated as Zone AO or Zone AH on the FIRM;
   (L)   Fill projects that do not involve a structure must be protected
against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulk
heading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
feet horizontal to one foot vertical;
   (M)   Construction of new solid waste disposal facilities, hazard waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted in areas of special flood hazard;
   (N)   Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the SFHAs shall be
constructed with permeable materials;
   (O)   Whenever any portion of the SFHAs is authorized for use, the volume of
space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the BFE
shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume of excavation
taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to the
volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of one to one) due to the fill or
structure:
      (1)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.
      (2)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be allowed to take
place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that the excavated
volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in the same
property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will be
accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding when
not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled.
      (3)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of floodwater but
shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood water.
      (4)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way leading to
the floodplain.
      (5)   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the excavated
area is accessible to the regulatory flood water.
      (6)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed stable enough
to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and shall include
provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any increased runoff or
drainage resulting from its placement.
      (7)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled shall be
submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site work; once site
work is complete, but before the actual start of construction, the applicant
shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a certified survey of the
excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply with
this section.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.47 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHA, where base flood elevation data or flood depths have been
provided (other than coastal high hazard areas), as set forth in §
150.07, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   In addition to the general standards requirements of §
150.46, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the
following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any residential structure or any non-
residential structure.
      (2)   Addition or improvement made to an existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land) An addition and/or
improvement project that is continuous in scope or time is considered as one
project for permitting purposes.
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred (the costs of any proposed additions or
improvements beyond restoring the damaged structure to its before damaged
condition must be included in the cost).
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days.
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site.
      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
      (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structures shall meet the provisions described in §
150.45 and §
150.46.
      (1)   In Zone A and Zone AE, new construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor; including basement,
at or above the Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of §
150.47(B)(4).
      (2)   In Zone AH, new construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor; including basement, at or
above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of §
150.47(B)(4). Should fill be used to elevate a structure, the standards of §
150.47(B)(5) must be met. Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures to be constructed on slopes.
      (3)   In Zone AO, new construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
two feet greater than the flood depth specified on the FIRM above the highest
adjacent grade. If no flood depth is specified, the community shall use two
feet as the minimum depth. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements
of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of §
150.047(B)(4). Should fill be used to elevate a structure, the standards of §
150.047(B)(5) must be met. Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures to be constructed on slopes.
      (4)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls
below the flood protection grade shall meet the following requirement:
         (a)   Designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls. Flood openings must be designed and installed in
compliance with criteria set out in FEMA Technical Bulletin 1. Engineered flood
openings must be designed and certified by a registered design professional
(requires supporting engineering certification or make/model specific ICC-ES
Report). Non-engineered openings must have a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area. Both engineered and
non-engineered flood openings must meet the following installation criteria:
            1.   Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of an
enclosure. If there are multiple enclosed areas, each is required to meet the
requirements for enclosures, including the requirement for flood openings in
exterior walls;
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot
above the higher of the final interior grade (or floor) and the finished
exterior grade immediately under each opening;
            3.   Doors and windows do not qualify as openings;
            4.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions;
            5.   Openings are to be not less than three inches in any direction
in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in the wall,
excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical foundation air vent
device.
         (b)   The floor of such enclosed area must be at or above grade on at
least one side.
      (5)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential structure may be
constructed on fill in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test showing
compliance shall be retained in the permit file.
         (b)   Fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
         (c)   Fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical.
         (d)   Fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
         (e)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
      (6)   A residential structure may be constructed using a stem wall
foundation (also called chain wall, raised-slab-on-grade, and slab-on-stem-
wall-with-fill). Any backfilled stem wall foundation (also called chain wall,
raised-slab-on-grade, and slab-on-stem-wall-with-fill) must be backfilled with
compacted structural fill, concrete, or gravel that supports the floor slab. No
flood openings are required for this type of construction.
   (C)   Non-residential structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure (excludes accessory structures) shall meet the provisions described
in §
150.45 and applicable general standards described in §
150.46.
      (2)   In Zone A and Zone AE, new construction, or substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (excludes accessory
structures) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement and,
elevated to or above the FPG or be floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should
solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be
provided in accordance with the standards of §
150.47(C)(5). Should fill be used to elevate a structure, the standards of §
150.047(C)(6) must be met.
      (3)   In Zone AH, new construction or substantial improvement of any non-
residential structure (excludes accessory structures) shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated at least to the FPG or be floodproofed to
or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of §
150.47(C)(5). Should fill be used to elevate a structure, the standards of §
150.47(C)(6) must be met. Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures to be constructed on slopes.
      (4)   In Zone AO, new non-residential construction or substantial
improvements of any non-residential structure (excludes accessory structures)
shall either:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two
feet greater than the flood depth number specified on the FIRM (If no flood
depth number is specified, two feet shall be used as the flood depth.) above
the highest adjacent grade. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements
of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of §
150.47(C)(5). Should fill be used to elevate a structure, the standards of §
150.47(C)(6) must be met. Drainage paths must be provided to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures to be constructed on slopes; or
         (b)   Be floodproofed to an elevation at least two greater than the
flood depth number specified on the FIRM (if no flood depth number is
specified, two feet shall be used as the flood depth) above the highest
adjacent grade.
      (5)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls
below the flood protection grade shall meet the following requirement:
         (a)   Designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls. Flood openings must be designed and installed in
compliance with criteria set out in FEMA Technical Bulletin 1. Engineered flood
openings must be designed and certified by a registered design professional
(requires supporting engineering certification or make/model specific ICC-ES
Report), or meet the following criteria for non-engineered flood openings:
            1.   Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of an
enclosure. If more than one enclosed area is present, each must have openings
on exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area);
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot
above the higher of the final interior grade (or floor) and the finished
exterior grade immediately under each opening;
            3.   Doors and windows do not qualify as openings;
            4.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions;
            5.   Openings are to be not less than three inches in any direction
in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in the wall,
excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical foundation air vent
device.
         (b)   The floor of such enclosed area must be at or above grade on at
least one side.
      (6)   A nonresidential structure may be constructed on fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   Shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before
compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the Standard or
Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test showing compliance shall
be retained in the permit file;
         (b)   Shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the structure
before sloping below the BFE;
         (c)   Shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by
vegetative cover, riprap, or bulk heading. If vegetative cover is used, the
slopes shall be no steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical;
         (d)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties;
         (e)   Shall be composed of clean granular or earthen material.
      (7)   A nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in accordance with
the following:
         (a)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
      (8)   A nonresidential structure may be constructed using a stem wall
foundation (also called chain wall, raised-slab-on-grade, and slab-on-stem-
wall-with-fill). Any backfilled stem wall foundation must be backfilled with
compacted structural fill, concrete, or gravel that supports the floor slab. No
flood openings are required for this type of construction.
   (D)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in the SFHA:
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in §
150.47(B)(4).
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (2)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days and be fully licensed and
ready for use on a public highway (defined as being on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached additions); or
         (b)   Meet the requirements for "manufactured homes" as stated earlier
in this section.
   (E)   Accessory structures. Within SFHAs, new construction or placement of
an accessory structure must meet the following standards:
      (1)   Shall have a floor area of 400 square feet or less;
      (2)   Use shall be limited to parking of vehicles and limited storage;
      (3)   Shall not be used for human habitation;
      (4)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (5)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (6)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (7)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG;
      (8)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in §
150.47(C)(5);
      (9)   Shall not have subsequent additions or improvements that would
preclude the structure from its continued designation as an accessory
structure.
   (F)   Free-standing pavilions, gazebos, decks, carports, and similar
development. Within SFHAs, new construction or placement of free-standing
pavilions, gazebos, decks, carports, and similar development must meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Shall have open sides (having not more than one rigid wall);
      (2)   Shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement;
      (3)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials below the FPG;
      (4)   Any electrical, heating, plumbing and other service facilities
shall be located at/above the FPG;
      (5)   Shall not have subsequent additions or improvements that would
preclude the development from its continued designation as a free-standing
pavilion, gazebo, carport, or similar open-sided development.
   (G)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. Within SFHAs designated as
Zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, AH, V, and VE on the community’s FIRM, all newly placed
or replacement aboveground gas or liquid storage tanks shall meet the
requirements for a non-residential structure as required in §
150.47(C).
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.48 SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS (ZONE VE).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
150.07, are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas in/along Lake
Michigan (Zone VE). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave
wash. The following provisions apply within coastal high hazard areas:
   (A)   Human-made alterations of sand dunes within a coastal high hazard area
are prohibited unless an engineering report documents that the alterations will
not increase potential flood damage by reducing the wave and flow dissipation
characteristics of the sand dunes.
   (B)   The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited.
   (C)   Non-structural fill within a coastal high hazard area shall be
permitted only if an engineering report demonstrates that the fill will not
cause runup, ramping, or deflection of floodwaters that cause damage to
buildings.
   (D)   Within a Coast High Hazard Area, bulkheads, seawalls, revetments, and
other erosion control measures shall not be connected to the foundation or
superstructure of a building and shall be designed and constructed so as not to
direct floodwaters or increase flood forces or erosion impacts on the
foundation or superstructure of any building.
   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements must be elevated on
pilings or columns so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is at or above
the FPG. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto must be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects
of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components.
      (1)   Water loading values used must be those associated with the base
flood.
      (2)   Wind loading values used must be those required by applicable state
or local building standards; or in the absence of applicable state or local
building standards, those determined according to American Society of Civil
Engineers 7-16, Minimum design loads and associated criteria for buildings and
other structures, or equivalent standard.
      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect must develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
and must certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
this section.
      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements must have the space
below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or be constructed with non-
supporting breakaway walls, open wood latticework, or insect screening intended
to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement,
or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
      (5)   For purposes of this section, a breakaway wall must have a design
safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per
square foot.
      (6)   Use of breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance
of 20 pounds per square foot, either by design or where so required by local or
State codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the design proposed meets the following conditions:
         (a)   Breakaway wall collapse must result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
         (b)   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system must not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components, structural and nonstructural.
            1.   Water loading values used must be those associated with the
base flood.
            2.   Wind loading values used must be those required by applicable
State or local building standards; or in the absence of applicable State or
local building standards, those determined according to American Society of
Civil Engineers 7-16, Minimum design loads and associated criteria for
buildings and other structures, or equivalent standard.
      (7)   Any enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.
      (8)   Placement or substantial improvement of manufactured homes must
comply with §
150.047(D).
      (9)   Recreational vehicles must either:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
         (c)   Comply with §
150.047(D).
(Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.49 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS AND OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
area not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and all other proposed new development (including manufactured home
parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/
or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.50 CRITICAL FACILITY.
   (A)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA.
   (B)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within
the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available.
      (1)   Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
      (2)   Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
      (3)   Access routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all
critical facilities to the extent possible.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022) Penalty, see §
150.99
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 150.65 DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.66 DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator
in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by
the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the Porter County Circuit
or Superior Court.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.67 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   In considering such applications, the Board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of
this chapter, and:
   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
   (B)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (C)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (D)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (E)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
   (G)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters at the site;
   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.68 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   A written report addressing each of the above factors in §
150.67 shall be submitted with the application for a variance.
   (B)   Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall only be granted
when the Board can make positive findings of fact based on evidence submitted
at the hearing for the following:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship as defined in §
150.05; and
      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public,
or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
   (C)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §
150.45(A), (C), or (D) may be granted.
   (D)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §
150.45(A), (C), or (D) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources. Variances shall not be issued within any designated
regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
   (E)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
150.45(B) may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
   (F)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (G)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
   (H)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use.
   (I)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (J)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
   (K)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation (see §
150.69).
   (L)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.69 VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official, that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood
protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
      (2)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks
to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a
manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
(Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord.
2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
      (1)   All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated
as such in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the Town of
Beverly Shores.
      (2)   All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500
for the first violation and $7,500 for the second and any subsequent violation.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.
   (B)   The Town of Beverly Shores Town Council shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 93-04, passed 11-8-1993; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 2-19-2007; Am. Ord. 2015-
05, passed 8-17-2015; Am. Ord. 2022-09, passed 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 151: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
Section
   
151.01   Adoption of state unsafe buildings law
   
151.02   Establishment of Building Department
   
151.03   Establishment of Unsafe Building Fund
   
151.04   Definitions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 ADOPTION OF STATE UNSAFE BUILDINGS LAW.
   Indiana Code Chapter 36-7-9 (Unsafe Building Law), as amended from time to
time, is hereby adopted.
(Ord. 11-26, passed 3-11-2012)
§ 151.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   The Town of Beverly Shores Building Department is created and the Building
Commissioner shall be the chief administrative officer of the Department.
(Ord. 11-26, passed 3-11-2012)
§ 151.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   The Town of Beverly Shores Unsafe Building Fund shall be established as a
non-reverting fund in which shall be deposited monies from any source allowed
by law, including, but not limited to, any monies received as payment for
reimbursement of the town’s expenditures in implementing any provision of this
chapter. Upon appropriation by the Council, monies from the Fund may be
expended for any purpose directly related to the implementation and enforcement
of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-26, passed 3-11-2012)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSIONER. The Building Department Commissioner for the Town of Beverly
Shores who shall be the enforcement authority for purposes of this chapter.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. That person appointed by the Common Council from time to
time to hear appeals of any Commissioner order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   ORDER. Any directive issued by the Commissioner. Except in emergency
situations, the ORDER should be in writing.
   PERSON. Any individual or entity capable of holding an interest in real
estate.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. The definition of SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY
INTEREST set forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2 is incorporated herein by reference. As of
the date of this chapter it means any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by action authorized by this chapter, including a
fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a mortgage interest,
or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.
   TOWN. The Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. See I.C. 36-7-9-4(a) and I.C. 36-7-9-4.5, as amended.
   UNSAFE PREMISES. See I.C. 36-7-9-4(b) and (c) and I.C. 36-7-9-4.5, as
amended
(Ord. 11-26, passed 3-11-2012)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Up to the maximum amount allowed by Indiana law at the time of the
violation, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails to
timely comply with the requirements of a Commissioner’s Order directed to that
person or that person’s property may be fined up to $2,500 per violation. Each
day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. The
Commissioner may issue a citation for any violation of this chapter or any
Commissioner Order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 11-26, passed 3-11-2012)
CHAPTER 152: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
152.01   Title, purpose and authority
   
152.02   Scope; adoption of regulations
   
152.03   Permits; compliance
   
152.04   Fees
   
152.05   Review of application
   
152.06   Inspections
   
152.07   Entry; stop order
   
152.08   Certificate of occupancy
   
152.09   Standards
   
152.10   Violations
   
152.11   Right of appeal
   
152.12   Remedies
   
152.13   Sanitary code
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 TITLE, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Indiana Code 36-1-3-1 et seq. and I.C. 22-13-2-2 authorize the Town
Council to adopt an ordinance regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, structural repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all
buildings and/or structures in the town; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefore; providing penalties for the violation
thereof.
   (B)   This subchapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the Building Code of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana, may
be cited as so, and will be referred to herein as this subchapter.
   (C)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, limb, health, environment, public safety and welfare, and
for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures.
   (D)   (1)   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this subchapter, except as
otherwise provided by law, regulation, statute or ordinance of the United
States, State of Indiana or its political subdivision, including but not
limited to Chapter 155.
      (2)   Whenever in the building regulations, it is provided that anything
must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction at the Building
Commissioner or any other officer of the town, this shall be construed to give
the officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards
established by ordinance has been complied with; and no provision shall be
construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what regulations,
codes or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinances or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory
manner.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.02 SCOPE; ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter apply to the construction,
alterations, structural repair, use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to
all buildings, structures and fences, in the town.
   (B)   The following rules and regulations, as published and/or promulgated
by the respective state administrative agency, hereby referred to, are adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this subchapter.
      (1)   Construction Rules and Regulations, Volume 1, 1980 Edition of the
State of Indiana (660 I.A.C. 1-1.1) as amended, which was originally published
as (3 IR 2148) which identifies, amends and incorporates therein the Uniform
Building Code, 1979 Edition, and the Uniform Building Code Standards, 1979
Edition.
      (2)   Indiana Electrical Rules, 1981 Edition (660 I.A.C. 7) as amended,
which was originally published as (4 IR 798) which identifies, amends and
incorporates therein the National Electrical Code, 1981 Edition.
      (3)   Indiana Plumbing Rules, 1981 Edition, (660 I.A.C. 9) as amended,
which was originally published as (4 IR 2398) which identifies, amends and
incorporates therein the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1979 Edition.
      (4)   Indiana Mechanical Rules, 1981 Edition, (660 I.A.C. 8) as amended,
which was originally published as (4 IR 1828) which identifies, amends and
incorporates therein the Uniform Mechanical Code, 1979 Edition.
      (5)   One and Two Family Dwelling Code of Indiana, (660 TAG 3-1) as
amended, which was originally published as (4 IR 916) which identifies, amends
and incorporates therein the One and Two Family Dwelling Coda, 1979 Edition.
      (6)   Indiana Energy Conservation Rules and Regulations for New Building
Construction, Volume V, 1979 Edition, (660 IAC 4) (1980 Supp.) as emended,
which was originally published under that title.
      (7)   Swimming Pool Code (660 IAC 5) (1979 Supp.) as amended, which was
originally published as the Indiana Swimming Pool Code, 1978 Edition.
   (C)   Copies of this subchapter and rules, regulations and codas adopted
herein by reference are on file as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4 in the office of
the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.03 PERMITS; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   (1)   No permits shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless
the application for the permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done, and the Building Commissioner determines the
applicant has complied with all ordinances of the town.
      (2)   All plans for building construction under the authority of the
Administrative Building Council of the State of Indiana must also be filed with
the Council.
      (3)   No local permits shall be issued hereunder until a copy of any
required release for construction from the State Building Commissioner is
received by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning any excavation,
construction, or alteration of any building or structure, as provided in §
155.055, using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. No permit shall be
issued by the Building Commissioner unless all requirements of the Town Code
relating to that permit have been satisfied and all fees provided for herein
have been paid to the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (C)   All work done under any permit issued hereunder shall be in full
compliance with all code provisions and ordinances pertaining thereto, and in
addition to the fees for permits hereinafter provided for, there shall be paid
the fees prescribed therein.
(Ord. 11-21, passed 11-21-2011) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 FEES.
   For building permit fees, see the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
§ 152.05 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall review all building permit applications to determine full
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.06 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   After the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work
being done under the permit as are necessary to ensure full compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and the terms of the permit.
   (B)   Reinspections of work found to be incomplete or not ready for
inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.07 ENTRY; STOP ORDER.
   (A)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or
his or her duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure or premises in the town to perform any duty imposed upon
him or her by this subchapter.
   (B)   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing the work to be
done, and any persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the
Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.08 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered
or repaired after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued unless the
building or structure was erected, altered or repaired in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and the Building Commissioner determines the
applicant has otherwise complied with all ordinances of the town.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33)) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.09 STANDARDS.
   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good and workpersonlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33)) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.10 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sublessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building
or structure, other than fences, in the town, or cause or permit the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33)) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.11 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building Commissioner's
decision first through the Board of Zoning Appeals of the town, and then to the
Administrative Building Council of Indiana, in accordance with the provisions
of I.C. 22-13-2 as applicable.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.12 REMEDIES.
   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the town bring actions in the
Circuit or Superior Courts of Porter County, Indiana, for mandatory and
injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any other
or orders made by the Building Commissioner, and any action for mandatory or
injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this subchapter.
(Ord. 195, passed 11-5-1982 (84-33))
§ 152.13 SANITARY CODE.
   (A)   This section and the provisions hereof shall be known and cited as the
Sanitary Code of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
   (B)   Hereafter the location of any sewage disposal system or part thereof,
or the establishment, location or relocation of any well or water supply for
any building or structure, private or public, situated in the Town of Beverly
Shores, Indiana, shall comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of this
section.
   (C)   The Town Council hereby ratifies the agreement regarding the Porter
County Health Department assuming responsibility for the implementation and
enforcement of the Porter County Well and Sewage Disposal Ordinances within the
town limits, which agreement was entered into on or about November 29, 1974,
between Andrew Kedzierski, Beverly Shores Building Commissioner and Robert
Medford, Administrative Assistant for Porter County Health Department.
   (D)   The Town Council hereby adopts and incorporates by reference herein,
Porter County Ord. 73-22 (a/k/a Sewage Disposal Ordinance) and 73-27 (a/k/
a Well Ordinance) as the ordinances are now in effect or may hereafter be
revised or amended, subject to the Town Council reservation of right to reject
or modify the revisions or amendments.
   (E)   No building permit for any building or structure for which sanitary
facilities are required in the town shall be issued until the sanitary permit
herein provided for shall have been issued in accordance with this section. The
issuance of a sanitary permit is hereby expressly made a condition precedent
for the issuance of any building permit in the town for any building or
structure for which sanitary facilities are required.
   (F)   All plumbing work or plumbing installations done or made in relation
to any sanitary facility for which a permit is required under the terms of this
section shall be done and made in compliance with the plumbing code of the
town.
   (G)   Hereafter any water supply established or sewage disposal system
located, relocated, maintained, operated or used in violation of the terms of
this section is hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance subject to
abatement.
(Ord. 174, passed 10-27-1980 (84-32)) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   All violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$2,500. Each day that the violation shall continue to exist, or each distinct
repetition of any violation shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 153: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
153.01   Obstruction of public rights-of-way
   
153.02   Required display of house numbers
   
153.03   Street construction standards
   
153.04   Streets, alleys and public grounds; excavation and obstruction
 
   
153.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Town ownership of all inspected and approved street and water main
extensions, see §
155.182
§ 153.01 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Private use of platted right-of-ways is prohibited. The town does not
assume any liability for damage to structure or items placed in the unpaved
portions of street rights-of-way that may be damaged as a result of public use
of the rights-of-way, including its use for street maintenance and snow plowing
operations and that to the extent that structures and/or items are placed in
the unpaved or untraveled portion of the street right-of-way and cause damage
to the person or property of users at the street right-of-way.
   (B)   The Town Marshal or the Building Commissioner is authorized to demand
removal of the encroaching property from a town right-of-way.
§ 153.02 REQUIRED DISPLAY OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of each house, business
structure or other occupied. structure within the Town of Beverly Shores,
Porter County, Indiana now existing or hereafter erected which has been,
assigned a house number by the Town Council to display the number within 60
days from the date of passage of this section, in letters or numerals (not
Roman numerals or written words) not less than 3 inches high
   (B)   The letters or numerals shall be placed on the structure or in a
prominent position in front of the structure so that the number is visible from
the nearest public street and the number shall contrast with the color of the
background upon which it is placed. All numbers not in compliance with the
current uniform numbering system shall be removed within 60 days from the
passage of this section.
(Ord. 94-09, passed 11-14-1994) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.03 STREET CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   In the event that it is necessary to construct a street on a public
right-of-way for the purpose of providing access from a zoning parcel to the
nearest improved street, the street improvements shall be at the sole expense
of the property owner(s).
   (B)   The street shall be constructed in accordance with the following
standards:
      (1)   An asphalt paved crowned surface to provide draining of surface
waters off of the roadway, with an improved shoulder of 2 feet in width on each
side.
      (2)   The proposed asphalt paved street widths shall be provided using
the town-authorized street map consisting of the following designations:
         (a)   Arterials: 18 feet to 32 feet;
         (b)   Collectors: 15 feet to 25 feet; and
         (c)   Locals: 12 feet to 15 feet.
      (3)   Street widths will be determined by the Street Superintendent and
the Building Commissioner, and the improved street shall consist of the
following:
         (a)   Compact base (in town sand is generally the base);
         (b)   Lay 8 inches of Indiana #53 limestone (not slag) and compact;
         (c)   Lay 2 inches of asphalt base;
         (d)   Lay 1-1/2 inches of asphalt top coat; and
         (e)   Lay shoulder of 6 inches of Indiana limestone compacted 2 feet
wide.
      (4)   The appropriate water lines of a size and type determined by the
town, or its designee, the Michigan City Water Department, to be appropriate
under the circumstances, shall also be installed according to the town's
standards for the complete length of the newly constructed or newly paved
street, including the installation of fire hydrants at locations and intervals
required by town ordinance.
   (C)   Prior to any construction the property owner(s) shall present to the
Building Site Committee a certified plat of survey in triplicate of the
property by a registered Indiana land surveyor at a scale not more than 1 inch
equals 20 feet indicating swales, ditches, flow line, top and toe of slopes,
and high point.
   (D)   Topographical contours shall be shown at 2-foot intervals except in
cases of steep dune topography where 5-foot intervals should be shown, as well
as 2 established benchmarks at assumed elevation in cases where sea level
elevation is not available.
   (E)   The topographical drawing shall also show:
      (1)   The placement and size of all existing trees more than 8 inches in
diameter, measured 4 feet above ground level and those proposed to be removed;
      (2)   Underground utilities on or within 10 feet of the property;
      (3)   Overlay drawing of the topographical drawing showing the proposed
location of the street upon the property and the proposed topography upon the
completion of the proposed street; and
      (4)   The property owner is to have 3 test cores taken through the new
road, and copies of the test cores are to be sent to the Building Commissioner
for approval.
(Ord. 05-08, passed - -; Am. Ord. 09-02, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 153.04 STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS; EXCAVATION AND OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation,
or any other entity, other than town employees, to excavate, disturb, or
install anything underground, including, but not limited to, a cable, pipe,
tunnel, or other device, in, on, or under any town street, alley, right-of-way,
easement or other town property without first obtaining a permit as hereinafter
provided.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation, or
any other entity to obstruct or impair the use of any town street, alley,
right-of-way, easement or other town property without first obtaining a permit
as hereinafter provided.
      (3)   The requirement for a permit before beginning work shall not apply
to an emergency situation in which case the permit application shall be filed
as soon as reasonably possible. A permit must be applied for and received even
if the work has been completed before the permit application has been filed.
      (4)   The requirement in this section for obtaining a permit shall apply
to town contractors but those contractors shall not be required to pay any fee
for the permit.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, persons, firm or corporation desiring to make any
opening in any of the streets, alleys or public grounds of the town, or to
excavate or otherwise create or maintain an obstruction therein, shall file an
application in triplicate, provided by the town, with the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   The application shall include plans and specifications and shall be
filed 15 days in advance of the proposed date of excavation or obstruction so
that the Street Superintendent may review the plans and inspect the proposed
site.
      (3)   The Street Superintendent shall determine the cost that would be
required to fill and/or re-pave the excavation if it should become necessary or
the re-paving and repair costs that might reasonably result from the proposed
obstruction, including cost of damage to town roads and other damages which
result from heavy truck traffic related to the excavation or obstruction.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued until the applicant desiring to make an
opening and/or excavate or create or maintain an obstruction has filed a cash
bond, approved by the Town Council or its authorized agent, equal to 125% of
the Street Superintendent's cost of required filling, re-paving and repairs or
this cash bond requirement is specifically waived, in writing, by the Town
Council or its authorized agent for 1 or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The Street Superintendent's estimate of costs is less than $1,000;
      (2)   The costs associated with the necessary filling and/or re-paving is
included in a bond that may be required by other sections of the town, such as
those involving the licensing of contractors and the like; or
      (3)   The size of the project and/or applicant's financial stability and
established professional reputation make other forms of security acceptable.
   (D)   The bond, if required, shall be used to complete the work should the
permit holder fail to do so and to pay for any damages occasioned by his or her
failure to perform.
   (E)   In addition to the bond requirements, proof of liability insurance to
save the Town of Beverly Shores harmless for any injury or damage to persons or
property resulting directly or indirectly from the work, must be provided with
the permit application.
   (F)   The bond and liability insurance requirements shall remain in full
force and effect for a period of 1 year after the work is completed, unless
expressly waived in writing by the Town Council.
   (G)   Upon the filing of the application, as herein provided, the Town
Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the Town Council of the fact, and if the plans and
specifications satisfy the conditions set forth in the application and the bond
and liability insurance is sufficient as to form and surety, the Town Council
shall approve the application and the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue to the
applicant a permit to do the work set forth in the application.
   (H)   At the time of filing the application as herein provided, the
applicant shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer an application fee as set forth in
the form provided by the town, as may from time to time be amended and
supplemented by resolutions of the Town Council, which sum shall become a part
of the street fund of the town.
   (I)   All surfaces, piping and/or structures removed, disturbed or otherwise
altered by, or in connection with, the excavation or obstruction, including
damage to town roads resulting from heavy truck traffic related to the
excavation or obstruction shall, at the permit holder's expense, be returned to
its original condition or to a condition meeting the existing requirements of
the Town of Beverly Shores, whichever is more stringent.
   (J)   The Town Council hereby adopts as its excavation permit application
form the Application for a Permit to Excavate in a Street, Alley or Public
Grounds, copy of which is attached to Ord. 191, and available in the office of
the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   (K)   The Town Council hereby adopts as its obstruction permit application
form the Application for a Permit for Obstruction of a Street, Alley or Public
Grounds, copy of which is attached to Ord. 191, and available in the office of
the Town Clerk-Treasurer.
   (L)   No opening in any street, alley or public grounds of the town shall
remain open for a period of more than 10 consecutive days unless expressly
authorized in writing by the Town Council upon a showing of unnecessary
hardship and that relief is consistent with the public interest and the spirit
of this section.
(Ord. 191, passed 8-9-1982 (84-35); Am. Ord. 11-25, passed 11-27-2011) Penalty,
see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §
10.97.
CHAPTER 154: PARKING LOTS
Section
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Lots to be licensed
   
154.03   Application for license
   
154.04   Separate license for each location
   
154.05   License; issuance, fee, conditions and posting
   
154.06   Sidewalks to be kept clean
   
154.07   Care of parking lot
   
154.08   Sanitary requirements and facilities
   
154.09   Revocation of license
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. The owner or lessee in possession and control of a parking lot.
   PARKING LOTS. Any land area used or intended to be used for the storage or
parking of motor vehicles by the general public on payment of money fees or
other compensation.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4))
§ 154.02 LOTS TO BE LICENSED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a
parking lot or permit a parking lot in his or her possession or control to be
so operated, unless he or she shall have been duly licensed to operate the
same.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4)) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for parking lot licenses shall be made by the operator thereof,
to the Town Council of Beverly Shores, Indiana, upon blanks provided by them
and shall set forth the following:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant, and, if a partnership, the name
and address of all partners; if a corporation, the name, date and state under
which incorporated and the names and addresses of the officers and statutory
agent. If the applicant is a non-resident of the Town of Beverly Shores, the
name and address of a local representative inside the town limits upon whom
service can be made under the provisions of this chapter or of summons or other
process issued by the court; and
   (B)   The exact location of the parking lot, the lot not to occupy more than
2 building lots as platted, including a legal description of the property and
evidence of ownership.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4))
§ 154.04 SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH LOCATION.
   A separate license shall be required for each parking lot.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4))
§ 154.05 LICENSE; ISSUANCE, FEE, CONDITIONS AND POSTING.
   (A)   Issuance of license. If an application for a parking lot license is
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be examined by
the Town Council of Beverly Shores; if issuance of a license is approved by a
3/5 vote of the duly elected members of the Town Council, then the Clerk-
Treasurer shall be instructed to issue a license to the applicant on payment of
the proper license fee.
   (B)   License fee.
      (1)   For license fee, see the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
      (2)   The applicant shall obtain the required license before beginning
business operations.
   (C)   Special conditions of license.
      (1)   In accepting a license under the provisions of this chapter, an
operator agrees that he or she will notify the Town Council at 1 of its regular
meetings, as to any material change in the facts set forth in the statements of
application.
      (2)   The operator also agrees that the lot or any part thereof will not
be used for any other commercial enterprise of any kind.
      (3)   No motor vehicles shall be permitted to be parked in front of the
parking lot on the street side or on the road; nor shall any motor vehicle be
permitted on the inside of the parking lot in the area directly adjoining the
entrance or exit thereof for a distance of 25 feet on each side of the entrance
or exit.
   (D)   Posting of license. The license issued under the provisions of this
chapter for operation of the parking lot shall be displayed in a prominent,
clearly visible location within the parking lot.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4)) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.06 SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   Sidewalks along parking lots including vehicle entrances shall be kept
clean, clear and free of nuisances for pedestrians use, and clear of parked
vehicles at all times.
   (B)   For the purposes of safety and public convenience, the parking lot
shall be set back not less than 25 feet from the property line, this area of 25
feet from the public road or sidewalk to the beginning of the parking lot shall
be kept free and clear of all obstructions and shall be kept clearly visible at
all times.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4)) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.07 CARE OF PARKING LOT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the operator and of any subordinate in charge
of any parking lot to keep the surface thereof free of nails, glass, litter and
other substances capable of causing a nuisance to the general public and of
causing damage to motor vehicles.
   (B)   It shall further be the duty of the operator or subordinate to surface
the parking lot area with a semipermanent or permanent hard surface sufficient
to keep the parking lot area surface free of dust and mud.
   (C)   (1)   Each day's failure to comply with this section shall constitute
a separate offense.
      (2)   Where a hard surface is used, the parking surface shall be pitched
in a manner so that drainage will be away from any public street or road.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4)) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.08 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   Each parking lot shall be provided with toilets, lavatories and
sanitary facilities as follows:
      (1)   One toilet of the water flush type in the proportion of 1 for every
15 parking spaces or fraction thereof, for each sex. In the men's department,
there shall be additional urinals in the proportion of 1 for every 15 parking
spaces or fraction thereof;
      (2)   One wash basin shall be provided for each sex in the proportion of
1 for every 15 parking spaces or fraction thereof;
      (3)   Adequate drinking water facilities shall be provided and maintained
at all times;
      (4)   One shower or bath shall be provided for each sex;
      (5)   Sufficient lockers and locker rooms in which to change clothes
shall be provided for each sex, to provide adequate and ample facilities and
accommodations for those using the parking lot;
      (6)   (a)   Toilets, bathtubs and showers, wash basins, lockers and
locker rooms shall be placed in properly constructed buildings located not more
than 100 feet from each parking lot;
         (b)   These buildings shall be well lighted at all times of day or
night when lot is open for business, and constructed of moisture proof material
as shall permit satisfactory cleaning and washing;
      (7)   The floors of these buildings shall be of concrete or other
nonporous material and each room shall be provided with floor drains;
      (8)   A tightly covered metal garage can shall be provided for each unit;
and
      (9)   All buildings and sanitary facilities shall meet the requirements
of the building, plumbing and sanitary codes and ordinances of the town.
   (B)   No open fires shall be permitted on, near or at any place within the
parking area which would endanger life, automobiles or other property.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4)) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.09 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The license of any parking lot may be revoked on motion of any member of the
Town Council for continual violation of the provisions of this chapter, but no
license shall be revoked except after a hearing to be held by the Town Council
and provided further that the revocation shall be concurred in by a majority
vote of the duly elected members of the Town Council.
(Ord. 21, passed 3-19-1951 (84-4))
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §
10.97.
CHAPTER 155: ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title, purpose and provisions declared minimum requirements
   
155.002   Amendments to this chapter
   
155.003   Definitions
   
155.004   Zoning map and districts
   
155.005   Intent
   
155.006   Registration
   
155.007   Prior construction
   
155.008   Nonconforming lots of record
   
155.009   Nonconforming uses of land
   
155.010   Nonconforming structures
   
155.011   Nonconforming uses of structure
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.025   Creation, duties and qualifications of the Building Commissioner
   
155.026   Building Committee
   
155.027   Building Site Committee
   
155.028   Capital Planning Advisory Committee
   
155.029   Plan Commission
   
155.030   Meetings of the Plan Commission
   
155.031   Final disposition of zoning cases
   
155.032   Action for injunction for restraint of violation
   
155.033   Green Space Committee
   
155.034   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
155.035   Supplementary conditions and safeguards; written commitments
   
155.036   Appeal; expiration of special exception permit
   
155.037   Site plan showing landscape enhancement
   
155.038   Pre-application conference
   
155.039   Site plan approval required
   
155.040   Application for site plan approval
   
155.041   Procedure for site plan review
   
155.042   Approval of site plan application
Specific Regulations and Requirements
   
155.055   Building permit required
   
155.056   Application for building permit
   
155.057   Waiver of building permit requirements
   
155.058   Approval of building permit
   
155.059   Building regulations
   
155.060   Certificate of occupancy; application
   
155.061   Issuance and termination of certificate of occupancy
   
155.062   Disclaimer of liability
   
155.063   Demolition or moving of structures
   
155.064   Tree preservation and protection
   
155.065   Duration of building permits
   
155.066   Violations
   
155.067   Contractor registration and revocation of registration procedures
Residential District Regulations
   
155.080   Purpose; permitted uses
   
155.081   Special exceptions as permitted uses
   
155.082   Bulk regulations
   
155.083   Standards
   
155.084   Parking regulations
   
155.085   Off-street loading
   
155.086   Accessory uses and structures
   
155.087   Home occupations
   
155.088   Sign regulations
   
155.089   Temporary uses
   
155.090   Official schedule of uses
Commercial District Regulations
   
155.105   Purpose
   
155.106   Permitted uses
   
155.107   Special exceptions as permitted uses
   
155.108   Design standards
   
155.109    Off-street parking regulations
   
155.110   Sign regulations
   
155.111   Outdoor sales
   
155.112   Bulk regulations
Supplementary Regulations
   
155.130   Sand mining
   
155.131   Dune topography
   
155.132   Manufactured housing
   
155.133   Standardized housing
   
155.134   Application of regulations
   
155.135   Solar access
   
155.136   Streets and rights-of-way
   
155.137   Junk and abandoned vehicles
   
155.138   Driveways
   
155.139   Signs; permits required
   
155.140   Protection of steep slopes
   
155.141   Definition of steep slope
   
155.142   Prohibition against construction on a steep slope except as provided
   
155.143   Supplementary criteria for approval of site plan and issuance of
building permit on a lot containing a steep slope
   
155.144   Supplemental site plan and building permit requirements for steep
slopes
   
155.145   Applicant's burden to demonstrate compliance with steep slope
provisions; applicant's right to appeal for a variance to the B.Z.A.
General Subdivision Control Regulations
   
155.150   Citation; jurisdiction
   
155.151   Definitions
   
155.152   Subdivision application process
   
155.153   Pre-platting conference
   
155.154   Application
   
155.155   Technical review
   
155.156   Notice of public hearing
   
155.157   Primary approval
   
155.158   Decision; written findings of fact
   
155.159   Appeal
   
155.160   Public improvements and performance bond
   
155.161   Secondary approval
Specific Subdivision Control Regulations
   
155.175   Improvement standards
   
155.176   Design standards and specifications
   
155.177   Nonresidential subdivisions
   
155.178   Specifications for technical review
   
155.179   Primary plat
   
155.180   Secondary plat
   
155.181   Construction plans
   
155.182   Town ownership of all inspected and approved street and water main
extensions
Performance Standards
   
155.195   Purpose; application
   
155.196   Procedure for obtaining permit
   
155.197   Noise regulations
   
155.198   Exemptions from noise regulations
   
155.199   Air pollution regulations
   
155.200   Vibration regulations
   
155.201   Heat and glare regulations
   
155.202   Electromagnetic interference regulations
   
155.203   Nuisances
   
155.204   Enforcement
   
155.205   Performance standards
   
155.206   Escrow deposit
Wetland Protection
   
155.220   Title, fact and purpose
   
155.221   Definitions
   
155.222   Lands to which subchapter applies
   
155.223   Permit requirements; enforcement
   
155.224   Uses by right; special permit uses in wetland
   
155.225   Standards and procedures for special use permits
   
155.226   Nonconforming activities
   
155.227   Judicial review
   
155.228   Amendments
 
   
155.999   Penalty
Editor’s Note:
   These provisions became effective 2-2-1984, and were revised 2-28-2006
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE, PURPOSE AND PROVISIONS DECLARED MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Ordinance
Establishing Zoning and Subdivision Regulations for the Town of Beverly Shores,
Indiana.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted in connection with and as a chapter for the
enforcement of the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the Plan Commission and Town
Council of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana. In administering this chapter
and its various provisions, the persons or board charged with the enforcement
of the Zoning Chapter shall be guided by and give due consideration to the
following concerns:
      (1)   To promote the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general
welfare of the Town of Beverly Shores in light of the town's reliance on
private wells and septic systems and the lack of a tax base for a public water
and sewer system in the foreseeable future;
      (2)   To conserve the values of property throughout the Town of Beverly
Shores and to preserve the character, ambience and stability of residential
areas and to ensure that landscape continues to be generally dominate over the
improvements;
      (3)   To encourage the conservation of natural contours, vegetation,
wildlife and all the scenic qualities of the area of the sand dunes and all
associated and related geographical elements which are so unique and valuable
to the balance of nature. The special value of Beverly Shores is that it is one
of the few towns which contains beautiful and unique ecological specimens;
      (4)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access
to property and safety from flood, fire and other dangers;
      (5)   To lessen or avoid congestion on the public streets and highways in
the Town of Beverly Shores and surrounding areas;
      (6)   To regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings,
structures and lands to residences, buildings and other uses, and to restrict
the intensity of those uses and to maintain an appropriate balance between
building scale and the local environmental setting;
      (7)   To divide the Town of Beverly Shores into districts of a number,
shape and area according to the use of land and buildings, as may be deemed
best suited to carry out the purpose of this chapter;
      (8)   To prohibit locations and uses of buildings or structures and uses
of land that are incompatible with the type of development planned for specific
zoning districts in the Town of Beverly Shores;
      (9)   To prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in a way so as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations lawfully imposed herein under;
      (10)   To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
dangers;
      (11)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures
shall conform;
      (12)   To provide for the gradual elimination of those uses that would
not be permitted in the district in which they are located and are adversely
affecting the orderly and beneficial development of the Town of Beverly Shores;
      (13)   To define and limit the powers and duties of administrative
officers and bodies as herein provided;
      (14)   To prescribe penalties for the violation and provide methods for
the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto; and
      (15)   To give special consideration to the unique character of Beverly
Shores resulting from the combination of private and public land within the
town boundaries.
   (C)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to establish minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and the general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance or in any other way conflict with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances,
deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive, or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.002 AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   Amendments to this chapter; generally.
      (1)   Prior to any change or amendment the Commission shall give notice
and hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance change or amendment. At
least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing the Commission shall have
published in 1 newspaper of general circulation in Porter County the notice of
time and place of the hearing.
      (2)   A petitioner who seeks to amend this chapter or other Comprehensive
Plan elements shall file a petition with the Plan Commission. The petitioner or
petitioners shall consist of the owner or owners of at least 50% of the area
involved in the petition.
      (3)   Nine copies of the petition must be submitted to the Plan
Commission.
      (4)   All petitions not initiated by the Commission itself shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee to defray the administrative and
investigative expenses of the Commission, made payable to the Clerk-Treasurer
of the Town of Beverly Shores as specified in §
155.065.
      (5)   The petition shall include:
         (a)   The subject of the petition;
         (b)   The name(s) and address(es) of the petitioner(s);
         (c)   The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s);
         (d)   Legal description of the property and common description (common
address);
         (e)   The present zoning of the property;
         (f)   Covenants running with the property relative to the petition;
         (g)   The reason for the petition; and
         (h)   Other plats and plans consistent with divisions (5)(a) through
(d).
      (6)   Once the petition has been set for public hearing, all property
owners within a 300-foot radius of the petition site or across the right-of-way
shall be notified of the time and place of the public hearing. This shall be
done by certified letter at the expense of the petitioner or by personal
contact with the property owners and proof of the contact shall be furnished by
the petitioner. The petitioner will provide proof that he or she has conformed
to the above at the public hearing.
      (7)   The petitioner at his or her expense shall cause the notice or the
public hearing to be published in 1 newspaper of general circulation in Porter
County.
      (8)   No petition shall be accepted by the President for hearing unless
accompanied by or included with all information, data, statistics and/or plats.
   (B)   Agenda for public hearing on amendments to this chapter.
      (1)   Each action to be presented before the Commission shall be filed in
proper form with the required data; shall be numbered serially and placed on
the docket of the Commission. The docket numbers shall include the year and
begin a new on January 1 of each year.
      (2)   As soon as the case receives a docket number, it shall be placed on
the agenda of the Commission and a date set for public hearing.
      (3)   Cases shall come before the Commission in the regular order of
their consecutive numbers unless otherwise ordered by the Commission.
   (C)   Conduct of public hearing for amendments to this chapter. The conduct
of a public hearing shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Commission President shall call for the reading of the petition
by the Secretary;
      (2)   The petitioner shall present the facts and arguments in support of
his or her case;
      (3)   The Commission may question the petitioner;
      (4)   The Commission President shall open the public hearing;
      (5)   Each of those who oppose the petition shall have 1 opportunity to
speak. To do so, one must address the Chair and be recognized before speaking
on the subject of the petition:
         (a)   The proponent or remonstrator must give his or her name and
address; and
         (b)   The President may limit a duly recognized speaker's time.
      (6)   The President shall close the public hearing after the Commission
has adequately heard from the remonstrators and proponents;
      (7)   The President shall call for the reading of written remonstrances
by the Secretary;
      (8)   The petitioner may summarize arguments;
      (9)   The Commission may question further;
      (10)   Vote;
      (11)   In the presentation of a case the burden shall be upon the
petitioner to supply all information including charts, plats, diagrams and
other exhibits necessary for a greater understanding of the problem. The
Commission may continue the hearing when in its judgment the petitioner has not
provided sufficient evidence and information in which to make a determination;
      (12)   Every person appearing before the Commission shall abide by the
order and directions of the President. Discourteous, disorderly or contemptuous
conduct shall be regarded as a breach of the privileges of the Commission and
those responsible for the action shall be removed from the premises;
      (13)   The Commission, at its discretion, may continue or postpone the
hearing of any case upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the Commission;
      (14)   All petitioners must share the burden of providing 1 or more of
the following points to the satisfaction of the Commission:
         (a)   That there was an error in the original zoning of the property
when the chapter was adopted;
         (b)   That the character of the area under consideration has changed
either through technological advances or developmental changes;
         (c)   That a change of zoning will not be injurious or detrimental to
the surrounding property values;
         (d)   That if the change were granted it would promote orderly
community growth; and/or
         (e)   That the petition will not create spot zoning which will confer
a special benefit on a relatively small tract without commensurate benefit to
the community.
      (15)   Upon having satisfied itself that the petitioner has met the
requirements of division (A) above, the Commission shall pay reasonable regard
to: (i) the Comprehensive Plan; (ii) current conditions and the character of
current structures and uses in each district; (iii) the most desirable use for
which the land in each district is adapted; (iv) the conservation of property
values throughout the town; and (v) responsible development and growth; and
shall, in light of those considerations, then decide whether or not the
proposed change meets the following standards:
         (a)   That the proposed change will not adversely affect the
community;
         (b)   That the zoning district will not be disrupted or destroyed;
         (c)   That the topography, soil condition and other physical features
of the land involved are suitable for the proposed use and zoning change; and
         (d)   That the proposed land use will not have an adverse affect upon
the surrounding land.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 155.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural
number and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word
SHALL is always mandatory and not merely directory. The term PERSON shall mean
an individual, partnership, corporation or other association or their agents.
   (B)   Any word or term not herein defined shall be construed as defined in
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary Third Edition.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building or portion of a building which is
subordinate to a main building on the same lot and which is exclusively
occupied by or devoted to an accessory use.
      ACCESSORY SIGN. A general informational sign provided it bears no
commercial information.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily and exclusively incidental and
subordinate to the main use of the premises.
      ADVERTISING SIGN. Any sign, excluding business signs, which directs or
attracts attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or
business in a commercial fashion.
      ALLEY. A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street that affords
a secondary means of access to abutting property.
      ALTERATION. A change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a structure.
      ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign using or incorporating any moving parts or moving
flashing (intermittent) lights.
      APARTMENT. A dwelling unit located in a building other than a single-
family or 2-family dwelling.
      APARTMENT BUILDING. A building designed for, or intended to be used as, a
residence for 3 or more families living in separate housekeeping units, each
unit containing 2 or more rooms and including kitchen, toilet and bath
facilities.
      APARTMENT HOTEL. An apartment building under resident supervision which
maintains an inner lobby through which all tenants must pass to gain access to
their apartments and which provides services ordinarily furnished by hotels.
      APARTMENT HOUSE. A residential structure containing 2 or more apartments.
(Same as MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING).
      APPAREL STORES. Stores selling new clothing for men, women or children at
retail.
      APPLIANCE REPAIRS. The repairing and servicing of common household
appliances such as washing machines, television sets, power tools, electric
razors, radios and refrigerators and repair of the same types of appliances as
are sold on the premises where the repairs are incidental or accessory to the
sale of those types of appliances.
      ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES. Architectural features of a building shall
include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows,
chimneys and decorative ornaments.
      AUTO ACCESSORY STORES. Stores engaged primarily in the business of
selling tires, batteries, seat covers and other automobile accessories.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A building or structure designed or used for
the retail sale or supply of fuels (stored only in underground tanks),
lubricants, air, water and other products for motor vehicles, aircraft or
boats, which building or structure may include the facilities for the
installation of products on or in vehicles, and also may include space for
storage, minor repair and servicing, but not painting, refinishing, steam
cleaning, rust proofing, muffler installation where it is a primary use of the
premises, or facilities designed for washing of more than 2 vehicles at a time.
      BANNER SIGN. Any sign, excluding national flags, made of cloth, fabric,
paper or similar material, including pennants, streamers, flags, ribbons and
strings.
      BASEMENT. That portion of a building partly below grade but so located
that the vertical distance from the average ground level to the ceiling is less
than the vertical distance from the average ground level to the floor.
      BILLBOARD. A single or double-faced structure permanently affixed to the
surface of the land.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded on all sides by any of the following:
         (a)   Streets;
         (b)   Public parks;
         (c)   Railroad rights-of-way, when located at or above ground level
but not including sidings or spurs in the same ownership as the zoning lot; or
         (d)   Corporate boundary lines of the Town of Beverly Shores.
      BLOCK FRONT. All of the property on 1 side of a street and lying between
the 2 nearest intersecting streets, or between 1 intersecting street and a
railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or lake; or between any of
the foregoing or any other barrier to the continuity of development.
      BOARD. The Board of Zoning Appeals.
      BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling including fraternity and sorority houses where
meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation to 3 or more persons
other than members of the keeper's immediate family by prearrangement for
definite periods of not less than 1 week where individual cooking facilities
are prohibited. A BOARDING HOUSE is to be distinguished from a dormitory,
hotel, motel or a convalescent or nursing home.
      BOND. Any form of security including a cash deposit, performance bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to the Town Council. All BONDS shall be approved by the Town Council whenever a
bond is required by these regulations.
      BUILDING. A structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels. Tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property
and used for purposes of a building shall also be considered a BUILDING. When
any portion of a structure is completely separated from every other part
thereof by division walls from the ground up, and without openings, each
portion of the structure shall be deemed a separate BUILDING.
      BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of a building and
its accessory buildings.
      BUILDING LINE. A line established, in general, parallel to the front lot
line, beyond which no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter. (See SETBACK).
      BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
      BULK REGULATIONS. Regulations controlling the size of buildings or other
structures and the relationships of buildings, structures and uses to each
other and to open areas and lot line. Bulk regulations include regulations
controlling:
         (a)   Maximum height;
         (b)   Minimum zoning parcel size;
         (c)   Maximum floor area ratio;
         (d)   Minimum zoning parcel width;
         (e)   Minimum size of yards and setbacks; and
         (f)   Maximum floor area.
      BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. The office of an engineer, doctor,
dentist, minister, architect, real estate or insurance broker, author,
musician, photographer, accountant or other similar professional person.
      CANOPY. Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving
its support from framework or posts or other means independent of a connected
structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the
elements.
      CARPORT. A partially-enclosed structure principally devoted to the
storage of motor vehicles.
      CELLAR. That portion of a building partly below the average ground level,
but so located that the vertical distance from the average ground level to the
floor is less than the vertical distance from the average ground level to the
ceiling. (See BASEMENT).
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by the Building
Commissioner for the authorized use of premises as provided by §§
155.025 through
155.042 below.
      CHANNEL. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with
definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically
flowing water.
      CLEARING OF LAND. Any activity which may result in soil erosion or
disturbance of the existing ground cover, bushes or native vegetation,
including removal or cutting of native brush or ground cover, grading, or
depositing or stockpiling of soil, material or ground cover. CLEARING OF LAND
will not include the limited removal of brush or ground cover necessary to
comply with the requirements for a site plan application as provided in this
Code.
      COMMISSION. The Municipal Plan Commission of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
      CONSTRUCTION PLAN. The maps, drawings and textual descriptions showing
the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in accordance
with the requirements enumerated in this chapter.
      CONTRACTOR, BUILDING. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation
which agrees to furnish materials or perform services to a property owner at a
specified price, especially relating to construction; the term shall not
include any private person doing remodeling work on his or her own private home
or accessory structure. Further, for purposes of the Contractor Registration
Ordinance, the term shall not include any individual employee of a BUILDING
CONTRACTOR or an individual, firm, partnership, or corporation that only
furnishes materials to a BUILDING CONTRACTOR and does not perform any services
in the town.
      CONTRACTOR, REGISTERED. A building contractor who complies with the
requirements stated in the application for contractor registration and who
obtains a contractor registration designation from the town that is authorized
by the Town Clerk-Treasurer and approved by the Building Commissioner.
      CORNER LOT. A lot which adjoins the point of intersection or meeting of 2
or more streets.
      COURT. An open unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings and which is bounded on 2 or more sides by a
building or buildings.
      COURT, ENCLOSED. An open unoccupied space surrounded on all sides by
walls, or by walls and a lot line.
      COURT, OUTER. An open unoccupied space opening onto a street, alley or
yard.
      COVENANT. A private legal restriction on the use of land contained in the
deed to the property and otherwise formally recorded.
      CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. See TREE, CRITICAL ROOT ZONE .
      CULVERT. A drain pipe that channels water under a bridge, street or
driveway.
      DECK, ON GRADE. A platform, on grade, that may have piers for vertical
support. (See §
155.082 for setback requirements.)
      DECK, RAISED. A platform structure that is 3 feet or more above grade,
having columns or walls for vertical support and railings on the open sides. A
building permit is required. (See §
155.082 for setback requirements.)
      DENSITY. A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units per acre of
land in a subdivision plat.
         (a)   GROSS DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of the
total land to be developed, including public rights-of-way.
         (b)   NET DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre of land when
the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses,
excluding public rights-of-way and other public sites.
      DENSITY, HIGH. Any subdivision with a density greater than 6 dwelling
units per acre of gross land area.
      DENSITY, LOW. Any subdivision with a density less than 2 dwelling units
per acre of gross land area.
      DENSITY, MEDIUM. Any subdivision with a density of 2 to 6 dwelling units
per acre of gross land area.
      DEPTH OF LOT. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
      DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his or her
representative. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
      DISEASED TREE. See TREE, DISEASED .
      DISTRICT. A portion or portions of the Town of Beverly Shores within
which uses of land and buildings are permitted and wherein regulations and
requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter on a uniform basis.
      DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment so developed that all or
any part of its retail or service character is dependent on providing a
driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons
while in the motor vehicle (e.g., restaurants, cleaners, banks, theaters).
      DUPLEX. Two single-family dwellings separated only by a vertical or
horizontal common wall without openings.
      DWELLING. A fixed structure or building, containing 1 or more dwelling
units.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof, used or
designed for 3 or more dwelling units. (Same as APARTMENT HOUSE).
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building, used or designed for not
more than 1 dwelling unit.
      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A detached building, used or designed for 2 but not
more than 2 dwelling units.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof having cooking facilities
which is used or designed wholly as the home, residence or sleeping place of 1
family, either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a mobile home,
automobile chassis, tent or portable building be considered a dwelling. In case
of mixed occupancy, where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit,
the parts so occupied shall be deemed a DWELLING UNIT for the purpose of this
chapter and shall comply with the provisions thereof relative to dwellings.
      EASEMENT. A liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which 1
landowner receives from the lands of another.
      ELECTION PERIOD. The period of time beginning 60 days before and ending 7
days following a general, primary, or special election for a public office that
represents the area of the Town of Beverly Shores.
      ERECTED. The word ERECTED shall include the words built, constructed,
reconstructed, moved upon or any physical operations of the premises required
for the building. Building excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be
considered a part of erection.
      ESCROW. The arrangement for the handling of instruments or money not to
be delivered until specified conditions are met.
      EXCAVATING. The removal of sand, stone, gravel or fill dirt below the
average elevation of the surrounding land or established grade, whichever shall
be the higher.
      FAMILY. Either:
         (a)   An individual or 2 or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or
         (b)   A group of not more than 4 persons, who need not be related by
blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit; plus in either case, usual domestic servants.
      FENCE. A type of structural barrier usually made of posts affixed to the
ground and supporting a railing, partition, screen, or other upright structure,
typically made of wood, masonry, or metal, and partially or completely
enclosing an area of ground to mark a boundary, control access, increase
safety, or prevent escape.
      FILLING. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground,
except what is related to common household gardening.
      FLOOD PLAIN. The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel
of a river or stream which has been or may be covered by a 100-year flood. The
flood plain includes the channel, floodway and floodway fringe.
      FLOOR AREA.
         (a)   The sum of the gross horizontal actual floor areas of a building
(s) measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls, including stairways
and enclosed porches, but including only that portion of the lowest level where
the exterior wall height (vertical distance from the floor to the ceiling) is
exposed in excess of 50% above grade.
         (b)   The FLOOR AREA of the lowest level is determined by calculating
the percent of the exterior wall perimeter exposed above grade in excess of
50%. Also to be included is the square footage of attached and/or detached
garages in excess of 600 square feet. Phantom floor planes i.e., extensions of
actual floor areas into open space to an exterior wall shall not be included as
floor area. Lowest square feet 50% above grade level, plus all additional
floors in square feet, minus garage area in square feet (maximum 600 square
feet) equals total floor area in square feet.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.). The floor area of structures on any zoning lot
divided by the area of the zoning lot.
      FRONTAGE. The length along the street right-of-way line of a single lot,
tract or development area between the side lot lines of the property. It is
that side of a lot abutting a street and ordinarily regarded as the front of
the lot.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. A garage with a capacity of not more than 3 automobiles
for storage only, and which is erected as an accessory to a dwelling.
      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any premises, except those described as a private or
storage garage, used for the storage or care of power-driven vehicles or where
any vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration,
hire or sale.
      GENERAL STANDARDS. Those regulations contained in §§
155.080 through
155.090,
155.105 through
155.112 and
155.195 through
155.206.
      GREENBELT. A strip of land of definite width and location, planted with
shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip.
      HALF STREET. A dedicated right-of-way providing only a portion of the
required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision or tract of
land.
      HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance measured from the lower of:
         (a)   The surface of the lowest floor (including basements and/or
attached garage); or
         (b)   The grade level midpoint of the building, defined by projecting
the perimeter of the proposed building platform on the existing elevation to
the uppermost point of the roof (chimneys, antennas and similar extensions not
included). The grade level midpoint is calculated by the average of:
            1.   The lowest existing grade level beneath the perimeter of the
proposed building platform; and
            2.   The highest existing grade level beneath the perimeter of the
proposed building platform.
      HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or business customarily conducted
entirely within the dwelling and carried on exclusively by members of the
immediate family thereof and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and which does not change the character thereof.
      HOTEL. A building occupied or used for the lodging of individuals or
groups of individuals with or without meals, and in which there are more than 5
sleeping rooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any guest
room.
      ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or any other
artificial means of illumination.
      IMPROVED LAND. See  LAND, IMPROVED .
      IMPROVEMENT. Any alteration to the land or other physical construction
associated with subdivision and building site development.
      IMPROVEMENT, LOT. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other
object or improvement of the land on which they are situated, constituting a
physical betterment of real property, or any part of a betterment. Certain LOT
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded as provided in these regulations.
      IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC. Any drainage ditch, roadway, sidewalk, curb, tree,
lawn, off-street parking area, main or other facility for which the local or
state government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and/
or operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local or state
government responsibility is established. All like improvements shall be
properly bonded.
      IMPROVEMENT, TEMPORARY. Improvements built and maintained by a builder
during construction and which must be removed prior to release of the
performance bond.
      INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile, sewage
disposal system or any other sewage treatment device designed for use in a
limited area and approved by the Porter County Health Department.
      JUNK. Any motor vehicle, machinery, appliances, products, merchandise
with parts missing or scrap metals or other scrap materials that are damaged,
deteriorated or are in a condition which would preclude the product's use for
its originally designed purpose.
      JUNK BUSINESS. Any occupation or trade for the sale, resale, processing,
accumulating or storage of, or other commerce with, waste materials, scrap,
wrecked automobiles or other commodities commonly classified as junk.
      KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which 4 or more dogs, 4 months or more
old, are kept permanently or temporarily.
      LAND, IMPROVED. A lot, or contiguous lots under common ownership, or
parcel upon which a legally existing occupied dwelling is situated.
      LAND, UNIMPROVED. All lots not meeting the definition of IMPROVED LAND
above.
      LAUNDRY. An establishment in which clothing and other fabrics are
laundered professionally.
      LOCAL ROADS. A system of streets and roads which primarily provides local
access service and access to collectors and thoroughfares.
      LODGING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.
      LOT. When used in this chapter, shall mean ZONING LOT unless the context
clearly indicates that LOT OF RECORD is intended.
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the intersection of 2 streets or a lot
bounded on 2 sides by a curving street, 2 chords of which form an angle of 135
degrees or less. The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the
CORNER. In the case of a corner lot with curved street lines, the CORNER is
that point on the street lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the
chords described above.
      LOT COVERAGE. That area of the lot or parcel covered by buildings and
structures, including accessory buildings or structures, calculated as a
percentage of the lot area. LOT COVERAGE shall include all impermeable
buildings and structures, whether above or below ground level or on the ground
surface, in the computations so as to provide greater assurance for surface
water percolation or necessary on-site impoundment in instances of excessive
rainfall, flooding or other water accumulation circumstances. Any semi-
permeable or permeable structures, such as brick pavers, shall be calculated
based on manufacturer specifications for installation and rate of absorption.
Notwithstanding any other provision, a driveway shall be considered impermeable
for the purposes of LOT COVERAGE. Unroofed decks built out of boards or planks
that allow for drainage between the boards shall be excluded.
      LOT DEPTH. The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and
the midpoint of the rear lot line.
      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontages on 2 more or less
parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of
double frontage lots, 1 street may be designated as the front street for all
lots in the plat and in the request for a building permit.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot. Any portion of a corner lot
more than 120 feet from the corner measured along a front street lot line,
shall be considered an INTERIOR LOT, provided the portion is of sufficient
width, length and area to meet the minimum requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. Any lot line which is a street line except that in the
case of a corner lot, the front line is the longer of the 2 intersecting lines.
In the case of a double frontage lot, all lot lines which are street lines
shall be considered front lot lines unless otherwise designated in the plat.
      LOT LINE, REAR. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular or
triangular shaped lot, a line 10 feet in length entirely within the lot
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line of the lot
shall be considered to be REAR LOT LINE for the purpose of determining depth of
rear yard. In cases where none of these definitions are applicable, the
Building Commissioner shall designate the REAR LOT LINE. (See DOUBLE FRONTAGE
LOT).
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a SIDE STREET LOT LINE.
A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior SIDE
LOT LINE.
      LOT LINE, STREET OR ALLEY. A lot line separating the lot from the right-
of-way of a street or an alley.
      LOT LINES. The property lines bounding the lot.
      LOT OF RECORD. An area of land that is designated as a lot in a recorded
subdivision plat or an official survey recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of Porter County, Indiana. A LOT OF RECORD may or not be of sufficient
area to meet the requirements to be a ZONING LOT or ZONING PARCEL.
      LOT SIZE. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and
rear lot lines.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at the 2 points where the building line or setback intersects the side lot
lines.
      MAJOR STREET. A main traffic artery designated on the town's
Comprehensive Plan as a major thoroughfare.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site,
bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law and was constructed
after January 1, 1981.
      MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision.
      MONUMENT. Any permanent marker either of stone, concrete, galvanized iron
pipe or iron or steel rods, used to identify the boundary lines of any tract,
parcel, lot or street lines.
      MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential building containing 2 or more
dwelling units.
      NATURAL MEANS. An act of nature such as a fire, flood or hail storm.
      NONCONFORMING USE. Any use of land or a structure, or portions thereof,
which does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which
it is located, provided however, that the use was in existence on the date of
adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto which directly affect
the land or structure in question.
      NOXIOUS MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects on
the physical or economic well-being of individuals.
      NUISANCE TREE.  See TREE, NUISANCE .
      OCCUPANCY. For purposes of a certificate of occupancy, a premises shall
be deemed occupied immediately upon the commencement by any person of actual
physical use or possession of premises as a temporary or permanent place of
residence, or business.
      ODOR THRESHOLD. The lowest concentration of odorous substance in the air
which will produce an odor sensation.
      OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A lot, or portion thereof, devoted to parking
spaces for motor vehicles along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering
so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than 2
automobiles.
      OPEN SPACE. A public or private outdoor area expressly set aside for the
use and benefit of the public.
      OUTDOOR STORAGE. The storage of goods and materials outside of any
building or structure, but not including storage of a temporary or emergency
nature.
      OUTLOT. Property shown on a subdivision plat within the boundaries of the
land which is to be developed but which is to be excluded from the development
of the subdivision because of its potential use as a street extension or other
public purpose. If after a predetermined period of time the proposed use does
not appear feasible the lot may be released from its excluded status and made
available for private development, consistent with surrounding development.
      OWNER. Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation
or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary
interest in land.
      PACKAGE SEWERAGE SYSTEM. A sewerage system including collection and
treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or
development in an outlying or generally rural area.
      PARCEL. That area of land required for construction of a principal
single-family dwelling, whose area must be a minimum of 20,000 square feet,
unless §
155.008(A) applies. No building permit may be issued for a parcel that has been
reconfigured/increased from its original size by any dimension of less than 35
feet in length and a minimum of 2,500 square feet.
      PARKING SPACE.
         (a)   A durable surfaced area, enclosed in a main or accessory
building or unenclosed which is sufficient in size to store 1 standard
automobile.
         (b)   An unenclosed PARKING SPACE shall comprise an area of not less
than 180 square feet exclusive of a durably-surfaced driveway which shall
connect the parking space(s) with an alley or street so as to permit
satisfactory ingress or egress of an automobile.
      PARTICULATE MATTER. Dust, smoke or any other form of airborne pollution
in the form of minute separate particles.
      PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only 1 side.
      PERFORMANCE BOND. Any amount of money or bond issued by a corporate
surety paid or deposited by a builder or subdivider to the Clerk-Treasurer
which guarantees that the builder or subdivider will perform all actions
required by the Town Council regarding an approved plat or required by the
Building Site Committee regarding an approved site plan application, building
permit and as-built topographic survey, and provides that if the person
defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of an approved plat or the
site plan application, building permit and as-built topographic survey, and any
amendments thereto the builder or subdivider will pay damages up to the limit
of the bond, otherwise the performance bond itself will be spent to complete
the requirements of the approved plat.
      PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which is made of durable materials and
permanently affixed to the ground or a structure.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
      PLAN. See CONSTRUCTION PLAN.
      PLAT. The drawing, map or plan of a subdivision or other tract of land or
a replat of that including certifications, descriptions and approvals.
      PLAT, FINAL. The final and formal presentation of the map, plan or record
of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in these
regulations.
      PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in
these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision
to be submitted to the Commission for approval.
      PLAT, SKETCH. An informal sketch preparatory to the preparation of the
preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable
the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the
Building Commissioner as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these
regulations.
      PORCH, ENCLOSED. A covered entrance to a building or structure which
restricts the free entry of air, natural light or view by means of permanently
installed fixtures, and which projects out from the main wall of the building
or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.
      PORCH, OPEN. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is not
enclosed except for columns supporting the porch roof and railing which may be
attached thereto, and which projects out from the main wall of the building or
structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.
      PREMISES. A building or a part of a building.
      PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A non-accessory building in which is conducted a
principal use of the parcel on which the building is located.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The primary purpose for which a parcel is to be used and
for which a certificate of occupancy is or will be issued.
      PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE. A non-profit association of persons who are bona
fide members and whose facilities are restricted to members and their guests.
Food and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises provided they are
secondary and incidental to the principal use.
      PRIVATE STREET. A local street that is not dedicated or accepted for
public use or maintenance which provides vehicular and pedestrian access.
      PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. A water system formed by a developer to serve a new
community development in an outlying or generally rural area. It includes water
treatment and distribution facilities.
      PUBLIC STREET. A street under the control of and kept by the public
established by regular governmental proceedings for the purpose, or dedicated
by the owner of the land and accepted by the proper authorities and for the
maintenance of which they are responsible.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, under federal,
state or municipal regulations, to the public, electricity, gas, steam,
communications, telegraph, transportation or water services.
      REAR LOT LINE. See LOT LINE, REAR.
      REAR WALL. See WALL, REAR.
      REAR YARD. See YARD, REAR.
      RESERVE STRIP. A strip of land between a partial street and adjacent
property, which is reserved or held in public ownership for future street
widening.
      RESIDENT. Someone who is domiciled in the Town of Beverly Shores (i.e.,
permanent place of residence is within the boundaries of the Town of Beverly
Shores) or who maintains a domicile elsewhere but will spend more than 183 days
of a calendar year in the Town of Beverly Shores. Proof of residency may be
made by providing to the Clerk-Treasurer 1 of the following:
         (a)   Indiana driver=s license with an address in the town;
         (b)   Indiana voter registration card with an address in the town;
         (c)   A notarized Indiana residency affidavit in a form provided by
the Clerk-Treasurer.
      RESUBDIVISION (REPLAT). A change in a map for an approved or recorded
subdivision plat if the change affects any street layout on the map or area
reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it affects any map or
plat legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.
      REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which frontage is at right angles to the
general pattern in the area. A REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT may also be a corner lot.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by
transportation facilities, public utilities or other public uses. RIGHT-OF-WAY
intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat on which the right-of-way
is established.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH, STREET. The distance between property lines measured
at right angles to the center line of the street.
      ROOF SIGN. Any sign which is fastened to and/or supported on the roof of
a building and/or projects over the exterior wall of a building.
      ROOMING HOUSE. A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, in which
sleeping accommodations are provided for rent for more than 3 people, but meals
are not furnished and in which individual cooking facilities are prohibited.
      SALE OR LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
interstate succession or transfer, of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by deed, metes and bounds, contract or other written
instrument.
      SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership or unincorporated associations, in which a stockholder, partnership
or associate, or a member of his or her family owns an interest in each
corporation, firm, partnership, entity or unincorporated association.
      SCREENING or SCREEN. Structures or evergreen vegetation used in the
commercial district that are maintained for the purpose of concealing from view
the area behind the structures or evergreen vegetation.
      SEASONAL BUSINESS. Any business which is operated for not more than 4
consecutive months during 1 full calendar year.
      SEPARATE OWNERSHIP.
         (a)   Ownership of a parcel of contiguous property wherein the owner
does not own adjoining vacant property. Ownership of a parcel may include joint
or multiple ownership by a partnership, corporation or other group.
         (b)   Provided that the owner of any number of contiguous lots of
record may have as many of the contiguous lots of record considered as a single
zoning lot for the purpose of this chapter as he or she so elects, and in that
case the outside perimeter of the group of lots of record shall be used for
determining the front, rear and side lot lines and yards thereof.
      SETBACK. The distance between a building and the nearest street right-of-
way line or property line regardless of whether it is the front, side or rear
of the building. It is an imaginary line established by the zoning ordinance
from property lines.
      SETBACK, FRONT. The distance between a building front right-of-way line
nearest thereto as established by the zoning ordinance.
      SETBACK, REAR. The minimum required distance between a building or
structure and a LOT LINE, REAR.
      SETBACK, SIDE. The minimum required distance between a building or
structure and a LOT LINE, SIDE.
      SIGN. An identification, description, illustration or device and which is
visible from any public street, alley or public place. Neither governmental
flags, traffic control devices, signs posted by a governmental entity, nor
signs within a building shall be subject to the terms of this chapter.
      SIGN AREA. The area encompassed within any geometric figure which
encloses all parts of a sign excluding structural supports. The area of a
double-faced sign shall be considered as the area of 1 sign.
      SIGN ZONING PARCEL. A single, contiguous tract of land not necessarily
coinciding with a lot or lots of record, which lots or parcels are incidental
to and connected with the main use of the tract of land and upon which the
application for a sign is to be erected.
      SILT FENCE. A fabric barrier installed to contain erosion. The fabric
should extend at least 6 inches below grade with support members no greater
than 6 feet apart. The fence is to be maintained throughout the building phase.
      SINGLE OWNERSHIP. Ownership by an individual, partnership, corporation,
cooperative or condominium having control over exterior maintenance of
buildings and grounds.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A residential building containing 1 dwelling unit
only.
      SLOPE. The incline of a piece of ground.
      SOIL REMOVAL. Removal of any kind of soil or earth matter, including
topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, rock or similar materials, or combination thereof,
except what is related to common household gardening and agriculture.
      STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS. The specifications as provided in this chapter
or as officially adopted by and for the Town of Beverly Shores.
      STANDARDIZED HOUSING. Housing where the plan of a residence is
standardized and remains constant as to width and length and/or the elevations
are constant in character and finish.
      STEEP SLOPE. See §
155.141.
      STREET. A thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and a principal
means of access to abutting property, including an avenue, place, way, drive,
lane, boulevard, highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley.
Improved public streets are those constructed according to standards existing
at the time of new construction.
      STREET ADDRESS. A building's street address is to be the name of the
street that the driveway enters from. If the property contains a driveway on 2
or more streets, then the address is to be the street the building faces on.
The address number is to be posted in a manner that is readable from the
street.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the width or number of
exits, or any substantial change in the roof.
      STRUCTURE. Includes "building" and, in addition, any man-made surface or
designed earth feature including driveways, swimming pools, parking areas,
garden houses, pole barns, sheds, pergolas, patios, decks, porches, playhouses
and game courts located on a permanent foundation, but excluding lot or parcel
boundary fences, walls, berms and screens, and other finished grading or
drainage or landscaping.
      STRUCTURE, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. Any structure of any kind or character
erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor
advertising sign or billboard may be placed, including outdoor advertising
statuary.
      SUBDIVIDER.
         (a)   The individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association,
syndicate, trust or other legal entity that executes the application and
initiates proceedings for the subdivision of land in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   The SUBDIVIDER need not be the owner of the property; however,
he or she shall be an agent of the owner or have sufficient proprietary rights
in the property to represent the owner.
      SUBDIVISION.
         (a)   Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be
divided into 2 or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, of interests for the
purpose to offer, sale, lease or development, either on the installment plan or
upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, including resubdivision.
         (b)   SUBDIVISION includes the division or development of
residentially and non-residentially zoned land, whether by deed, metes and
bounds description or other recorded instrument. However, this regulation shall
not apply to the following:
            1.   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat which
does not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth or building setback lines of
each building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does not change
the original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat; or
            2.   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening property
boundary lines which does not result in the change of the present land usage.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Any subdivision that is not a minor subdivision.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A subdivision of land that does not involve the
opening of a new public way and that complies in all other respects with this
chapter.
      SUBDIVISION PLAT. The final map or drawing, described in this chapter, on
which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the Commission for
approval and which, if approved, may be submitted to the County Recorder for
filing.
      SWIMMING POOL. Any permanent, non-portable structure or container
intended for swimming or bathing, located either above or below grade designed
to hold water to a depth greater than 24 inches.
      TEMPORARY BUILDING AND USE. A structure or use permitted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main structure or
use for special events, not to exceed 2 years.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. A TEMPORARY SIGN is characterized by materials,
construction, design, and placement that allow the sign to be easily removed
and carried away. A TEMPORARY SIGN may not be permanently attached to any
structure, affixed to the real estate, or otherwise be permanent in nature.
      THOROUGHFARE. A street with a large amount of continuous traffic flow and
serving as a principal traffic way between Beverly Shores and its environs.
      THROUGH LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than 1
street. THROUGH LOTS abutting 2 streets may be referred to as DOUBLE FRONTAGE
LOTS.
      TOXIC MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
      TRAILER. A vehicle standing on wheels or on rigid supports which is used
for living or sleeping purposes or to transport boats or cargo.
      TRANSITIONAL YARD. A required yard in the General Commercial District and
the Residential District.
      TREE. A self supporting, woody plant, together with its root system,
having a well-defined stem or trunk or a multi-stemmed trunk, a more or less
defined crown of branches, and a mature height of at least 10 feet.
      TREE, CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. The circular area on the ground, with the trunk
of a tree as its center, having a radius of 1 foot for each 1 inch of tree
diameter.
      TREE DIAMETER. The diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at 4 feet
above ground level, unless specifically stated otherwise.
      TREE, DISEASED. A tree determined so in writing by the Building
Commissioner or a certified arborist.
      TREE, NUISANCE. The following species of trees:
         (a)   Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima);
         (b)   Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica and Rhamnus frangula);
         (c)   Russian Olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia);
         (d)   Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacia);
         (e)   Siberian Elm (Ulmus pumila);
         (f)   White Mulberry (Morus alba);
         (g)   Red Mulberry (Morus rubra);
         (h)   Honey Locust (Gleditsia triocanthos);
         (i)   Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacia); and
         (j)   Sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua).
      TREE TOPPING. The practice of severely cutting back of limbs within a
tree's crown of branches so as to alter the tree's natural shape and disfigure
the tree.
      UNIMPROVED LAND. See LAND, UNIMPROVED .
      USABLE FLOOR AREA.
         (a)   Usable floor area, for the purposes of computing required
parking spaces, is that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of
merchandise or services or for serving patrons, clients or customers.
         (b)   The floor area which is used or intended to be used principally
for the storage or processing of merchandise, or for utilities shall be
excluded from this computation of USABLE FLOOR AREA.
      USE. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a parcel of
land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; also any
activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be
carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land.
      VIBRATION. Rhythmic or periodic motion or disturbance projected through
air or earth.
      WALL, FRONT. The wall of a building which is nearest to, and most nearly
parallel to, the front lot line of the lot on which the building is located.
      WALL, REAR. The wall of a building which is nearest to, and most nearly
parallel to, the rear lot line of the lot on which the building is located.
      WALL, SIDE. Any wall of the building other than a front wall or a rear
wall.
      WALL, SIGN. A sign on a wall of a building or structure in a manner so
that the wall becomes merely the supporting structure, or in which the wall
forms the background surface.
      YARD. An open space on the same land with a building or group of
buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings,
and the nearest lot line or zoning lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending the full length of a front lot line, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the nearest part of the main building.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard
and the rear yard, the width of which is the minimum horizontal distance
between the side lot line and the nearest part of the main building.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full length of a rear lot line, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the nearest part of the main building.
      ZONING LOT. An area of land that is:
         (a)   Located within a single block;
         (b)   Sufficient to meet the land area required for construction of a
principal single-family dwelling (see PARCEL); and
         (c)   Designated by its owner as a tract, all of which is used or is
to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
The area of a ZONING LOT may or may not coincide with that of a lot of record
shown in the official records of the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Porter
County, or on any recorded subdivision plat or deed.
      ZONING PARCEL.  See ZONING LOT .
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 06-02, passed 7-17-2006; Am. Ord. 06-15,
passed 12-18-2006; Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 11-17-2008; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed
11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 10-03, passed 6-21-2010; Am. Ord. 11-11, passed 9-19-2011;
Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed 2-17-2014; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed - - ; Am. Ord.
2018-06, passed 8-21-2018; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-
07, passed 8-16-2022)
§ 155.004 ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Zoning map. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of this chapter, a
map entitled Zoning Map for the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana and that map is
made a part of this chapter. The boundaries of the zoning districts are
indicated on the zoning map of the Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana. At least 2
copies of the map shall be at all times kept on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Beverly Shores for public inspection.
   (B)   Boundaries. In the event uncertainties exist with respect to the
intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the
following rules shall apply.
      (1)   The district boundaries are the center lines of streets, easements
or alleys unless otherwise indicated, and where the designation of a boundary
line on the zoning map coincides with the location of a street, easement or
alley, the center line of the street, easement or alley shall be construed to
be the boundary of that district; and
      (2)   Where district boundaries do not coincide with the location of
streets, easements or alleys but do coincide with lot lines, the lot lines
shall be construed to be the boundary of that district.
   (C)   Districts. The Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana is hereby divided into
districts, described generally as follows:
      (1)   R: Residential District; single-family dwellings;
      (2)   C: General Commercial District; and
      (3)   G: Governmental District.
   (D)   Districts described.
      (1)   R: All areas not otherwise described in this section.
      (2)   C: All the area that borders on U.S. Highway 12 North to the south
shore right-of-way, and south to the corporate limits of Beverly Shores.
      (3)   G: Lots 1, 2, 3, Block 106; Lots 1, 2, 3, 27, 28, Block 107; and
Block A.
      (4)   Beverly Shores Unit “F” as per plat, recorded in the Office of the
Recorder of Porter County, Indiana.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.005 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that later
may be adopted, there exist lots, structures or uses of land and structures or
uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was adopted
or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this chapter or future amendments. This chapter intends that any lots,
structures or uses of land legal prior to the adoption of this chapter may
continue, provided that owners comply with the following regulations.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.006 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Within 3 months after the effective date of this chapter, the owner,
if known, of every nonconforming use shall be notified by the Secretary of the
Plan Commission of the provisions of this section. Within 30 days after receipt
of the notice, the owner shall apply to the Town Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
Beverly Shores for a registration certificate for the nonconforming use.
   (B)   Within 5 months after the adoption of this chapter, notification of
the provisions of this section shall be given by publication per I.C. 5-3-1-1;
public notification shall be published at least 3 times. Any owner of a
nonconforming use, other than the owner who has previously received direct
notification as provided in I.C. 5-3-1-1 shall apply for a registration
certificate for the nonconforming use within 6 months following the adoption of
this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   The application for the certificate shall designate the
location, nature and extent of the nonconforming use and other pertinent
details as the Plan Commission may require from time to time by general
regulations to describe the use.
      (2)   If the Plan Commission finds, upon review of the application, that
the existing use is a legal nonconforming use, it shall issue a registration
certificate within 30 days after receipt of the application; but if it finds
that the existing use has been constructed or altered for the existing use or
for any other use without compliance with the this chapter in effect at the
time of the construction or alteration, it shall not issue a registration
certificate for the use, and the use shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter. The action of the Plan Commission shall be reviewable by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   After 6 months from the adoption of this chapter, plus a reasonable
period as may be needed by the Commission to act on applications submitted
within the time limits required by division (C) above, failure to obtain a
certificate of non-conformance shall be considered a violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties provided in §
155.999.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.007 PRIOR CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the passage of this
chapter or amendment of this chapter upon which actual building construction
has been diligently carried on.
   (B)   Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in permanent manner;
except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been
substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, the demolition or removal shall
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently
carried on until completion of the building involved.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.008 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   Owners of record, legal and beneficial, who own a zoning parcel with a
minimum of 15,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet as of the
effective date of this chapter, or their assigns, may build in perpetuity.
   (B)   If 2 or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of adoption
of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements
for minimum size parcels for building purposes as established by this chapter,
the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel and no portion
of the parcel shall be used for building purposes which does not meet the
parcel width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor any
division of the parcel be made which left remaining any lot with width or area
below the requirements stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.009 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Where, at the effective date of passage of or amendment of this chapter,
lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this
chapter as enacted or amended, the use may continue, as long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions of divisions (A) through (C) below.
   (A)   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
passage or amendment of this chapter.
   (B)   No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other
portion of the lot or parcel occupied by the use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (C)   If the nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of
more than 30 days, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which the land is
located. Should any nonconforming structure be destroyed by any natural means,
it may be rebuilt so long as it is completed within 2 years of the loss.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.010 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, coverage, height, yards or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, the structure may
be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the provisions
of divisions (A) and (B) below:
   (A)   (1)   Owners of conforming structures on nonconforming lots shall
apply to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance in order to enlarge, alter
the height or change the footprint of such structure. In considering the
application, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply the same criteria as in
the case of conforming lots. Nonconformance alone shall not constitute grounds
for denying a variance.
      (2)   A legal nonconforming structure may be altered or changed in order
to decrease or eliminate the nonconformity or in a manner that does not
increase its nonconformity. An owner of a nonconforming structure shall apply
to the Board of Zoning Appeals for a variance if the proposed enlargement,
alteration or change does not comply with the bulk requirements and other
provisions of this section because it increases its nonconformity. In
considering the application, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply the same
criteria as in the case of conforming structures. Nonconformance alone shall
not constitute grounds for denying a variance. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the alteration of a legal nonconforming structure when
such alteration is required to bring the structure into compliance with the
Building Commissioner's order in the case of a structure determined to be
unsafe.
   (B)   The party alleging the existence of a legally nonconforming structure
or use bears the burden of demonstrating that the structure or use was legally
existing at the time of a change in ordinance which rendered the structure or
use nonconforming.
   (C)   Should any nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for any
distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district which it is located after it is moved.
   (D)   A legal nonconforming structure or portion of such structure that has
been partly or completely demolished or destroyed, including fire, flood,
explosion, force majeure, or any other casualty, may be repaired or replaced,
provided:
      (1)   The structure cannot be repaired or replaced in a manner that makes
the structure legally conforming;
      (2)   The owner makes application for a building permit within 6 months
from the date of the destruction or removal and all necessary construction is
completed within 1 year from the date of the application for a building permit;
and
      (3)   The replacement structure is placed on the same footprint and has
the same square footage of the structure that is being replaced and does not
otherwise increase nonconformity.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 07-07, passed 6-18-2007; Am. Ord. 10-05,
passed 6-21-2010; Am. Ord. 11-27, passed 11-27-2010; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed -
-)
§ 155.011 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURE.
   If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and premises in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption of this chapter, that
would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the
lawful use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the provisions of divisions (A) though (E) below.
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, moved or structurally altered except
in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in
which it is located.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside the building.
   (C)   (1)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of
a structure, or a structure and premises, may be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided the Board of Zoning Appeals, either by general rule
or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is
equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use.
      (2)   In permitting the change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   (1)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or a structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for 6 consecutive months
during 1 full calendar year or for 18 months during any 3-year period, the
structure or the structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with regulations of the district in which it is
located.
      (2)   This provision does not apply to a seasonal business.
   (E)   A seasonal business which is a nonconforming use that does not operate
for at least 4 consecutive months during 1 full calendar year shall be deemed
to be discontinued or abandoned and the structure shall not thereafter be used
except in conformance with regulations of the district in which it is located.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.025 CREATION, DUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS OF THE BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Creation of the Office of Building Commissioner.
      (1)   There is hereby created and continued in the Town of Beverly Shores
the Office of Building Commissioner. The person to fill this office shall be
appointed by the Town Council.
      (2)   In all matters relating to the duties of his or her office, as
hereinafter set out, the Building Commissioner shall be under the jurisdiction
of the Town Council.
   (B)   Duties of the Building Commissioner:
      (1)   Serve as Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce this
chapter, and all ordinances now in force or which may hereinafter be
established together with all town, state and federal laws, and regulations
pertaining to the erection, construction, alteration, repair or removal of
buildings and other structures in the Town of Beverly Shores or pertaining to
the use and occupancy of real estate in the town;
      (2)   Upon finding that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for the
violations, ordering the action necessary to correct the violation. However, in
emergency situations, oral communication may precede written notice;
      (3)   Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures;
      (4)   Order removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal
additions or structural alterations;
      (5)   Order discontinuance of any violations of this chapter; and
      (6)   Take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or prevent violations of this chapter. This shall include the:
         (a)   Issuance of and action on certificates of occupancy and
maintenance of records thereof;
         (b)   Issuance of all building permits, and inspection of buildings,
structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this
chapter;
         (c)   Maintenance of permanent and current zoning records, including
but not limited to all maps, conditional use permits, amendments to this
chapter, variances, special exceptions, appeals and applications thereof;
         (d)   Transmission of written recommendations on all amendments to
this chapter, conditional use permits and subdivisions to the Town Council and
Plan Commission; and/or
         (e)   Performance of other similar administrative duties as permitted
by law and are assigned to him or her by the Town Council.
   (C)   Qualifications of the Building Commissioner.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner shall be either a registered architect,
registered professional engineer, licensed general contractor or other
qualified person as determined by the Town Council.
      (2)   An OTHER QUALIFIED PERSON is a person deemed by the Town Council to
have at least 5 years of experience in responsible charge of construction
activity as determined by the Town Council on a case by case basis after a
review and consideration of the resume and employment record of any Building
Commissioner candidate.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner shall not undertake any of the duties in
division (B) above in which he or she has a direct or indirect financial
interest, where a family member is involved, where the Building Commissioner
would review or approve his or her own work performed for any person other than
the town, or where it is otherwise necessary for the Building Commissioner to
recuse himself or herself. For purposes of this section, the “his or her own
work” includes, but is not limited to, services performed by his or her
partners, employees, employer, company, firm, partnership, and associates.
      (4)   In a like case, the Building Committee shall select 1 of its
members as temporary Building Commissioner for the purposes of the case, and in
an appropriate case the Town Council may appoint the temporary Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 155.026 BUILDING COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby created and continued in the Town of Beverly Shores a
Building Committee which shall consist of 5 members appointed by the Town
Council, 1 of whom may be the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   (1)   The Building Committee shall advise and assist the Building
Commissioner in carrying out his or her duties under this chapter. An
affirmative vote of the majority of the Committee shall either approve, request
further information, or disapprove applications for building permits regarding
any building, structure, excavation, or filling.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner may act on his or her own authority in
approving building permits for improvements of a "limited scope", for additions
or garages, or other improvements such as screen porches, decks, sheds, window
replacement and remodeling or may, in the discretion of the Building
Commissioner, refer applications to the Building Committee for limited scope
improvements. For purposes of this section LIMITED SCOPE IMPROVEMENTS shall
mean additions or garages of less than 250 square feet and only minor site
excavation, i.e., hand digging. Any building permit issued by the Building
Commissioner on his or her own shall be presented to the Building Committee at
the next meeting of the Building Committee. Once an application has been
referred to the Building Committee, any further action on the application shall
be by majority vote of the Committee.
   (C)   (1)   The qualifications for 3 of the additional members of the
Building Committee shall be the same as for the Building Commissioner as
specified in §
155.025(C), and the other 2 members shall be appointed by the Town Council
under their jurisdiction.
      (2)   A member of the Building Committee may not participate in any
matter considered by the Committee in which he or she has a direct or indirect
financial interest, where a member may have a family member involved or where a
member should otherwise recuse themselves.
      (3)   The Committee shall enter in its records the fact that the member
is disqualified under §
155.025(C) and/or this division to participate as a member of the Committee in
the deliberation and vote upon the particular aforementioned matter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 11-24, passed 11-21-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-
08, passed 9-17-2012; Am. Ord. 2018-03, passed 5-15-2018)
§ 155.027 BUILDING SITE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Creation of Building Site Committee.
      (1)   There is hereby created and continued in the Town of Beverly Shores
a Building Site Committee which shall be composed of the members of the
Building Committee.
      (2)   A member of the Building Site Committee shall not participate in
any matter considered by the Committee in which he or she has a direct or
indirect financial interest and where a member may have a family member
involved.
      (3)   The Committee shall enter in its records the fact that the member
is disqualified and the remaining members of the Committee shall appoint a
replacement to participate as a member of the Committee in the deliberation and
vote upon the aforementioned matter. No action shall be taken by the Committee
unless upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Committee.
   (B)   Duties of the Building Site Committee. The Building Site Committee
shall:
      (1)   Meet with an applicant for the purpose of site review; and
      (2)   Approve or disapprove an application for site plan approval
following site review on the basis of standards listed in §
155.042.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2012-08, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 155.028 CAPITAL PLANNING ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created and continued in the Town of Beverly
Shores, a Capital Planning Advisory Committee which shall consist of the Clerk-
Treasurer and 6 members, 1 member from the Park Board, 1 from the Police
Department and 1 from the Fire Department shall serve for 4-year terms and 1
member from the Town Council, 1 from the Plan Commission, who is not a Council
member, and 1 at large resident shall initially serve for 2-year terms. All
members shall be appointed by the Town Council and after the first 2 years, for
4-year terms.
   (B)   Duties. The Capital Planning Advisory Committee shall meet on an as-
needed basis to review and set priorities for expenditure of available capital
funds to prepare a 5-year capital plan for the Town of Beverly Shores, and to
report its recommendations to the Town Council for its consideration in the
preparation of the town's annual budget. The committee shall elect a
Chairperson annually.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.029 PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation.
      (1)   There is hereby created and continued in the Town of Beverly Shores
a municipal Plan Commission consisting of 7 members. The Town Council shall
appoint 3 members in the municipal government and the Town Council President
shall appoint 4 citizen members, of whom no more than 2 may be of the same
political party. Each member of the Commission shall be a resident of the town.
      (2)   A member of the Plan Commission may not participate in any matter
considered by the Commission in which he or she has a direct or indirect
financial interest or where a member may have a family member involved. The
Commission shall enter in its record the fact that the member is disqualified
and the remaining members shall appoint a replacement qualified under this
section to participate as a member of the Commission in the deliberation and
vote upon the particular aforementioned matter.
      (3)   Members of the Commission may be removed from office by the Town
Council for cause upon written charges. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term of the member affected.
   (B)   Officers.
      (1)   At the first regular meeting in each year, the Plan Commission
shall elect from its members a President and a Vice President.
         (a)   The President. The Commission President shall call and preside
over all meetings whether regular or special.
         (b)   The Vice President. The Vice President shall have the authority
to act as President of the Commission during the absence, disability or
resignation of the President until the new President shall be elected. In the
case of resignation of the President, the Commission shall hold an election at
the next regular meeting.
         (c)   The Secretary. The Secretary shall record all activities of the
Commission. The Secretary shall attest all documents of the Commission. The
Secretary may be an employee of the Commission.
      (2)   The Commission may appoint the Secretary and other employees
necessary to the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Commission
and shall within its budgetary allowances fix the compensation for the
employees.
   (C)   Authorization under state statute. Administrative powers and duties as
authorized by I.C. 36-7-4-401 et seq. are as follows:
      (1)   Exercise general supervision of and make regulations for the
administration of the affairs of the Commission;
      (2)   Prescribe uniform rules pertaining to investigations and hearings;
      (3)   Supervise fiscal affairs and responsibilities of the Commission;
      (4)   Prescribe the qualifications of appointment, remove and fix the
compensation of the employees of the Commission, compensation to be in
conformity to and in compliance with salaries and compensations theretofore
fixed by the town; delegate to employees authority to perform ministerial acts
in all cases except where action of the Commission is necessary;
      (5)   Keep an accurate and complete record of all Commission proceedings;
record and file all bonds and contracts and assume responsibility for the
custody and preservation of all papers and documents of the Commission;
      (6)   Make recommendations and an annual report to the Town Council
concerning the operation of the Commission and the status of planning within
its jurisdiction;
      (7)   Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances and other
material relating to the activities authorized under the State Planning Act;
      (8)   Adopt a seal, if necessary, and certify to all official acts;
      (9)   Sue and be sued collectively by its legal name, The Town of Beverly
Shores Plan Commission, service of process being had on the President of the
Commission; no cost shall be taxed against the Commission or any of its members
in any action;
      (10)   Invoke any legal equitable or special remedy for the enforcement
of the provisions of the act or ordinance or its action taken thereunder;
      (11)   Prepare and submit a budget, if necessary, in the same manner as
other departments of the town government and shall be limited in all
expenditures to the provisions made therefore by the Town Council;
      (12)   The Plan Commission shall have authority to expend under regular
town procedure and provided by law all sums appropriated to it for purposes and
activities authorized; and
      (13)   If deemed advisable, establish an Advisory Committee or
Committees.
   (D)   Advisory powers and duties. So as to assure the promotion of public
health, safety, morals, convenience, order or the general welfare and for the
sake of efficiency and economy in the process of development the Plan
Commission shall prepare a Comprehensive Plan which can contain the items
listed below:
      (1)   Careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing
conditions and factors of growth of the town and its environs;
      (2)   Maps, plats, charts and descriptive material presenting basic
information, locations, extent and character of any of the following:
         (a)   History, population and physical site conditions, including soil
survey reports as pertains to load bearing values and sanitary absorption
characteristics;
         (b)   Land use including the height, area, bulk, location and use of
private and public structures and premises;
         (c)   Population densities;
         (d)   Community centers and neighborhood units;
         (e)   Blight and slum areas;
         (f)   Streets and highways including bridges, viaducts, subways,
parkways, alleys and other public ways and places;
         (g)   Sewer, sanitation and drainage including handling treatment and
disposal of excess storm water, sewage effluent, refuse and other wastes;
         (h)   Stream pollution;
         (i)   Public and private utilities including water, light, heat,
communications and other services;
         (j)   Transportation including land, bus, truck, air and water
transportation for terminal facilities;
         (k)   Local mass transit including motor and trolley bus, street,
elevated and underground railways and taxi cabs;
         (l)   Parks and recreation including parks, playgrounds, reservations,
forest, wildlife refuges and other public grounds, spaces and facilities of
recreational nature;
         (m)   Public buildings and institutions including governmental
administration services, buildings, hospitals, infirmaries, clinics, penal and
correctional institutions and other civic and social service buildings;
         (n)   Education, including location and extent of schools, colleges
and universities;
         (o)   Land utilization including agricultural, forest and other uses;
         (p)   Conservation of water, soil, agricultural and mineral resources;
and
         (q)   Any other factors which are a part of the physical, economic,
social situation within the town.
      (3)   Reports, maps, charts and recommendations, setting forth plans for
the development, redevelopment, improvement extension and revision of the
subjects and physical situation of the town, set out in division (D)(2) above
so as to substantially accomplish the object of the legislation;
      (4)   A long range development program of public works projects based on
the recommended plans of the Commission for the purposes of eliminating
unplanned, unsightly, untimely and extravagant projects and with a view to
stabilizing industry and employment and the keeping of the program up-to-date
by yearly revision; and
      (5)   A long range financial program of governmental expenditures in
order that the development program may be carried out and the keeping of the
program up-to-date for the purpose of assuring efficient and economic use of
public funds.
   (E)   Other powers and duties:
      (1)   Initiate proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and this
chapter; hold hearings as required by law and make recommendations to the Town
Council;
      (2)   Review all proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and this
chapter initiated elsewhere and make recommendations to the Town Council as
specified in §
155.031;
      (3)   Review, approve or disapprove all subdivision applications as
specified in §§
155.150 through
155.161;
      (4)   Formulate recommendations to the Town Council regarding public
ways, public places, public structures and public and private utilities;
      (5)   Formulate policies governing the layout and development of public
ways and service to platted and unplatted land; and
      (6)   After adoption of the Comprehensive Plan and this chapter, the Town
Council and the Plan Commission shall be guided by and shall give consideration
to the general policy and pattern of development set out in the Comprehensive
Plan in the:
         (a)   Authorization, construction, alteration or abandonment of public
ways, alleys, easements, public places, public structures or public utilities;
and
         (b)   Authorization, acceptance or construction of water mains,
sewers, connections, facilities or utilities.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed - -)
§ 155.030 MEETINGS OF THE PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Meetings of the Commission shall be called by the Commission
President.
   (B)   The majority of the members shall constitute a quorum; however, no
action of the Commission is official until authorized by a majority of the
Commission.
   (C)   (1)   Decisions of the Commission shall be by voice vote of the
members.
      (2)   All members present shall vote on every question unless they
disqualify themselves and are excused from voting by a majority of the members
present.
      (3)   A member of the Commission who is aware of a conflict of interest
in connection with a filed petition shall inform the Commission President of
the conflict.
      (4)   The Commission shall then appoint an elector to act as a member
during the hearing and determination of that particular petition.
   (D)   The Secretary shall record and keep the official minutes of all
proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question presented or
indicating that the member is absent or not voting.
   (E)   The Secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings of the Commission
which shall be presented to the Commission at the next succeeding meeting for
approval. When approved, the records shall be signed by the President and
attested by the Secretary and filed in the permanent records of the Plan
Commission of the Town of Beverly Shores.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.031 FINAL DISPOSITION OF ZONING CASES.
   (A)   (1)   The final disposition of any case shall be in the form of an
order setting forth the findings and determination of the Commission together
with any modification, specification or limitation which it makes.
      (2)   The Secretary shall provide a written copy of each order to all
petitioners within 10 days of final disposition.
   (B)   The Commission may dismiss a case for want of prosecution or lack of
jurisdiction. When a petitioner has failed to appear at 2 consecutive meetings,
the case shall be dismissed for want of prosecution.
   (C)   A petitioner may not withdraw a case after a roll call vote has been
called by the President or requested by the Commission.
   (D)   A case which has been withdrawn by the petitioner shall not be again
placed on the docket within a period of 3 months after the date of withdrawal.
   (E)   A case which has been decided adversely to the petitioner shall not
again be placed on the docket for consideration until 1 year after the date of
the decision previously rendered.
   (F)   A case which has been decided favorable shall be forwarded to the Town
Council.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.032 ACTION FOR INJUNCTION FOR RESTRAINT OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Plan Commission or any designated enforcement official may
institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court of Porter County to
restrain an individual or a governmental unit from violating the provisions of
the State Planning Act or an ordinance enacted pursuant to its terms. A change
of venue from the county shall not be granted in a like case.
   (B)   (1)   The Plan Commission may institute a suit for a mandatory
injunction directing an individual or a governmental unit to remove a structure
erected in violation of the provisions of the State Planning Act or of an
ordinance enacted pursuant to its terms.
      (2)   If the Plan Commission is successful in its suit the respondent
shall bear the cost of the action. A change of venue from the county shall not
be granted in a like case.
   (C)   No compensation shall be awarded for the taking of or injury to any
structure erected in violation of the provisions of the State Planning Act or
of an ordinance enacted pursuant to its terms.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.033 GREEN SPACE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Creation.
      (1)   The Town Council shall appoint a Green Space Committee to encourage
and assist owners of undeveloped property in Beverly Shores to donate property
to the town to protect natural and open areas and add to public lands (green
space) in Beverly Shores.
      (2)   The Town Council shall initially appoint 5 residents, no more than
1 of whom may be serving on the Town Council, to serve on the committee for 1-,
2- or 3-year terms, and after the first 3 years the appointments will be for 3-
year terms.
   (B)   Duties. The committee members shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Advising potential donors to investigate federal and state tax law
procedures for obtaining tax deductions for their land donations;
      (2)   (a)    The Committee shall discuss with all potential land donors
the benefits of allowing their donated land to be used as public parks in
Beverly Shores, but shall not make park use a criterion for acceptance.
         (b)   If a potential donor requests that his or her land be designated
as permanently protected green space rather than as public park land, and if
the Committee agrees tbat the land should be accepted with that designation,
the Committee shall make its recommendation to the Town Council that the land
be accepted as permanently protected green space. As a part of its
recommendation, the Committee shall advise the Town Council about land
stewardship needs for the donated land.
      (3)   Regularly submitting recommendations, based on criteria that the
Committee shall recommend to the Plan Commission for approval, to the Town
Council for acceptance of donated land parcels;
      (4)   After Town Council approval, registering the land titles of donated
property with the Porter County Recorder of Deeds;
      (5)   Ensuring the town's title to the property is valid and recorded
with the Clerk-Treasurer; and
      (6)   Annually at the time of member appointment, the Town Council shall
review the Committee's activities to assure that the Committee is properly
conducting the business of the town in effectively acquiring and stewarding
non-parklands owned by the town.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 10-04, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 155.034 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Reestablished.
      (1)   As a part of this chapter, there is hereby reestablished and
continued a Board of Zoning Appeals (hereinafter the B.Z.A.).
      (2)   The B.Z.A. shall consist of 5 members appointed as follows:
         (a)   Three citizen members appointed by the Town Council President,
of whom 1 must be a member of the Plan Commission and 2 must not be members of
the Plan Commission;
         (b)   One citizen member appointed by the Town Council who must not be
a member of the Plan Commission; and
         (c)   One citizen member appointed by the Advisory Plan Commission who
must be a member of the Plan Commission other than the member appointed under
division (2)(a) above.
   (B)   Appointment of alternate members. At the time an appointing authority
makes an appointment pursuant to division (A) above, the appointing authority
shall appoint an alternate member for each of its appointments to participate
with the B.Z.A. in any hearing or decision in which the regular member is
disqualified by reason of interest.
   (C)   Organization of B.Z.A. Chairperson, Vice Chairperson.
      (1)   At the first meeting of each year, the B.Z.A. shall elect a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from its members. At the first meeting, any
member may take the Chair for the limited purpose of accepting nominations for
Chairperson.
      (2)   A member may nominate any member including himself or herself for
Chairperson. Upon motion duly made, seconded and adopted, the nominations shall
be closed. Thereupon the nominee receiving the vote of the majority of the
entire membership of the B.Z.A. shall be elected Chairperson of the B.Z.A.
      (3)   The temporary Chairperson is entitled to vote.
      (4)   The Chairperson shall immediately take the Chair and preside over
the nomination and election of a Vice Chairperson, and the appointment of a
Secretary and other employees as are necessary for the discharge of the
B.Z.A.’s duties.
      (5)   The Vice Chairperson may act as Chairperson during the absence or
disability of the Chairperson.
   (D)   Quorum. A quorum consists of a majority of the entire membership of
the B.Z.A.
   (E)   Official action. Action of the B.Z.A. is not official unless it is
authorized by a majority of the entire membership of the B.Z.A.
   (F)   Removal of B.Z.A. member.
      (1)   The appointing authority may remove a member from the B.Z.A. for
cause. The appointing authority must mail notice of the removal, along with
written reasons for the removal, to the member at his or her residence address.
      (2)   A member who is removed may, within 30 days after receiving notice
of the removal, appeal the removal to the Porter Superior Court.
   (G)   Vacancy. If a vacancy occurs among the members of the B.Z.A., the
appointing authority shall appoint a member for the unexpired term of the
vacating member.
   (H)   Conflict of interest.
      (1)   A member of the B.Z.A. may not participate in a hearing or decision
of the B.Z.A. concerning a zoning matter in which he has a direct or indirect
financial interest.
      (2)   The B.Z.A. shall enter in its records:
         (a)   The fact that a regular member has a disqualification; and
         (b)   The name of the alternate member, if any, who participates in
the hearing or decision in place of the regular member.
      (3)   The determination of whether or not a member has a direct or
indirect financial interest shall be made as follows:
         (a)   Any evidence showing the existence of a conflict shall be
received by the Board at a meeting at which there is present a quorum,
excluding the member in question;
         (b)   Rebuttal evidence, if any, shall be received;
         (c)   The Board shall honor the opinion of a member in question who
asks to disqualify himself or herself;
         (d)   Absent self-disqualification, a member shall not be disqualified
from participating in a hearing or a decision of the B.Z.A. except upon a vote
of a majority of the entire membership of the B.Z.A. The member in question may
not vote on his or her disqualification, nor shall any member of the B.Z.A. who
presents evidence at the hearing on disqualification.
      (4)   No Board member shall be disqualified by reason of questions asked
or comments made during the presentation of evidence or deliberations on the
disqualification issue.
   (I)   Rules of procedure.
      (1)   The B.Z.A. shall adopt rules, which may not conflict with the
Zoning Chapter, concerning:
         (a)   The filing of appeals;
         (b)   The application for variances, special exceptions, special uses,
contingent uses and conditional uses;
         (c)   The giving of notice;
         (d)   The conduct of hearings; and
         (e)   The determination of whether a variance application is for a
variance of use or for a variance from the development standards (such as
height, bulk or area, among others).
      (2)   A variance application shall be deemed an application for a
variance of use if the applicant seeks to use land within the jurisdiction of
the B.Z.A. in a manner that is neither a permitted, special or conditional use,
or special exception in the zoning district wherein the land is located.
   (J)   Powers and duties of the B.Z.A. A Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear
and determine appeals from and review:
      (1)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Building Commissioner or any other administrative official, hearing officer or
staff member under the this chapter;
      (2)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative board or other body except a Plan Commission in relation to the
enforcement of this chapter; or
      (3)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative board, or other body except a Plan Commission in relation to the
enforcement of an ordinance adopted under the chapter requiring the procurement
of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
   (K)   Special exceptions.
      (1)   A Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve or deny all of the
following from the terms of this chapter, but only in the classes of cases or
in the particular situations specified in this chapter:
         (a)   Special exceptions;
         (b)   Special uses;
         (c)   Contingent uses; and
         (d)   Conditional uses;
      (2)   The Board may impose reasonable conditions as a part of its
approval.
      (3)   The B.Z.A. shall review the particular facts and circumstances of
each special exception, special use, contingent use and conditional use in
terms of the following standards and shall not approve a special exception
except upon a finding from the evidence at the public hearing that the proposed
use:
         (a)   Is in fact a special exception as established under the
provisions of the zoning district wherein it is located;
         (b)   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives and any specific objective of the Town of Beverly Shores
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning and/or Subdivision Ordinance;
         (c)   Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to
be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity; and further that the use will not change the
essential character of the neighborhood wherein it is located;
         (d)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
         (e)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, schools; or that the persons or
agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to
provide adequately any like service;
         (f)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at public
expense for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the
economic welfare of the community;
         (g)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person,
property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic,
noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;
         (h)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic or surrounding public
thoroughfares and shall provide for adequate parking; and
         (i)   Will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural,
scenic or historic feature(s) of major importance.
   (L)   Variance; use.
      (1)   A Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve or deny variances of use
from the terms of this chapter. The Board may impose reasonable conditions as a
part of its approval.
      (2)   A variance may be approved under this section only upon a
determination in writing that:
         (a)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community;
         (b)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included
in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
         (c)   The need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to
the property involved;
         (d)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter will
constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the
variance is sought; and
         (e)   The approval does not interfere substantially with the
Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Beverly Shores, as amended from time to
time.
   (M)   Variance; development standards.
      (1)   The B.Z.A. shall approve or deny variances from the development
standards (such as height, bulk or area) of this chapter.
      (2)   A variance may be approved under this section only upon a
determination in writing that:
         (a)   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community;
         (b)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included
in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and
         (c)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter will result
in practical difficulties in the use of the property.
   (N)   Appeals to B.Z.A.; grounds; transmission of record. An appeal filed
with the B.Z.A. must specify the grounds of the appeal and must be filed within
a time and in a form as may be prescribed by the Board of Zoning Appeals by
rule.
      (1)   The administrative official, hearing officer, Administrative Board
or other body from whom the appeal is taken, shall, on the request of the Board
of Zoning Appeals, transmit to it all documents, plans and papers constituting
the record of the action from which an appeal was taken.
      (2)   Certified copies of the documents, plans and papers constituting
the record may be transmitted for purposes of division (N)(1).
      (3)   When an appeal is filed as herein provided with the B.Z.A., all
proceedings and work on the premises shall be immediately stayed unless the
official or board from whom the appeal is taken shall certify to the B.Z.A.
that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings or work shall not
be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Porter
Superior Court after notice to the officer or board from whom the appeal is
taken and the owner of the premises affected and after due cause shown.
   (O)   Public notice and hearing.
      (1)   The B.Z.A. shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
administrative appeals, exceptions, uses and variances.
      (2)   At least 10 days before the date set for the public hearing the
party taking the appeal shall, using forms provided by the B.Z.A., give public
notice of the hearing as follows:
         (a)   Publish the notice in 1 newspaper of general circulation in
Porter County;
         (b)   Post the notice at or near:
            1.   The Town Hall; and
            2.   The Beverly Shores Post Office.
         (c)   Deliver the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to record owners of all real property located within 300 feet of petitioner's
property as shown on the rolls of the Township Assessor or a similarly reliable
resource.
      (3)   The party taking the appeal, or applying for the exception, use or
variance may be required to assume the cost of public notice and notice by
certified mail to record owners within 300 feet. At the hearing, each party may
appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
      (4)   The B.Z.A. may require the Building Commissioner or any person
having information relevant to a pending matter to appear at the hearing on the
matter and present evidence. Other persons may appear and present relevant
evidence.
      (5)   (a)   A person may not communicate with any member of the B.Z.A.
before the hearing with an intent to influence the member's action on a matter
pending before the B.Z.A.
         (b)   Not less than 5 days before the hearing, however, the town
official or board from whom the appeal is taken, or in any event, the Building
Commissioner, may file with the B.Z.A. a written statement setting forth any
facts or opinions relating to the matter.
      (6)   (a)   The B.Z.A. may require any party adverse to any pending
petition to enter a written appearance specifying the party's name and address.
         (b)   If the written appearance is entered more than 4 days before the
hearing, the B.Z.A. may also require the petitioner to furnish each adverse
party with a copy of the petition and a plot plan of the property involved.
      (7)   Upon appeal, the B.Z.A. may reverse, affirm or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed. For this purpose the B.Z.A.
has all the powers of the official officer, board or body from which the appeal
is taken.
      (8)   The B.Z.A. shall make a decision on any matter that it is required
to hear either:
         (a)   At the meeting at which that matter is first presented; or
         (b)   At the conclusion of the hearing on that matter, if it is
continued.
      (9)   Within 5 days after making the required decision, the B.Z.A. shall
file in its permanent record a copy of its decision and deliver copies of the
decision to the Building Commissioner and the petitioner. The decision shall be
available for public inspection.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 11-11, passed 9-19-2011; Am. Ord. 2021-
09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.035 SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS; WRITTEN COMMITMENTS.
   (A)   Supplementary conditions and safeguards.
      (1)   In granting any special exception, special use, contingent use,
conditional use, variance or other relief on appeal, the B.Z.A. may prescribe
any reasonable conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the spirit and
purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan and those purposes set forth
in the Indiana Planning and Zoning Law, being I.C. 36-7-4-101 through 36-7-4-
1213.
      (2)   Violation of the conditions and safeguards when made a part of the
Board of Zoning Appeal’s decision or the violation of any written commitment
shall be deemed in violation of this chapter subject to the enforcement and
penalty provisions set forth in §
155.999.
   (B)   Written commitments.
      (1)   In the case of a petition for any of the following, from the terms
of this chapter, a Board of Zoning Appeals may permit or require the petitioner
and/or owner of the parcel of property subject to the Board's review to make a
written commitment concerning the use or development of that parcel:
         (a)   Special exception;
         (b)   Special use;
         (c)   Contingent use;
         (d)   Conditional use; or
         (e)   Variance.
      (2)   The B.Z.A. may:
         (a)   Adopt rules governing the creation, form, recording,
modification; and
         (b)   Adopt rules designating which specially affected persons and
classes of specially affected persons are entitled to enforce commitments.
      (3)   If the B.Z.A. requires a written commitment from the petitioner,
the B.Z.A. may require the petitioner to submit a proposed written commitment
at the time of the pre-hearing preceding the public hearing. Nevertheless, the
B.Z.A. shall establish all items to be included in the written commitment
including conditions upon which the commitment may terminate, no later than:
         (a)   At the meeting at which that matter is first presented for
public hearing; or
         (b)   At any continued meetings on that matter.
      (4)   The B.Z.A. may require the commitment to be recorded at the
petitioner's expense prior to taking final action on the petition. By
permitting or requiring commitments, the B.Z.A. does not obligate itself to
approve or deny any request.
      (5)   The written commitments may be enforced by the Town of Beverly
Shores by and through its Town Council, the B.Z.A., the Building Commissioner
or record owners of property located within 300 feet of the parcel subject to
the commitment.
      (6)   (a)   Commitments shall be recorded in the Porter County Recorder’s
Office and take effect upon the granting of the exception, use or variance.
         (b)   Unless modified or terminated by the B.Z.A., a commitment is
binding on the petitioner, the owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner and
each other person acquiring an interest in the parcel.
         (c)   A commitment may be modified or terminated only by a decision of
the Board made at a public hearing after notice as provided by rule.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.036 APPEAL; EXPIRATION OF SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning
Appeals may appeal the B.Z.A. decision to the Circuit or Superior Court of
Porter County.
   (B)   Expiration of special exception permit. A special exception permit
shall be deemed to authorize only 1 particular use and the permit shall
automatically expire if, for any reason, the use has not commenced within 1
year.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.037 SITE PLAN SHOWING LANDSCAPE ENHANCEMENT.
   (A)   A site plan showing landscape enhancement shall be required for all
new residential construction, and commercial, governmental and civic buildings.
A site plan showing landscape enhancement may be required in cases of accessory
structures and additions when deemed appropriate by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The purpose of requiring a site plan showing landscape enhancement is
to promote the stability of land, values and investments, the orderly
development of the town and the general welfare.
   (C)   These purposes can best be realized through:
      (1)   Proper attention to siting of the enumerated structures; and
      (2)   Avoidance of unsightly, undesirable and incompatible design in
relation to the physical landscape and character of the neighborhood in which
the construction is proposed.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 11-11, passed 9-19-2011; Am. Ord. 2021-
09, passed 7-20-2021) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.038 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   To facilitate the achievement of the objectives of this chapter, a
pre-application conference between the Building Commissioner and owners of
property enumerated in §
155.037, who are planning development thereof, shall be required.
   (B)   Applicants are encouraged to schedule the conferences as early as
possible in planning for the development of their property.
   (C)   The purpose of the conference shall be to familiarize the applicant
with the provisions of the Town Zoning Chapter and to discuss siting and the
improvement planned for the property.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.039 SITE PLAN APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   No placement of any building or structure nor the modification of any
foundation on a site in the cases enumerated in §
155.037 shall be permitted without site approval.
   (B)   The approval shall be considered a prerequisite to the issuance of a
building permit and shall be based upon finding by the Building Site Committee
that the proposed site plan meets the requirements of this chapter or upon
written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding an appeal, special
exception or variance.
   (C)   The Building Site Committee may waive by a majority vote of the
members of the Committee the requirements in §
155.040 for certified topographical drawings when the proposed work does not
involve major alteration of the terrain or is of a limited scope.
   (D)   Applicants who wish to obtain a waiver should apply to the Building
Commissioner prior to submitting an application for site plan approval and
obtain a waiver in writing.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.040 APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   The application for site plan approval shall be made upon a form
prescribed by the Plan Commission and signed by the owner(s) attesting to the
accuracy of all information supplied by the application.
   (B)   The following information is required:
      (1)   Name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of legal owner(s) of the
property;
      (2)   Legal description of the property;
      (3)   Copy of recorded deed for the property;
      (4)   Certified plat of survey no more than two years old in triplicate
of the property by a registered Indiana land surveyor at a scale not more than
one inch equals 20 feet indicating swales, ditches, flow line, top and toe of
slopes and high point. Topographical contours shall be shown at two-foot
intervals, all steep slopes shall be color coded or highlighted, as well as two
established benchmarks at assumed elevation in cases where sea level elevation
is not available. The topographical drawing shall also show:
         (a)   The placement and size of all existing trees more than eight
inches in diameter, measured four feet above ground level. The site plan shall
also show those trees more than eight inches, or as otherwise provided in §
155.064, in diameter that are proposed to be removed;
         (b)   Underground utilities on or within ten feet to the property;
         (c)   Overlay drawing of the topographical drawing showing the
exterior dimensions of the foundation of any structure(s) and their placement
on the property including setbacks from property lines and other structure(s)
and the proposed topography upon completion of the proposed building(s) or
structure(s) or additions or alterations thereto, including well (if
applicable) and septic system, driveways, retaining walls, revetments and
parking facilities;
         (d)   Upon completion of the project, an as-built topographic survey
shall be filed with the Building Commissioner for comparison to the approved
plan; and
         (e)   Indicate location of any active wells within 75 feet of proposed
septic field, or provide a letter verifying that none exist.
      (5)   Three drawings to scale not more than 1 inch equals 20 feet upon
which the relationship of the proposed building(s) or structure(s) or
alteration or addition thereto to surrounding uses, the location of surrounding
streets, walkways, rights-of-way, existing easements of record, parking
facilities, access to the site and proposed location of septic systems and
wells, if applicable, including wells, yard drains, septic tanks, drainage
fields on adjacent properties and locating retaining walls, permanent fences,
curbs, all driveways, parking and loading areas on the subject property and
within 15 feet of the property line and on adjacent property;
      (6)   A plan, which contains a method of preventing erosion immediately
after excavation of the site, a system for protecting excavated materials from
erosion, and a method of restoration of disrupted areas;
      (7)   Drainage plan and specifications to provide adequate surface runoff
in order to prevent increased runoff on surrounding property. These plans and
specifications shall be prepared by an architect or engineer licensed in
Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Ohio or Wisconsin and are required to be certified
by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Indiana and certified by a
soil scientist licensed by the State of Indiana;
      (8)   Receipt from the Michigan City Department of Water Works for the
municipal water connection fee, and a receipt from the Town of Beverly Shores
for the town tap-in fee (if applicable);
      (9)   Building heights;
      (10)   Provide information to demonstrate compliance with the steep slope
provisions contained in this chapter or provide a variance signed by the
B.Z.A.;
      (11)   The proposed site of the structure must be staked consistent with
site plan;
      (12)   All areas affected by construction or excavating activities must
be staked with a different color stake from the structure stakes at the site;
      (13)   All retaining walls which will be used during construction or
intended for permanent, protection of the dune must be designated on the site
plan as well as the method which will be utilized to install such walls and, in
the case of temporary walls, remove the walls after construction;
      (14)   Construction techniques utilizing a pile driver or other vibration
techniques are prohibited; and
      (15)   Any other matters which may be necessary to determine conformance
with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 11-
11, passed 9-19-2011; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 12-19-2016) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.041 PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a building site approval which
satisfies the requirements set forth in §
155.040, the Building Commissioner shall, within 5 days, establish a date for a
Building Site Committee inspection of the site.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall notify the applicant of the meeting
date no later than 25 days thereafter.
   (C)   The applicant and his or her architect/engineer shall meet with the
Building Site Committee at the property for the purpose of review,
familiarization and comment regarding the proposed construction work.
   (D)   In no event shall the Building Site Committee be required to render
professional architectural or engineering services.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.042 APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Building Site Committee shall approve, request further information
or disapprove a building site plan within 15 days following the site review
required in §
155.041 by a majority vote of the members of the committee.
   (B)   The approval or disapproval shall be based on the following standards:
      (1)   Whether there is an alternative building site on the property which
would adapt to the requirements of this chapter, both during construction and
after construction, so long as a compliant structure can be constructed;
      (2)   If there is a steep slope on any set back, required under this
chapter, no construction activities, including the removal of trees or
vegetation, shall occur within the side or rear yard setbacks;
      (3)   The applicant’s plans adapt to, and minimize disturbance of, the
natural terrain, trees and other vegetation;
      (4)   The applicant’s plans adapt to the topography of the property with
minimum alterations of the building site; and
      (5)   The applicant’s plans avoid excessive similarity, dissimilarity or
inappropriate in exterior design in appearance of buildings, awnings, signs,
fences and other structures. The determinations shall be made with respect of 1
or more of the following features:
         (a)   Apparently identical facade in relation to any other structure
existing or for which a permit has been issued within a distance of 1,000 feet
of the proposed site including substantially identical size and arrangement of
either doors, windows, porticos or other openings or breaks in the facade
facing the street including a reverse arrangement thereof;
         (b)   Other significant design features such as but not limited to
roof line, height of building, construction, material or quality of
architectural design;
         (c)   Location and elevation of building upon the site in relation to
topography of the site; and/or
         (d)   Inappropriateness in relation to any other property of the same
or adjoining district of design, landscaping, building materials in use
thereof, orientation to site or placement of parking, storage or refuse areas.
   (C)   If the application is disapproved, the Building Commissioner shall
indicate the reasons by certified letter to the applicant. In any case where
disapproval is based on considerations of a steep slope the Building
Commissioner shall prepare a report summarizing the concerns and issues
resulting from the applicant’s plans as related to the steep slope and shall
include the report with the records for the site plan application. The Building
Commissioner shall maintain records of all actions on site plan applications.
   (D)   If the application is approved, the applicant shall be bound to the
site plan in all details and respects as set out in the site plan application,
including any revisions or amendments thereto approved by the Building Site
Committee in writing, and if required by the Building Site Committee because of
exceptional circumstances, shall post a $10,000 cash or performance bond
guaranteeing compliance with the site plan application and guaranteeing
restoration of town streets to the condition detailed in the street inventory
described in §
155.056(B)(8).
   (E)   If the application is approved, all contractors who will perform any
activity related to the application shall comply with §
155.067.
   (F)   At time as all required excavations on the property have been
completed and all final grades established, and the applicant has presented the
Building Commissioner with a final street inventory release form prepared by a
representative of the Street Department confirming that the requirements of
this chapter have been fully complied with and all necessary repairs have been
completed, the Building Commissioner shall release the bond and return any cash
bond to the applicant.
   (G)   In no event shall any building permit for improvements requiring site
plan approval be granted until site plan approval has been granted; nor shall
the Board of Zoning Appeals grant any variance, special exception or special
use with respect to the affected property until that Board has first received
the report of the Building Site Committee.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 11-
11, passed 9-19-2011; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.055 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, persons, firm or corporation or similar entity shall begin
any improvement, construction, reconstruction, or repair of any existing or new
building or structure or cause the same to be done without a separate building
permit for each building or structure issued by the Building Commissioner,
except in the case of a residential unit accompanied by an unattached garage
only 1 permit shall be required.
   (B)   No land shall be excavated or changed in use without a building permit
issued by the Building Commissioner.
   (C)   Activities requiring a building permit, include but are not limited
to:
      (1)   Installation or construction of retaining walls, fences or swimming
pools (above and in-ground);
      (2)   Installation or construction of a shed, gazebo or shelter
regardless of whether or not it is permanently affixed to the ground;
      (3)   Installation or construction of a driveway, deck, porch, carport,
garage or room addition;
      (4)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, moving or demolition of a
building or structure; and
      (5)   Alteration or remodeling of an existing building or structure that
includes any changes in structural members, stairways, load bearing components,
electric service, plumbing, means of ingress and/or egress, or any other change
(s) affecting or regulated by the Building Code or Sanitary Code, except for
minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid provisions.
   (D)   No building permit shall be required to repair roofing, gutters,
siding or windows, providing no change is contemplated to the load bearing
components or the facade of the structure being repaired or modified. All
installations, repairs and modifications must be in conformance with all
provisions of this chapter regardless of whether a building permit is required.
   (E)   A permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner upon finding
that the proposed work complies with the requirements of this chapter or upon
written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding an appeal, special
exception, or variance.
   (F)   No permit shall be issued prior to the payment of the required fee to
the Clerk-Treasurer of Beverly Shores as specified in §
155.065.
   (G)   As specified in §
155.064(E)(3), no building permit shall be issued for a property upon which a
tree removal violation has occurred for a period of 1 year from the year of the
last violation. Furthermore, no building permit shall be issued for a property
upon which a tree removal violation has occurred until all unpaid tree removal
fines have been paid.
   (H)   After the issuance of any building permit the Building Commissioner
shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work being done as
are necessary to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this code and
the terms and conditions of the building permit, including, without limitation,
prior to the footers and prior to foundation walls being poured, before drywall
is installed and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 11-21, passed 11-21-2011; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2016-11,
passed 12-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.056 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   The application for building permit shall be made on a form prescribed
by the Plan Commission and signed by the owner(s) attesting to the accuracy of
the information supplied by the application.
   (B)   The following information is required:
      (1)   Name(s), address(s) and phone number(s) of legal owner(s) of
property;
      (2)   Legal description of property;
      (3)   Copy of recorded deed for property;
      (4)   Zoning district and description of existing and/or proposed use;
      (5)   Approved well and septic permits from the Porter County and State
Board of Health, if applicable, for the property showing exact location of the
proposed facilities;
      (6)   Three sets of plans of all floors, foundation sections and
elevations and detailed construction specifications describing the kind, size,
quality and grade of materials and service equipment and clearly indicating the
height of the proposed improvements. These plans and specifications shall be
prepared under the supervision and direction of an architect or an engineer
registered in Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Ohio or Wisconsin and shall be
certified for the specific building site;
      (7)   Approval in writing for the proposed construction work from:
         (a)   The Building Site Committee where applicable;
         (b)   The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, in all cases
of commercial and/or public buildings and additions and alterations thereto;
         (c)   The National Park Service in all cases where the property is
located within the boundaries of the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, and has
been acquired by the Department of the Interior; and/or
         (d)   The Indiana State Highway Department or any other governmental
jurisdiction, if applicable.
      (8)   All applicants for building permits shall be required to have a
street inventory completed and signed by a representative of the Street
Department. The inventory shall record the condition of any streets abutting
the property where the improvements are being made, as well as the condition of
the streets that the applicant has designated for use by his or her contractors
and material suppliers as hereinafter provided which inventory may be
supplemented by appropriate photographs if deemed necessary by the Street
Department representative.
   (C)   (1)   Prior to securing the street inventory from a representative of
the Street Department, the applicant shall complete that part of the street
inventory form designating a route for material suppliers and contractors from
the town limits to the job site.
      (2)   All contractors and material suppliers shall thereafter use the
designated route and if a contractor or material supplier operating a vehicle
larger than a pickup truck or van is found to be deviating from the designated
route both the contractor or material supplier and the applicant shall be
jointly and severally liable for any damage done to town streets and may be
fined for a violation of this chapter as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.057 WAIVER OF BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Building Committee may waive by majority vote, the requirements in
§
155.056 requiring preparation of construction plans by a registered architect/
engineer when the proposed work does not involve primary structural elements or
is of a limited scope such as a garage, an addition to an existing structure or
remodeling, provided that the proposed work is shown on drawings in a legible
and comprehensive manner.
   (B)   Applicants, who wish to obtain a waiver, should apply to the Building
Commissioner prior to submitting an application for a building permit and
obtain a waiver in writing.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.058 APPROVAL OF BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Within 15 days following receipt of a building permit
application the Building Committee shall review each application.
      (2)   Upon finding evidence that the applicant has obtained approval by
the Building Site Committee, if applicable, and the plans and specifications
meet all the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable town
ordinances and state and federal laws, the Building Committee shall by majority
vote approve, request further information or disapprove the application.
   (B)   The Building Committee may stipulate, in addition, any conditions
deemed by them to be necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter as part
of the approval of a building permit.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner shall issue the permit as provided in §
155.059.
      (1)   One set of plans and drawings shall be returned to the applicant by
the Building Commissioner and marked either approved or disapproved and signed
by the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   Two sets of plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the
Building Commissioner.
      (3)   If the application for a building permit is disapproved, the
Building Commissioner shall indicate the reasons by certified letter to the
applicant.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner shall maintain records of all actions on
building permits. The applicant shall be bound to the construction work in all
details and respects as set out in the building permit.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.059 BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   If the application for a building permit is approved, the building
permit shall state the approval date and the expiration date for the permit. No
activity related to the building permit may begin until the permit is issued to
the applicant and displayed in a conspicuous place at the building site.
Activity includes excavation or clearing of land, delivery of material, any new
construction or the altering, adding or repairing of existing construction. The
permit will not be issued to the applicant until payment of the designated
fees, as provided in §
155.065, including the payment of any fines owed to the town.
   (B)   If any activity related to the building permit begins prior to the
issuance of a building permit, the owner will be subject to a fine, not to
exceed $1,000, and the fee for the building permit shall be doubled. This fine
and double fee must be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit. If
the permit was already issued, all work must stop until the fine and additional
fee is paid.
   (C)   (1)   No changes or alterations of any plans or specifications that:
(i) increases the size or height of any structure; (ii) alters the pitch of the
roof of any structure; (iii) is a change or alteration that is regulated by the
Building Code or Sanitary Code; (iv) removes trees not previously indicated; or
(v) involves excavation or grading shall be made without the Building
Committee's approval.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner shall notify the applicant in writing of
the Building Committee's action.
   (D)   Construction hours. No construction or activity related to the
building permit is permitted outside of these designated hours of construction:
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no construction
on any Sunday. There shall be no construction on the following holidays or on a
Saturday on the following weekends: Mother's Day, Memorial Day, Father's Day,
the Fourth of July, or Labor Day. In the event of emergency, the Building
Commissioner may authorize temporary exceptions.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2016-11,
passed 12-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.060 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Certificate of occupancy required.
      (1)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for:
         (a)   Occupancy or use of a building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, moved or structurally altered;
         (b)   A change in the use of any building or structure; and
         (c)   Occupancy or use of land or change in the use of land.
      (2)   No occupancy, use or change of use shall be permitted until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued and no certificate shall be issued
unless the proposed occupancy or use is in full conformance with the
regulations of this chapter.
      (3)   Any person desiring to use or occupy a building, structure or have
use of land for which no certificate of occupancy is on file with the Building
Commissioner shall make application to the Building Commissioner certifying the
purpose for which the building, structure or land shall be occupied or used.
   (B)   Certificate of occupancy application.
      (1)   An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in
duplicate on a form prescribed by the Plan Commission.
      (2)   The application for a certificate of occupancy is required to
include the following:
         (a)   A precise description certifying the occupancy or use to be
undertaken in addition to other information as may be necessary to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   An as-built topographic survey of the property and all
structures by a land surveyor licensed by the State of Indiana, at a scale not
more than 1 inch equals 20 feet indicating swales, ditches, flow line, top and
toe of slopes and high points. Topographical contours shall be shown at 2-foot
intervals except in cases of steep dune topography where 5-foot intervals
should be shown, as well as 2 established benchmarks at assumed elevation in
cases where sea level elevation is not available. The topographical drawing
shall also show:
            1.   The placement and size of all existing trees more than 8
inches in diameter measured 4 feet above ground level;
            2.   Underground utilities on or within 10 feet of the property;
and
            3.   The exterior dimensions of the foundation of all structures
and their placement on the property including setbacks from the property lines
and other structure(s) and the topography upon completion of the building(s) or
structure(s) or additions or alterations thereto.
         (c)   The Building Commissioner may waive the requirements for an as-
built certified topographical drawing when, in opinion of the Building
Commissioner, there are no substantive changes to the site.
      (3)   One copy of the application together with a copy of the certificate
issued, if any, shall be retained by the Building Commissioner. The application
shall be accompanied by payment of a fee to the Clerk-Treasurer of Beverly
Shores pursuant to §
155.065 of this chapter, which payment shall be retained by the town even
though the certificate applied for is not granted.
      (4)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
structure for which a building permit is required, the Building Commissioner is
required to review the as-built topographic survey and compare it to the
original certified approved plans and approved alterations.
      (5)   If the Building Commissioner determines there are any substantive
differences between the as-built topographic survey after construction
completion and the original certified approved plans and approved alterations,
he or she is required to document those differences in writing and provide a
copy to the Plan Commission prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
      (6)   Differences are subject to Plan Commission review that may require
structural removal, fine assessment and/or denial of a certificate of
occupancy. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
structure for which a building permit is required, the applicant shall restore
any streets that abut the property upon which the improvements were made to a
condition at least as good as existed prior to the issuance of the building
permit as described in the Street Department inventory.
      (7)   In the event that repairs cannot be completed due to weather
conditions, a certificate of occupancy may be issued if the $10,000 bond
pursuant to §
155.042 remains in effect and is supplemented by any additional bond necessary
to complete the repairs as estimated by a representative of the Street
Department and is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (8)   As specified in §
155.064(E), no certificate of occupancy shall be issued prior to the payment of
any outstanding tree removal fines.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 06-10, passed 12-18-2006; Am. Ord. 09-
12, passed 11-16-2009) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.061 ISSUANCE AND TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner upon verifying that the requested
occupancy or use is authorized under the provisions of this chapter and that,
if applicable, the final inspection has been made and the finished construction
approved in accordance with all plans and specifications on file with the
Building Commissioner pursuant to §
155.056 and upon evidence that the applicant has paid the required fee as set
forth in §
155.065, shall issue a certificate of occupancy to that effect.
      (2)   A certificate of occupancy for any use requiring the approval of
the Board of Zoning Appeals according to provisions of this chapter shall be
issued only after the authorization of the Board of Zoning Appeals. Every
certificate of occupancy for which a variance or a special use permit has been
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall contain a detailed statement of
the special use permit or variance of the conditions, if any, to which it is
subject.
   (B)   Termination of certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize and is
required for both initial and continued occupancy and use of the building(s),
structure(s) or land to which it applies and it shall continue in effect so
long as the building(s) or land is used for the use authorized by the
certificate and is in compliance with all regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   Ten days after the service of notice of violation of any of the
regulations of this chapter with respect to any building(s) or structure(s) or
the use thereof or of land, a new certificate of occupancy shall be required
for any further use of the building(s), structure(s) or land.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.062 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The issuance of a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, or any other
discretionary act on the part of the Building Commissioner, Building Committee
or any other persons responsible for the application and enforcement of this
chapter, shall not be deemed an acceptance or certification of the design,
integrity or safety of a structure or its component systems.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.063 DEMOLITION OR MOVING OF STRUCTURES.
   All persons desiring to clear a site by demolishing or removing the existing
structure shall apply for a site clearing permit and comply with all the
conditions of this section.
   (A)   Application. Application shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer and
referred to the Building Commissioner and Site Committee and contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of the legal owner(s) of
the property;
      (2)   Legal description of the property;
      (3)   Copy of the recorded deed for the property;
      (4)   The name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of all contractors
involved in site clearing;
      (5)   Certificate of insurance of each of the contractors involved in
site clearing demonstrating minimum insurance coverage as follows:
 
Type of Coverage        Amount
General liability       $1,000,000 per occurrence
Automobile liability    $100,000 per person
Comprehensive Form
Bodily injury liability $100,000 per person
Bodily injury liability $250,000 per occurrence
Property Liability      $50,000 per occurrence
 
      (6)   A street inventory of the type described in §
155.056(B)(8) including the designation of a route for material suppliers and
contractors from the town limits to the job site as provided in the section;
      (7)   A $10,000 cash or performance bond that guarantees restoration of
the site in compliance with the standards set forth in this section, and that
additionally guarantees the restoration of town streets to the condition
described in the street inventory; and
      (8)   Non-refundable $100 permit fee, which may be amended from time to
time by the Town Council,.
   (B)   Site clearing standards.
      (1)   All structures not incorporated into an approved plan for new
improvements on the site shall be removed. STRUCTURES, as that term is used in
this section, means all buildings, foundations, walls, basements, floors,
steps, all slabs including any asphalt or concrete slabs used as pullovers or
driveways on or near any street, curbs, sidewalks, fences, septic tanks, wells,
trash and debris, concrete, steel or wood pilings, wire steel reinforcing rods
or any other material that is not of natural setting.
      (2)   All excavated areas shall be filled with clean fill (sand or dirt).
This material should be placed so it is a minimum of 6 inches above the
original ground level to allow for settlement. The final site shall be left at
or near the contour of the setting and seeded with grass or other ground cover
plants. (Example: the site shall contour the side of a hill if excavation
occurs on the side of a hill).
      (3)   All underground utilities shall be removed and capped in a manner
to comply with state and federal regulations. Contractor shall remove and fill
any septic tank or well hole. The contractor shall be responsible for the
notification of the appropriate utility company for disconnection or removal of
the utility.
      (4)   Contractor shall provide, erect and maintain barricades, lights,
danger signals and warning signs, and take all necessary precautions for the
protection of the work and safety of the public. The contractor should also
provide, erect and maintain sufficient approved detour signs (if applicable) at
road closures and along detour routes and illuminate barricades and
obstructions at night keeping safety lights burning from sunset to sunrise. All
barricades and signs shall be in accordance with Article VI, American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard D6.1, Manual of Uniform Traffic Control for
Streets and Highways.
      (5)   No trees, limbs or shrubs shall be cut, altered or removed by the
contractor without first securing approval from the Building Commissioner.
Trees to be removed shall be cut down, never knocked over using heavy
equipment. Excepting stumps located within the footprint of an approved
building, if stumps are to be removed they shall be removed using stump
grinding equipment, axes and saws, never ripped out using heavy equipment.
Proper pruning techniques shall be used; any torn or broken limbs shall be
properly pruned.
      (6)   Under no circumstances will fires of any type be allowed.
      (7)   All required work shall be completed within 60 days after the
issuance of required permits which period may be extended by the Building
Commissioner upon written application explaining any delays and setting forth a
timetable for completing the required work.
   (C)   Final inspection.
      (1)   A final inspection will be done upon notification by the permit
holder that the site is ready for inspection.
      (2)   The site shall be inspected by the Building Commissioner and/or the
Site Committee and if found to be satisfactory, upon presentation of a final
street inventory release form prepared by a representative of the Street
Department, the Building Commissioner and/or Site Committee shall direct the
Clerk-Treasurer to release the cash or performance bond.
      (3)   In the event that the site is not restored to the satisfaction of
the Building Commissioner and/or Site Committee, the cost of correcting any
deficiencies may be charged to the cash or performance bond.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 2014-
04, passed - -) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.064 TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION.
   (A)   Unimproved land. Removal of any tree 4 inches or greater in diameter
on unimproved land shall be prohibited in the absence of an approved building
permit, except as follows:
      (1)   Allowable removals on unimproved land:
         (a)   A diseased tree or a dead tree. The Building Commissioner shall
be consulted. If the Building Commissioner is unable to ascertain if a tree is
diseased or dead, a certified arborist can be consulted to make that
determination;
         (b)   A tree whose species is identified as a nuisance tree (as
defined in §
155.003);
         (c)   A tree that presents an imminent danger to humans or potential
damage to structures; and
         (d)   A tree for which removal is pursuant to a written naturalization
plan, which may be provided annually for a 12-month period, approved by the
Building Site Committee, for the removal of nuisance, non-native or invasive
species.
      (2)   Removal pursuant to allowable removals in division (A)(1) above
shall be subject to the following additional conditions:
         (a)   Prior written applications to the Town Clerk for a tree removal
permit, including payment of any required fees. The written application shall
include, but not be limited to, the number, approximate location, reason for
removal, and diameter of trees to be removed. Each permit may allow for the
removal of up to ten (10) trees.
         (b)   Review and approval of the application in (a) above by the
Building Commissioner.
         (c)   The permit must be applied for and received before beginning
removal work, except in case of imminent threat to humans or structures, under
division (A)(1)(c) in which case the permit must be applied for within five (5)
business days after the removal.
         (d)   The fee for each permit shall be in accordance with the Town Fee
Schedule, §
10.99.
      (3)   Removals pursuant to the allowable unimproved property exceptions
above shall require that trees be cut down, never knocked over using heavy
equipment. If stumps are to be removed, they shall be removed using stump
grinding equipment, axes and saws, never ripped out using heavy equipment.
   (B)   Improved land. Removal of any tree 4 inches or greater in diameter on
improved land shall be prohibited, except as follows:
      (1)   The property owner may remove any tree within 15 feet of the
dwelling unit.
      (2)   The following are allowable exceptions to the above improved
property restrictions on tree removal:
         (a)   A diseased tree or dead tree. The Building Commissioner, or his
or her written designee, shall be consulted. If the Building Commissioner, or
his or her designee, is unable to ascertain if a tree is diseased or dead, an
arborist certified by the Indiana Arborist Association can be consulted to make
that determination;
         (b)   A tree that presents an imminent danger to humans or potential
damage to structures as determined by the Street Commissioner of the Town of
Beverly Shores; and
         (c)   A nuisance tree (as defined in §
155.003).
      (3)   Removal pursuant to division (B)(1) above and the allowable
improved property exceptions in division (B)(2) above shall require that trees
be cut down, never knocked over using heavy equipment.
      (4)   Excepting stumps located within the footprint of an approved
building, if stumps are to be removed, they shall be removed using stump
grinding equipment, axes and saws, never ripped out using heavy equipment.
   (C)   Tree topping.
      (1)   This practice of severely cutting back of limbs within a tree's
crown of branches so as to alter its natural shape and disfigure the tree shall
be prohibited, except as provided in division (C)(2) below.
      (2)   The only allowable exception to this prohibition shall be utility
companies in the maintenance of their easements, when other less disfiguring
pruning practices are ineffective.
   (D)   Protection of trees during construction.
      (1)   By far the greatest damage to our trees, and the fragile dunes they
are critical in stabilizing, occurs during construction activities. Heavy
construction equipment activity is largely responsible, including purposeful or
inadvertent knocking over of trees that disturbs large areas of fragile topsoil
and potentially damages other adjacent trees and vegetation.
      (2)   Heavy equipment traffic over tree root zones (which extend as far
as the tree's leaf canopy) compacts soil and suffocates tree roots, resulting
in tree die back or death over time. In addition, altering of original grades
in tree root zones jeopardizes long-term tree survival. To avoid long-term tree
damage, the maintenance and/or restoration of original soil grades is
imperative.
      (3)   To reasonably protect existing trees, the following tree protection
measures shall be mandatory whenever building activity is undertaken. Items in
divisions (3)(a) through (d) below shall be completed and inspected by the
Building Commissioner prior to commencing any excavation, site clearing or
building activity. Once the site plan is approved no changes can be made.
         (a)   Trees to be removed in accordance with the site plan shall be
marked with colored ribbon for easy identification. During the construction
process for improved land, the property owner may remove any tree within 15
feet of the dwelling unit being built.
         (b)   In order to protect the trunks of trees, 2 x 4 or similar sturdy
lumber 8 feet high shall be lashed to the trunks of trees adjacent to ingress/
egress routes on the property and other high risk areas;
         (c)   Trees to be removed in accordance with the site plan shall be
cut down, never knocked over using heavy equipment, in a manner so as not to
damage adjacent trees. Stumps located within the footprint of an approved
building may be removed using heavy equipment. If stumps are to be removed
outside the footprint of an approved building, they shall be removed using
stump grinding equipment, axes and saws, never ripped out using heavy
equipment;
         (d)   Directional drilling for the installation of utilities is
preferred over trenching because trenching may involve the cutting of roots.
Where trenching is used, trenches must be run around critical root zones to
prevent root damage;
   (E)   (1)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the
provisions of §
155.999 of this chapter, except that the fines and other penalties for the
removal of any tree in whole or in part, including the topping of any tree, in
violation of this section shall be as set forth in §
10.98, with each tree representing a separate offense.
      (2)   In addition to the fines and other penalties, trees cut down in
violation of this section shall be replaced with that number of 2-inch diameter
trees so that the sum total of the diameter of all replacement trees equals the
diameter of the removed trees.
      (3)   Diameter means a measurement of the size of tree that is equal to
the diameter of its trunk, measured 4 1/2 feet above the adjacent natural
grade.
      (4)   The following species of trees may not be planted as replacement
trees (See definitions for TREE and NUISANCE):
         (a)   Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima);
         (b)   Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica and Rhamnus frangula);
         (c)   Russian Olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia);
         (d)   Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacia);
         (e)   Siberian Elm (Ulmus pumila);
         (f)   White Mulberry (Morus alba);
         (g)   Red Mulberry (Morus rubra);
         (h)   Honey Locust (Gleditsia triocanthos);
         (i)   Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacia); and
         (j)   Sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua).
      (5)   If a removal pursuant to division (A)(1) above is done without
receiving a permit as required by this section before beginning the removal
work, the cost of the permit shall be twice of the amount of the fee. This
additional fee is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fine that may be
imposed for violating the town code. This division (E)(5) shall not apply to
emergency removal that is done due to imminent threat to humans or structures,
but shall apply when a permit for emergency removal is not applied for within
five (5) business days after the emergency removal work.
      (6)   (a)   A tree removal fine shall be waived for offending property
owners meeting the following criteria:
            1.   It is the offender’s first violation of this section; and
            2.   The offender removed trees that satisfied the requirements of
divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3), provided that the offender
bears the burden of proof for each removed tree.
         (b)   In the event the above criteria are satisfied and the tree
removal fine(s) are waived, the offender shall still be required to pay the
cost of the applicable permit fee as set forth in division (E)(5) above.
      (7)   Division (E)(6) above shall only apply to property owners. If a
first-time offense for a property owner is committed by a contractor, the
applicable tree removal fines shall be assessed and charged to the contractor.
   (F)   A tree removal fine shall be assessed and paid according to §
10.98. The increased incremental fines and higher replacement ratio for larger
trees is intended as a deterrent in order to address the fact that these trees
are a significant and valuable resource for the entire Beverly Shores
community.
   (G)   Tree removal fines shall be paid to the Town Clerk-Treasurer and shall
be designated as funds to be used for the planting, care and maintenance of
trees on town-owned property and parks, and on the public right-of-way.
   (H)   No building permit shall be issued for a property upon which a tree
removal violation has occurred for a period of 1 year from the year of the last
violation.
   (I)   No building permit shall be issued for a property upon which a tree
removal violation has occurred until all unpaid tree removal fines have been
paid.
   (J)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a property upon which
a tree removal violation has occurred until all unpaid tree removal fines have
been paid.
   (K)   No building contractor registration shall be issued for a contractor
which has been assessed with tree removal fines until all unpaid tree removal
fines have been paid.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 2014-
04, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 12-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed
5-15-2018) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.065 DURATION OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   A building permit shall expire 12 months from the date of approval,
except that a building permit for complete construction of the main building
shall expire 18 months from the date of approval. The building permit shall
state the expiration date. Once a building permit has expired, the project must
be terminated, and all construction or activities related to the building
permit must stop until or unless a new building permit is issued. A building
permit will expire earlier than the expiration date stated on the permit if the
project is completed. The completion date shall be determined by the Building
Commissioner via the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or if such is not
required for the project, by issuance of the Building Commissioner's written
acknowledgment of completion of a permitted project.
   (B)   If the project has not been, or will not be, completed by the permit
expiration date, the owner must submit a new application for a building permit
and pay the fees required. The new application must comply with all the
requirements of §
155.056, and the fee for the new permit will be double the fee required for the
original permit. No work or construction related activities may resume until
the new building permit is approved by the Building Committee, the double fee
is paid, any fine owed to the town is paid, and the permit is issued as
provided in §
155.059. The Building Committee may waive all or a portion of the fee in
situations where the delay in completion of the project was due to
extraordinary circumstances not caused by the owner or any contractor on the
project.
   (C)   All fees and fines shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
Beverly Shores. The fee for the permits described in this chapter are set forth
in the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99. A double fee shall apply in the circumstances provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 8-21-2006; Am. Ord. 09-08,
passed 9-21-2009; Am. Ord. 09-14, passed 9-21-2009; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-
20-2021)
§ 155.066 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, install, remove, convert or
demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building(s), structure(s) or land
in the Town of Beverly Shores, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever any member of the Police Department of the Town of
Beverly Shores has probable cause to believe that any person, firm or
corporation has violated any term or provision of this chapter, the police
officer shall notify the Building Commissioner immediately in order to verify
that a violation exists and shall document the existence of the alleged
violation.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner shall, in turn, investigate the alleged
violation and inform the Police Department of his or her findings. In all
cases, where the Building Commissioner, in his or her judgment, finds a
violation does exist, he or she shall so notify in writing the Police
Department of the Town of Beverly Shores who shall thereupon issue a citation
to the violator.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Beverly
Shores from taking lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. In the event of a civil suit in which the Town of Beverly Shores
successfully enjoins a violation of this chapter, the parties enjoined shall be
liable for costs incurred by the Town of Beverly Shores including reasonable
attorney fees.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner is the designated official charged with
the enforcement of this chapter or any ordinance enacted under the State
Advisory Planning Law and has authority to investigate alleged violations
thereof and if facts elicited by the investigation are sufficient to establish
a reasonable belief that a violation has occurred on the part of the party
investigated, to file a complaint against the person, firm or corporation in
the court having jurisdiction over like matters.
   (D)   In addition to the foregoing provisions, the Town Council of the Town
of Beverly Shores hereby declares buildings erected, raised or converted or
land or premises used in violation of any provision of this chapter to be
common nuisances, and the owner of any building, land or premises shall be
liable for maintaining a common nuisance.
   (E)   Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued for applications that
are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered null
and void.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.067 CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION AND REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All building contractors providing services within the Town of Beverly
Shores must register with the town by completing the application for contractor
registration and paying the annual registration fee to the Clerk-Treasurer in
advance of performing any activity in the town. This registration requirement
applies to all entities of any kind or individuals performing any work as a
contractor or sub-contractor for: construction, repair, maintenance,
excavation, electrical, plumbing, drywall, painting, roofing, or any other
construction related activity, tree services, landscaping services, driveway
installation or sealing or any other similar contractor-provided services in
the town irrespective of whether a building permit is required. This
registration requirement does not apply to a: homeowner, engineer, architect,
employee of a contractor, delivery service, or a supplier of product or
material who performs no other services in the town.
   (B)   As a part of the contractor registration application, all building
contractors will be required to provide a certificate of liability insurance
that is no less than $500,000, and including coverage that is in compliance
with Indiana workers' compensation, occupational health and safety laws, and
property damage. The certificate holder shall be, "Town of Beverly Shores, 500
Broadway PO Box 38, Beverly Shores, IN 46301." The insurance policy shall be
maintained as long as the registered contractor continues to do business in the
town.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall cause the Building Commissioner to
issue a stop-work order on all projects the building contractor is doing in the
town.
   (D)   The annual registration fee is stated in the Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99. Registration fees are nonrefundable. Registration shall be effective on
the date issued and expires on December 31 each year. The registration may be
renewed for the following year beginning December 1. Renewal registrations must
be completed by January 31. Registrations that are not renewed by January 31
shall lapse and require a new application. If an application for contractor
registration lapses, the contractor must cease all business in the Town of
Beverly Shores until an application for contractor registration is renewed or
otherwise reinstated.
   (E)   (1)   If the Building Commissioner determines that a building
contractor has committed fraud, misrepresentation and/or multiple or flagrant
violations of the Town Code, then the Building Commissioner shall notify by
registered mail the building contractor, the property owner of record on the
approved building permit, and the Plan Commission of the violations.
      (2)   The Plan Commission will, within 30 days of notice being served,
conduct a hearing to review the findings by the Building Commissioner and, if
necessary, establish any penalty, which may include but is not limited to the
following:
         (a)   Revocation of contractor registration;
         (b)   Revocation of building contractor's approval on any or all
building permit(s); and
         (c)   Denial of the surety (performance) bond acceptance by the Town
of Beverly Shores from the building contractor on the current and/or future
projects for a period of one year.
      (3)   Any decision of the Plan Commission may, within 30 days, be
appealed to the Town Council.
   (F)   If a registered contractor's registration is revoked:
      (1)   The registered contractor will not be permitted to apply for any
new building permits for one year and any pending applications for building
permits will be denied;
      (2)   The registered contractor will only be allowed to complete
construction on projects for which there are approved building permits at the
time of building contractor registration revocation, if the approved building
permits were not revoked under division (C) above;
      (3)   The Plan Commission shall notify by registered mail the registered
contractor and the property owner of record on the approved building permit
that the contractor registration has been revoked; and
      (4)   In the event subsequent violations occur during the revocation
period, the Plan Commission may extend the period of revocation up to one year
for each additional violation to a maximum period of five years. Upon appeal,
the Town Council will conduct a hearing to review the findings by the Plan
Commission.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 10-07, passed 10-25-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-
11, passed 12-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.080 PURPOSE; PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Statement of purpose.
      (1)   The Residential District is established as the district in which
the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings.
      (2)   For the Residential District in promoting the general purpose of
this chapter, the specific intent of this subchapter is:
         (a)   To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of the
land for single-family dwellings;
         (b)   To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land,
and to prohibit any other use which would be incompatible with continued
development of single-family dwellings in the district;
         (c)   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not
be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor
or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those
streets; and
         (e)   To discourage any use, which because of its unusual character
and size would create requirements and costs for public service such as fire
and police protection, snow removal and garbage collection, substantially in
excess of those requirements and cost if the district were developed solely for
single-family dwellings.
      (3)   No building or structure or premises shall be constructed, located,
erected, installed, altered, assembled or used in the Residential District, in
whole or in part, for any use authorized in the district except in accordance
with the regulations herein contained, as well as those required by the Town of
Beverly Shores Building Code.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the
Residential District:
      (1)   One-family dwellings;
      (2)   Accessory uses as provided in §
155.086;
      (3)   Home occupation as provided in §
155.087 ;
      (4)   Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by governmental
agencies;
      (5)   Rental of a single-family dwelling to a single family if, and only
if, the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The rental period is for a minimum of 30 consecutive days or
more and must be evidenced by a written lease which, among other things, must
contain the name and date of birth of everyone who will be living in the house
pursuant to the lease and detailed and accurate instructions to the tenant
regarding the requirements of this chapter and the town=s parking and refuse
container rules and restrictions; and
         (b)   The rental is to a single family, further limited to 2 persons
per bedroom and no more than 8 total persons in any single rental, referred to
herein as "tenant;" and
         (c)   The rental is for the entire real estate containing the single-
family dwelling;
         (d)   No person or entity, other than the tenant, uses or occupies the
single-family dwelling or any other building or any part of the real estate
containing the single-family dwelling during the rental period;
         (e)   No sublease or any other rental of any kind of the single-family
dwelling or any other building that is part of the real estate containing the
single-family dwelling is permitted during the rental period;
         (f)   The owner of the single-family dwelling registers each rental in
the Clerk-Treasurer's office on a form approved by the town and pays a
registration fee of $25. The registration shall be required for each rental.
The registration for each rental shall include, at a minimum: the contact
information for the owners including the names, addresses and telephone
numbers, both home and cell, and emergency contact information; the address of
the rental property; the names and permanent addresses of all persons who will
occupy the rental property during the rental period and their contact
information, including telephone numbers, both rental number and cell, and
emergency contact information; the brands, models, and license plate
information for all vehicles of the tenant which will be parked at the rental
property during the rental period; and the beginning and ending dates of the
rental period. A copy of the written lease must also be provided to the Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2012-14, passed 12-17-12)
§ 155.081 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AS PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals if the
proposed use will constitute a desirable and stable development which will be
in harmony with developments in adjacent areas and will not cause congestion on
public streets nor will be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter:
   (A)   Renewable energy equipment accessory to residential use; and
   (B)   Dish tower antennas accessory to residential use.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.082 BULK REGULATIONS.
   No building or structure or premises shall be constructed, located, erected,
installed, altered, assembled or used in the Residential District, in whole or
in part, for any use authorized in the district except in accordance with the
regulations contained in this chapter; in accordance with the bulk regulations
herein contained as well as those requirements of the Town of Beverly Shores
Building Code:
   (A)   Maximum height of a building shall be 35 feet (see definitions for
"height of building" in §
155.003);
   (B)   A minimum building parcel width of 100 feet, measured at the lot line
bordering an improved street and at the required minimum setback as provided in
division (E) below;
   (C)   (1)   A minimum zoning parcel size of 20,000 square feet is required.
All parcels less than 43,560 square feet shall have at least 15,000 square feet
of moderately well drained or better drained soil, as determined and certified
by a soil scientist licensed by the State of Indiana. (see §
155.008(A)).
      (2)   Regardless of the overall parcel size, only the number of square
feet with moderately well drained or better drained soil shall be applied to
the formula in division (D) below in determining the maximum house size.
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence
of soil suitability and area to the Building Commissioner and the Building and
Site Committee as determined by a soil scientist licensed by the State of
Indiana;
   (D)   The aggregate size of structures on a residential, single-family
zoning lot may reach a maximum floor area (see definitions of floor area in §
155.003) determined by the following formulas:
      (1)   For structures on zoning lots 20,000 square feet or larger:
         Maximum floor area = 1,750 square feet + (.0775 x square feet on
zoning lot with moderately well drained or better drained soil)
      (2)   For structures on zoning lots less than 20,000 square feet:
         Maximum floor area = 16.5% percent of the area of the zoning lot
square footage with moderately well drained or better drained soil.
      (3)   Per division (C) above, the square footage defined as moderately
well drained or better shall be determined and certified by a soil scientist
licensed by the State of Indiana.
      (4)   Increases of up to 20% in the maximum floor areas computed above
are allowable as follows, in proportion to increases in front yard setback:
         A 1% increase in maximum building size is allowed for every 3 feet of
additional front yard setback in excess of 15 feet (calculated up to a setback
of 75 feet).
   (E)   A minimum front yard depth of 15 feet;
   (F)   A minimum rear yard depth of 25 feet for a single-family dwelling and
30 feet for an existing 2-family dwelling;
   (G)   A minimum side yard width of 15 feet for each side yard for a single-
family dwelling and 20 feet for an existing 2-family dwelling;
   (H)   A single-family dwelling shall have a minimum living area of 1,350
square feet and an existing 2-family dwelling shall have a minimum living area
of 2,000 square feet;
   (I)   Divisions (E), (F) and (G) above shall apply to accessory structures
and uses;
   (J)   (1)   Window sills, belt courses and ornamental features may extend a
maximum of 8 inches into established and required setbacks as provided in
divisions (E), (F) and (G) above.
      (2)   Eaves, overhangs and covered sidewalks shall not extend more than 4
feet into the required setbacks as provided in divisions (E), (F) and (G)
above.
      (3)   An open, unenclosed porch or paved patio may project into the
required setbacks for a distance not exceeding 4 feet.
      (4)   A driveway may be located in 1 of either the front setback or rear
setback, or on a corner lot in the side setback abutting the street, as
applicable, and may otherwise extend not more than 4 feet into one side
setback, or on a corner lot not more than 4 feet into one of the adjoining
setbacks (other requirements for driveways can be found in §
155.138, and additional limitations apply if the construction of or location of
the driveway would affect a steep slope as provided in §§
155.140 through
155.145); and
   (K)   The minimum width of a principal building shall be 24 feet.
   (L)   Lot coverage: maximum of 30% (see definition for lot coverage in §
155.003).
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 07-08, passed 9-10-2007; Am. Ord. 09-04,
passed 4-20-2009; Am. Ord. 10-03, passed 6-21-2010; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed
12-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-07, passed 8-16-
2022) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.083 STANDARDS.
   (A)   No residential or other use shall be established or built on a zoning
parcel which has less area or does not comply with the requirements set forth
in this chapter.
   (B)   No conversion of an existing structure, residence or building shall be
permitted which violates this chapter.
   (C)   Not more than 1 dwelling shall be erected on a zoning parcel.
   (D)   Outdoor storage of articles such as unlicensed cars and used furniture
shall not be permitted in the Residential District.
   (E)   (1)   All private wells for a single-family dwelling shall be located
at least 25 feet from any property line other than a property line abutting a
road right-of-way and for an existing 2-family dwelling at least 40 feet from
the property line other than a property line abutting a road right-of-way.
      (2)   All private wells shall be located at least 75 feet from any septic
system. It shall be the responsibility of the well driller to obtain all
necessary permits and pay all fees required by the Porter County Board of
Health for the repair, replacement and installation of wells.
   (F)   All individual sewage disposal systems and water wells shall be
located and installed in accordance with the State of Indiana and Porter County
Board of Health regulations.
   (G)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new
dwelling on a zoning parcel bordering a platted but unopened street unless the
applicant improves the street, in accordance with the street construction
standards established by the Town of Beverly Shores, along the entire frontage
of the improved zoning parcel and the entire length of the platted but unopened
street to the nearest gravel or asphalt paved street.
      (2)   No building permit shall be issued for construction of a new
dwelling on a zoning parcel bordering an open street currently in use, but not
asphalt paved, unless the applicant improves the street along the entire
frontage of the improved zoning parcel in accordance with street construction
standards established by the Town of Beverly Shores.
   (H)   No provision of this chapter shall be construed as being in conflict
with the building rules adopted by the Administrative Building Code of Indiana.
   (I)   All utilities installed in connection with any improvements for which
a building permit is required under this chapter shall be installed
underground.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 09-04, passed 4-20-2009; Am. Ord. 2014-
04, passed - -) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.084 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   For the convenience of those who seek to use the facilities of Beverly
Shores, it is essential that adequate parking facilities be available.
   (B)   To prevent traffic congestion, it is important that parking facilities
be located in a manner so that they cause the least possible impact on the
orderly flow of traffic.
   (C)   The following regulations are designed to promote that goal.
      (1)   Required off-street parking.
         (a)   All required parking space for residential uses shall be located
on the same building parcel as the building or use served.
         (b)   All required parking spaces for other uses permitted in the
Residential District shall be located on the same building parcel as the
principal building served or within 300 feet of the nearest point of the
principal structure; provided however that no off-street parking for use in the
General Commercial District shall be located in the Residential District.
      (2)   Standards for off-street parking.
         (a)   A required off-street parking space shall be at least 8 feet in
width and 19 feet in length exclusive of access drives or aisles. Vertical
clearance for a garage shall be a minimum of 6 feet, 7 inches.
         (b)   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway of a width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to a parking space.
            1.   All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
            2.   A driveway permit is required for all off-street parking
facilities.
            3.   The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit until all
regulations promulgated for a permit have been met.
         (c)   All open off-street parking areas shall be impressed with
compacted macadam base, not less than 4 inches thick, surfaced with asphaltic
concrete or some comparable dustless material.
         (d)   All open off-street parking shall be provided with adequate
drainage facilities.
         (e)   Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall
be directed, screened or reflected away from other residential properties or
other properties in a way so as not to create a nuisance.
         (f)   The parking facilities required in division (C)(1) above shall
be made available as soon after the time they become required as weather
conditions will reasonably permit, but in no case more than 9 months after the
date of the certificate of occupancy.
            1.   In the event that occupancy is obtained prior to completion of
the parking facilities, a bond or a cash escrow shall be deposited with the
Clerk-Treasurer sufficient to guarantee completion of the work.
            2.   The Building Commissioner shall determine the amount of the
bond or cash escrow.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.085 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   Off-street loading berths deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner for
existing structures of 15,000 square feet or more in the Residential District
shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations.
   (A)   Location.
      (1)   All loading berths shall be located on the same zoning parcel as
the use served. No loading berths for vehicles shall be closer than 75 feet to
any property line in the Residential District.
      (2)   No permitted loading berth shall be located within 50 feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any 2 streets or public ways.
   (B)   Setbacks. No loading berth shall be located in a required side yard or
required rear yard.
   (C)   Size. A required loading berth shall be at least 10 feet in width and
at least 25 feet in length exclusive of aisle or maneuvering space, and shall
have a clearance of at least 14 feet.
   (D)   Area. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements and shall be subject to the
approval of the Building Committee and the Administrative Building Council.
   (E)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base not less than 7 inches thick, surfaced with not less
than 2 inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all-weather dustless
material.
   (F)   Amount.
      (1)   The number of off-street loading facilities required for a
permitted use in an existing structure of more than 15,000 square feet shall be
determined by the Building Committee depending on the functions or the use.
      (2)   A minimum of 1 loading berth shall be provided for every 5,000
square feet of structure.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.086 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The following uses and structures are permitted in the Residential
District:
      (1)   A private garage or carport, not to exceed the following capacity:
         (a)   For a single-family dwelling, 3 cars; and
         (b)   For a 2-family dwelling, 2 cars per dwelling unit.
      (2)   A shed or storage building for garden equipment and household items
incidental to a permitted use, provided that the floor area of a shed shall not
exceed 0.75% of the size of the zoning parcel;
      (3)   A private swimming pool and bath house fenced and protected against
hazards to the public in full compliance with the Indiana Swimming Pool Code
675 I.A.C. 20;
      (4)   Statuary, arbors, trellises, awnings, canopies, barbecue equipment,
air-conditioning equipment, a screen house, flag poles, non-mechanical laundry
equipment, open terraces, recreational equipment, walls, hedges, gazebos, hot
tubs;
      (5)   Signs as provided in §
155.088 below;
      (6)   Off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities as
provided in §§
155.084 and
155.085;
      (7)   Ornamental light standards, outdoor fireplaces, open steps
necessary for access to and from a residential dwelling or an accessory
structure, steps as access to a zoning parcel from the street and in gardens or
terraces, trees, shrubs and flowers;
      (8)   Outdoor parking of boats and camping trailers no more than 30 feet
long provided they are parked no less than 10 feet from the property line;
      (9)   No manufactured housing shall be permitted as an addition to a
principal dwelling;
      (10)   The following requirements and prohibitions apply to fences:
         (a)   Fences shall be no taller than six feet in height and shall be
permitted in rear and side yards;
         (b)   Measured on a vertical plane bounded by the top and bottom of
the fence material, and the two nearest support posts, and facing the property
boundary, there must be as least as much open and unobstructed space within the
area of the vertical plane as solid fence material;
         (c)   Barbed wire and electrified wire are prohibited from use in a
fence;
         (d)   A property boundary fence shall be setback to a line that is not
within a right-of-way, whether the right-of-way area is paved or unpaved;
         (e)   When a property slopes downward to a property boundary in a rear
or side yard, a fence shall be setback from the side lot line or rear lot line
a distance of 15 feet or to the crest of the slope, whichever is less, when the
land surface slopes downward towards the property boundary at a horizontal to
vertical ratio of 1:3 or steeper;
         (f)   A gate wider than four feet on a property boundary fence shall
be setback at least ten feet from a right-of-way, whether the right-of-way area
is paved or unpaved; and
         (g)   The design of a fence structure may be prohibited or restricted
in accordance with the site plan approval requirements of §
155.042(B)(5).
      (11)   UHF and VHF antennas not to exceed 10 feet in height above the
roof and black or naturally colored mesh satellite dishes at heights not to
exceed 10 feet above the roof provided, however, no antenna may be installed in
the front yard unless an expert selected by the town and paid for by the
applicant determines that the applicant cannot receive the signal from any
other location on the applicant’s property. Any towers constructed for antenna
purposes will have a setback from any lot line equal to the height of the tower
and the tower and the appurtenances thereto may not be taller than 10 feet
above the roof of the principal structure unless a variance is approved; and
      (12)   Retaining walls not taller than 4 feet, garbage enclosures, stairs
and railings shall be permitted in the front, side and rear yards. A retaining
wall may not be constructed using railroad ties.
      (13)   No accessory structure shall exceed 16 feet in height, except that
garages may not exceed 24 feet in height. Accessory structures will not include
tree houses for play purposes.
   (B)   All accessory uses and structures shall comply with the bulk
regulations of the Residential District, provided, however, that retaining
walls not taller than 4 feet, garbage enclosures, stairs, railings shall be
permitted in the front, rear and side yards and fences shall be permitted in
rear and side yards.
   (C)   All accessory uses shall comply with all standards applicable to the
Residential District. No accessory use shall be established or erected prior to
the establishment or erection of the principal use or structure to which it is
accessory. No existing accessory use may be expanded or extended except in
compliance with all the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Ord. 06-02, passed 7-17-2006; Am. Ord. 2014-04,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 12-19-2016; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-
2021) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.087 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Permitted home occupations in the Residential District shall be any business
or occupation located within a single-family detached dwelling or a 2-family
dwelling and carried on by a member of the immediate family residing within the
dwelling in connection with the following.
   (A)   The home occupation is incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not occupy more than 25% of the floor
area of the dwelling.
   (B)   There are no signs, display or activity that will indicate from
exterior that the dwelling is being used, in part for any purpose other than
that of a dwelling except for 1 sign, as provided in §
155.088 below.
   (C)   There are no commodities sold, or services rendered that require
receipt and delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than a
passenger motor vehicle or a vehicle with a capacity of not more than 3,000
pounds.
   (D)   There is no person other than 1 additional member of the immediate
family residing on the premises employed or otherwise engaged in the home
occupation.
   (E)   All activity, including storage, is conducted completely within the
dwelling or garage.
   (F)   There are no special structural alterations or construction features
to the dwelling or garage, nor the installation of special equipment attached
to the walls, floors or ceilings.
   (G)   There is no perceptible noise, odor, smoke, electrical interference or
vibration emanating from the dwelling or garage.
   (H)   There is no activity between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.088 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The following signs shall be permitted in the Residential District subject
to the requirements of §
155.139:
   (A)   Permanent signs. The following permanent signs shall be permitted:
      (1)   House numbers required by §
153.02 of the Town Code, no permit or fee is required for the display of house
numbers;
      (2)   Accessory signs, provided their area does not exceed 2 square feet
per sign and no more than 3 accessory signs shall be allowed per sign zoning
parcel, no permit or fee is required for up to 3 accessory signs that are each
2 square feet or less in area; and
      (3)   A home in which a permitted home occupation occurs may display 1
additional accessory sign, not more than 4 square feet in area, a permit and
fee are required for a fourth accessory sign and for an accessory sign that is
larger than 2 square feet in area;
   (B)   Temporary signs. Property owners may display 1 temporary sign,
provided the area does not exceed 4 square feet, per sign zoning parcel without
a permit or a fee. Property owners may display additional temporary signs or a
temporary sign larger than 4 square feet in area, only after submitting a sign
permit application and paying the applicable fee to the Clerk-Treasurer.
Temporary banners shall also be permitted, subject to the same requirements as
temporary signs. The area of any temporary sign or temporary banner may not
exceed 32 square feet. Temporary signs that are not subject to a permit may be
displayed at any time. Temporary signs that are subject to a permit shall not
be displayed for more than 60 days, unless renewed or unless the owner has paid
for a 120 day permit, in which case the sign shall not be displayed for more
than 120 days;
   (C)   Election period. During the period 60 days before and 7 days following
a general, primary, or special election for public office that represents the
area of Beverly Shores, there shall be no limit on the number or size of
temporary signs, up to 32 square feet in area. No permit or permit fee is
required for any temporary sign placed during this period. However, this
exception does not allow temporary signs that are larger than 32 square feet in
area, and this exception does not allow temporary signs to be placed in the
right-of-way or in a location that is a traffic-safety hazard. Any temporary
sign placed during the election period that would otherwise require a permit
must be removed no later than 7 days after the election day if the owner does
not obtain a permit;
   (D)   No sign shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. No sign shall
be placed in a location that is a traffic-safety hazard, as determined in the
sole discretion of the Town Marshal or other authorized Town Police Officer. In
the event the location of a sign is determined to be a traffic-safety hazard,
the owner will be required to move the sign to a location that is not a
traffic-safety hazard;
   (E)   No billboards, illuminated signs, or animated signs shall be
permitted;
   (F)   Signs shall not be attached to any tree or shrub;
   (G)   No roof signs shall be permitted; and
   (H)   A violation of this section shall be subject to the general penalty
provisions of §
155.999 .
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-21-2018) Penalty, see
§
155.999
§ 155.089 TEMPORARY USES.
   The following temporary uses shall be permitted in the Residential District:
   (A)   Contractor's office and equipment shed (containing no sleeping or
cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction project and to continue
only during the duration of the project;
   (B)   Real estate office containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations
(unless located in a model dwelling unit) incidental to a new housing
development, provided that it be terminated upon disposal of substantially all
of the dwelling units in the development; and
   (C)   (1)   A carnival or circus when operated or sponsored by a local
nonprofit organization, only if located on church, or park property and which
is continued for a period not to exceed 1 week.
      (2)   The use shall comply with the minimum setback for the Residential
District.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.090 OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES.
Permitted, Conditional and Special Uses in Residential District
Use                                   Permitted Use Special Use Conditional Use
Residential Use
Single-family detached dwelling       P
Non-residential Use
Home occupations in a single- and 2-  P
family detached dwelling
Parking, off-street private as an     P
accessory use
Parks and recreational areas owned or P
operated by governmental agencies
Music recording studio and sales                                C
Physical fitness class                                          C
Art gallery and sales                                           C
Presentation in an auditorium                                   C
facility
Renewable energy equipment accessory                S
to residential use
Accessory uses to the above uses including but not limited to:
Off-street parking and loading        P
Signs regulated in §                 P
155.088 above and as follows:
(1) Accessory signs                   P
(2) Business or signs in conjunction  P
with a home occupation
(3) For sales or rent signs           P
 
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.105 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to establish regulations for the General
Commercial District to provide well-designed commercial land uses in
conformance with the goals of the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Beverly
Shores, and the following objectives:
   (A)   Provide a broad range of commercial uses in the General Commercial
District.
   (B)   Encourage construction in the General Commercial District that is
compatible with the natural environment of Beverly Shores and minimizes storm
water runoff on to public streets by installing pervious surfaces for parking
areas or installing adequate drainage facilities.
   (C)   Encourage consolidation of driveways, parking, and curb cuts that
minimize congestion and hazardous traffic conditions and provide more efficient
and economical off-street access and parking.
   (D)   Encourage a coordinated pedestrian path system to provide efficient
and convenient off-street pedestrian access from parking areas to and among the
various permitted uses.
   (E)   Encourage and permit reasonable use of outdoor lighting for
advertising, nighttime safety, utility and security while preserving the
ambiance of the night and curtail any degradation of the nighttime visual
environment and the night sky.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 155.106 PERMITTED USES.
   Property in the General Commercial District may be used for one or more of
the following uses, in compliance with the standards and the requirements
contained in regulations for the General Commercial District:
   (A)   Retail store offering: hardware, clothing, groceries, meats, milk and
milk products, fruits, vegetables, baked goods, confectionaries, beverages,
flowers, plants, books, furnishings or other household supplies, camping
supplies, rentals of bicycles and other non-motorized recreational equipment,
antiques, books, newspapers, magazines, paper products, art supplies, art
products, hardware, jewelry, clocks, optical goods, cameras, home appliances,
videos, computers or electronic equipment.
   (B)   Gas station and mini-mart or convenience store with fuel pumps,
provided:
      (1)   All activities except those to be performed at the fuel pumps, air
pumps or outside vending machine are performed within a completely enclosed
building.
      (2)   Servicing of vehicles and body repairs and/or painting shall not be
permitted.
      (3)   Canopies shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with
structures in the surrounding area with regard to color and building materials.
      (4)   One pylon sign is permitted on the sign zoning parcel, provided
that it does not exceed 25 feet in height.
   (C)   Club or fraternal organization.
   (D)   Personal service shop offering: hair care, shoe repair, tailoring,
nail care, tanning, and dry cleaning (pick-up establishments only; no on-site
processing).
   (E)   Business or professional office.
   (F)   Office of doctor, dentist, and other healthcare providers.
   (G)   Studio for dance, art, music, or photography.
   (H)   Health club or exercise facility.
   (I)   Business services establishment including copy centers, retail
printing and duplication services, computer rental and copying centers, and
shipping, cartage, express and parcel delivery services and sale of office
equipment and supplies.
   (J)   Bank or financial institution.
   (K)   Restaurant, diner or coffee shop, excluding drive-through facilities.
Outdoor dining is permitted.
   (L)   Liquor store.
   (M)   Bar or tavern. Outdoor service is permitted.
   (N)   Religious institution.
   (O)   Municipal building, office, and uses.
   (P)   Post office.
   (Q)   A mobile food truck, cart or van that serves food and beverages on the
lot that is either owned by the mobile food truck, cart or van operator or is
leased, licensed or granted occupancy rights by the owner of the lot to the
mobile food truck, cart or van operator. The mobile food truck, cart or van
shall remain parked on the lot during hours of its operation and shall vacate
the lot after hours. The dining area must contain a temporary barrier from the
parking area. The mobile food truck, cart or van shall obtain a permit from the
Porter County Health Department and shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, county and municipal ordinances, statutes, laws, rules, regulations,
permits and orders.
   (R)   Outdoor farmers' market.
   (S)   Outdoor fruit or vegetable stand.
   (T)   Garden center.
   (U)   Antique restorations.
   (V)   Pharmacy.
   (W)   Art gallery.
   (X)   Accessory use on the lot, which is customarily incidental to the
primary use, permitted and utilized. Accessory uses shall meet all requirements
for permitted uses.
   (Y)   All uses permitted in the Residential District are permitted provided,
however, that the residential use and the building and other structures shall
be built in accordance with and conform to the regulations of the Residential
District.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 155.107 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS AS PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals if the
proposed use will constitute a desirable and stable development which will be
in harmony with developments in adjacent areas and will not cause undue
congestion on public streets nor will be contrary to the spirit and purpose of
this chapter.
   (A)   Government facilities;
   (B)   Religious facilities;
   (C)   Gas, water, electrical and communication facilities;
   (D)   Renewable energy equipment accessory to commercial use; and
   (E)   Dish tower antennas accessory to commercial use.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.108 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Drive through facilities are not permitted.
   (B)   Drive-in facilities offering goods or services directly to a customer
waiting in a parked motor vehicle are not permitted.
   (C)   All buildings in the General Commercial District must be served by
public water facilities.
   (D)   All septic or sewage disposal systems shall be located and installed
in accordance with the State of Indiana and Porter County Board of Health
ordinances, laws, statutes, rules, regulations, permits and orders. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner of a lot in the General Commercial District to
provide evidence of soil suitability and area to the Building Commissioner as
determined by a soil scientist licensed by the State of Indiana.
   (E)   Pre-engineered metal buildings are permitted provided that 50% of the
facade facing a public street shall consist of brick, stone or cultured stone
and 33.33% of each side of the building (excluding the rear) shall consist of
brick, stone or cultured stone.
   (F)   No building or structure shall be constructed, located, erected,
altered, modified, repaired, maintained or used in the General Commercial
District, in whole or in part, except for the specific uses authorized in the
General Commercial District in compliance with the regulations of this
subchapter, the provisions of the State of Indiana Administrative Building Code
(IAC Title 675 et seq., as amended), the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (42 USC 12101 et seq., as amended) ("ADA") and all other applicable
federal, state, county and municipal ordinances, statutes, laws, rules,
regulations, permits and orders.
   (G)   All utilities servicing a building or structure shall be installed
underground.
   (H)   Side facades shall be of finished quality and shall be of color and
materials that are similar to the front facade and blend with structures within
the lot. Any lot with more than 1 building shall have a common and coherent
architectural theme throughout the lot.
   (I)   Principal buildings shall have clearly defined, highly visible
customer entrances with features such as awnings, canopies, porticoes or
arches.
   (J)   Rooflines shall be varied to add visual interest and shall either be:
      (1)   Pitched with a pitch of at least 3 vertical inches to every 12
horizontal inches and shall contain an eave that is no less than 12 inches; or
      (2)   Shall contain parapets or mansard roofs that conceal a flat roof
and rooftop equipment such as HVAC units along all roof edges.
   (K)   Loading docks, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash receptacles and
other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design theme of
the building or structure so that the architectural design is continuous. These
areas shall be located and screened so that the visual and acoustic impacts of
these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent lots and
public streets.
   (L)   No rubbish, debris, garbage, filth, refuse or other obnoxious matter
shall be kept in open containers or piled on the open ground. Outdoor trash
receptacles shall be screened from view from adjacent lots and public streets
and shall be enclosed and covered. All waste materials must be periodically
disposed of at least once in each 7-day period.
   (M)   No outdoor storage of goods, business articles or implements, shall be
allowed on the lot except for seasonal inventory in an outdoor sales area. All
storage of goods, business articles or implements shall be within the building
or structure on the lot or be surrounded by a solid 6-foot tall fence located
in the rear or side yard.
   (N)   Owners of adjacent lots are encouraged to provide continuous off-
street parking areas or connecting off-street driveways and sidewalks to
promote off-street pedestrian and vehicular ingress and egress between lots.
   (O)   Buildings, structures and accessory uses on a lot shall be screened
from abutting residential uses with an evergreen hedgerow in accordance with
the following provisions:
      (1)   The planting area shall be made fertile and planted within 6 months
from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and thereafter
reasonably maintained with permanent materials to provide for a suitable screen
from adjacent lots;
      (2)   Minimum height for plant materials shall be 4 feet;
      (3)   Minimum planting width shall be 5 feet on center; and
      (4)   Plant materials shall not be placed closer than 5 feet from the lot
line.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 155.109 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   The following off-street parking regulations shall apply in the General
Commercial District:
   (A)   An off-street parking area shall be located on each lot and shall
contain at least 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area of the
buildings (but no less than 4 parking spaces) plus employee parking for the
maximum number of employees on duty in the buildings at any 1 time.
   (B)   A driveway permit is required for all off-street parking areas on the
lot. The Building Commissioner shall not issue a driveway permit until all
regulations promulgated for the off-street parking areas and for a driveway
permit have been met and farther that the driveway curb cut has been approved
by the State Indiana Department of Transportation.
   (C)   The off-street parking area on the lot shall provide accessible
parking spaces in compliance with ADA (ADA requires a minimum of 1 accessible
space for parking totals of 1 to 25 spaces and 2 accessible spaces (1 for a car
and 1 for a van for parking totals of 25 spaces to 50 spaces).
   (D)   Parking spaces shall be at least 9 feet in width and 20 feet in length
exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps or work areas, provided that ADA
parking spaces shall contain an adjacent access aisle of a minimum of 60 inches
wide for a car parking space and an access aisle of a minimum of 96 inches wide
for a van parking space. The vertical clearance for a parking space shall be a
minimum of 8 feet.
   (E)   Off-street parking areas on the lot shall be installed with either:
      (1)   A suitable compacted base with a porous aggregate, porous asphalt
or porous concrete surface; or
      (2)   If the off-street parking area is to be improved with an impervious
asphalt or concrete surface the parking area shall be impressed with a 6-inch
aggregate base and the lot shall contain adequate grading and drainage
facilities to prevent storm water run-off from the lot onto a public street and
adjacent lots.
   (F)   All parts of the lot which are not covered by a building, structure
parking area, driveway and sidewalk, shall be landscaped with plantings of
flowers, grass, ground cover, shrubs or trees which shall be maintained
continuously. The planting of native plant species is encouraged. The planting
of invasive exotic plant species is not permitted.
   (G)   Designated parking spaces shall be marked on the surface of the
parking area with paint or permanent marking materials and maintained in
clearly visible condition. ADA parking spaces shall have clearly visible
signage and shall be clearly marked on the surface of the parking area.
   (H)   The off-street parking area on the lot shall be solely for the parking
of motor vehicles of patrons, occupants or employees of the permitted uses.
   (I)   Off-street parking spaces may be located in yard setback areas.
   (J)   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or driveway of a width and design so as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to a parking space.
   (K)   The off-street parking area on the lot shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that
will least interfere with traffic movements.
   (L)   A landscaping strip 6 feet in width, which shall not include a
sidewalk or trail, shall be located between the parking lot and the property
line with plants that are no less than 3 feet in height.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 155.110 SIGN REGULATIONS.
   The following sign regulations shall apply in the General Commercial
District:
   (A)   No animated signs shall be permitted in the General Commercial
District.
   (B)   No pennants, streamers or inflatable devices shall be permitted in the
General Commercial District.
   (C)   Roof and wall signs shall be permitted.
   (D)   Except for a gas station and mini-marts or convenience stores with
fuel pumps, pylon signs are not permitted.
   (E)   No billboards shall be permitted in the General Commercial District.
   (F)   Signs shall not be located in any public right-of-way and shall not be
any closer than 5 feet to any boundary lot line.
   (G)   A sign zoning parcel may contain multiple signs for each permitted use
on the sign zoning parcel provided that their total area does not exceed 100
square feet in the aggregate and no individual sign shall be larger than 36
square feet.
   (H)   All illuminated signs shall be front lit and the lighting fixtures
shall be mounted facing down at or near the top of the sign structure and
located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential property line or any
residential lot of record.
   (I)   Signs shall not be attached to any tree or shrub.
   (J)   All existing permanent wall and freestanding signs lawfully in
existence immediately prior to December 16, 2013 can remain until removed or
replaced by a lawful sign as defined by this subchapter or until such time as
said existing legal sign is no longer safely maintained or the use is changed.
An existing sign may be changed so long as the sign’s gross surface area is not
increased.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-21-2018)
§ 155.111 OUTDOOR SALES.
   Outdoor sales areas shall conform to the following requirements:
   (A)   Outdoor sales shall not be located within 15 feet of any public street
or boundary lot line.
   (B)   Outdoor areas for the sale of seasonal inventory shall be constructed
of materials and colors conforming to those used as predominant materials and
colors of the principal building. If such areas are to be covered, then the
covering shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors of the
principal building.
   (C)   Only 1 outdoor sales area is permitted on a lot and, except for a
garden center, an outdoor farmers' market or fruit or vegetable stand, such
area shall not exceed 10% of area of the lot. Outdoor dining areas are not
subject to the outdoor sales area limitation.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 155.112 BULK REGULATIONS.
   All buildings, structures and uses shall conform to the following
requirements:
   (A)   Lot area. Each principal building erected in the General Commercial
District together with accessory buildings, required parking spaces and
required loading berths shall be erected on a zoning parcel having an area not
less than 20,000 square feet. A minimum building parcel width of at least 100
feet measured at the lot line bordering an improved street and the required
minimum front yard setback.
   (B)   Floor area ratio. The combined floor area ratio of the principal
building and all accessory buildings on a lot shall not exceed 35% of the total
area of the lot.
   (C)   Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard with a depth of not less
than 30 feet. On zoning parcels with depth of less than 70 feet the front yard
shall have a depth of not less than 15 feet.
   (D)   Side yards.
      (1)   Each lot shall have 2 side yards, 1 on each side of the principal
building.
      (2)   The width of each side yard shall not be less than 10 feet,
provided, however that on a corner lot, the side yards on the street side shall
be 15 feet.
   (E)   Rear yard. Each zoning parcel shall have a rear yard of 10 feet in
depth from the property line.
   (F)   Height limits. No building or structure shall exceed 2 stories, nor
shall any building or structure exceed 35 feet in height from the existing
grade of the lot.
   (G)   Accessory uses and buildings. All accessory uses, buildings and
structures shall comply with all standards applicable to the General Commercial
District. No accessory use shall be established or erected prior to the
establishment or erection of the principal use, building or structure to which
it is accessory.
   (H)   Lighting standards. The purpose of these lighting standards and the
policy of the Town of Beverly Shores is to minimize glare and over-lighting
beyond the property boundary of each lot by limiting outdoor lighting that is
misdirected, excessive or unnecessary. The density of outdoor lighting, whether
shielded or unshielded, shall not exceed in the aggregate 50,000 lumens per
acre in the General Commercial District. Lighting shall be shielded to meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   No light shall shine directly into the windows of a building on
abutting lot.
      (2)   No light shall shine directly from a light source onto the ground
or improvements of an abutting lot, although incidental light may be permitted
to fall on an abutting lot. Such lighting shall not exceed 1/2 of an ISO foot-
candle at ground level on the abutting lot.
      (3)   No light shall shine directly onto public roads.
      (4)   No parking lot lighting standard or building fixture shall exceed
25 feet in height from grade level.
      (5)   Light fixtures located closer to a side or rear lot line than the
side or rear yard setback, shall be no more than 10 feet high, and shall direct
the light source away from the boundary line of the lot.
      (6)   Light fixtures located adjacent to a residential use of a lot shall
be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the boundary line of the lot.
      (7)   No streamers or festoon lighting, comprising a group of
incandescent light bulbs, shall be hung or strung on a building or any other
structure.
      (8)   No flashing or intermittent or moving lights, including lights on
signs, shall be permitted.
      (9)   Any lighting fixture with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more
than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot lighting fixtures with a lamp or lamps
rated at a total of more than 900 lumens, shall not emit any direct light above
a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the
lighting fixture.
      (10)   All existing lighting fixtures lawfully in existence immediately
prior to December 16, 2013 can remain until removed or replaced by a lawful
lighting fixture as defined by this subchapter or until such time as said
existing lighting fixture is no longer safely maintained or the use is changed.
   (I)   Violations. All violations of the regulations of the General
Commercial District shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500 per
violation. Each calendar day that the violation shall continue to exist, or
each distinct repetition of any violation, shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ord. 2013-09, passed 12-16-2013)
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 155.130 SAND MINING.
   (A)   In all districts, sand mining or any other type of mining in any
amount is strictly prohibited.
   (B)   In all districts, owners shall preserve and leave undeveloped land in
the natural state to protect the flora and fauna. In the process of excavation
for building construction, any bulldozing and grading shall be governed by §
155.134(D) below.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.131 DUNE TOPOGRAPHY.
   The Building Committee in determining approval of an application for
building permit for construction on dune topography shall consider divisions
(A) through (J) below, in addition to the other provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Planning and design to fit the topography, soils, geology, hydrology
and other conditions existing on the proposed site;
   (B)   Orientation of the planning and design to the site so that grading and
other site preparation is kept to an absolute minimum;
   (C)   The shape of essential grading to complement the natural land forms
and prohibition of all successive padding and/or terracing of the building
site;
   (D)   Development of the site so that construction can be completed within 1
construction season in order that areas are not left bare and exposed during
the winter-spring period;
   (E)   Accomplishment of all paving as rapidly as possible after grading;
   (F)   Landscaping of areas around the proposed structure in a manner which
blends into the natural topography;
   (G)   Demonstration of a concern for the view of the dune as well as the
view from the dune;
   (H)   Special consideration in the design of visual elements such as
sidewalks and pathways to enable the maximum identity and uniqueness of
character to be built into each site;
   (I)   Minimum disruption of existing plants or ground cover; and
   (J)   Minimum impact on the street right-of-way.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 11-11, passed 9-19-2011; Am. Ord. 2021-
09, passed 7-20-2021) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.132 MANUFACTURED HOUSING.
   (A)   General. Manufactured housing shall be permitted in the Residential
District as a principal dwelling provided that a dwelling meets all
requirements of this chapter as well as requirements stipulated in divisions
(A)(1) through (5) below:
      (1)   Bears certification attesting to construction after January 1,
1981;
      (2)   Bears a seal attesting to compliance with the Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standard Law (Title IV 43 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.);
      (3)   Is affixed to a permanent foundation which is anchored below the
frost line and has a crawl space of 3 feet or a basement which conforms to the
Indiana Single and Two-Family Dwelling Code;
      (4)   Has all transportation carriages removed; and
      (5)   Has a minimum occupied space of 1,350 square feet not including
accessory structures such as, but not limited to, patios and porches.
   (B)   Manufactured housing as an addition. No manufactured housing shall be
permitted in the Residential District as an addition to a principal permitted
dwelling.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.133 STANDARDIZED HOUSING.
   No free standing residence shall be erected closer than 1,000 feet to any
other residence having the same standardized plan when fronting on the same
street or closer than 500 feet when fronting on another street.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.134 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No part of a zoning parcel, yard, other open space, off-street parking
or loading space provided in connection with any building, structure or use
required under the provisions of this chapter shall, by reason of change of
ownership or otherwise, be included as part of the zoning parcel, yard, other
open space, off-street parking or loading space required for any building,
structure or use except as specifically provided in this chapter.
   (B)   All of the parcel size, yards, usable open space and other facilities
required in connection with any use or structure shall be located within the
same boundary as the use or structure, except as specifically provided in this
chapter.
   (C)   No part of the required parcel, yard, other open space or off-street
parking or loading space provided in connection with any building, other
structures or use (including but not limited to any building, other structures
or use which was existing on the effective date of the adoption of this chapter
or any amendment thereof) shall subsequently be reduced below, or further
reduced if already less than, the minimum requirements of this chapter for
equivalent new construction.
   (D)   In all districts in the Town of Beverly Shores, no land shall be
graded, defaced or altered to the extent that it shall be in violation or
conflict with the purposes and intent as defined in §
155.001.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.135 SOLAR ACCESS.
   (A)   The Town of Beverly Shores recognizes and endorses the use of solar
energy as a desirable energy conservation technique.
   (B)   Indiana Code 32-5-25 et seq. provides a mechanism for parties to
maintain their solar access.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.136 STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All of the streets, drives, avenues, roads and lanes, hereinafter
referred to herein as STREETS located within the corporate limits of the Town
of Beverly Shores, Indiana are legally dedicated rights-of-way and as they are,
when officially open, available for pedestrian as well as vehicular traffic.
      (2)   All control of the use of all streets in the Town of Beverly
Shores, except U.S. Highway 12, is vested in the Town of Beverly Shores and
shall be equitably administered by the Town Council.
      (3)   These streets shall be grouped in 3 general categories:
         (a)   Unopened streets;
         (b)   Opened streets; and
         (c)   Closed streets.
      (4)   The unopened streets shall remain unopened for public use until
they are officially opened by the Town Council.
         (a)   The entire length and width of the rights-of-way of open
streets, including both the so-called untraveled area (usually but not always
unpaved) and the so called traveled area (usually paved), shall also insofar as
the nature and configuration of the terrain in any given area permits, be kept
free and clear of all structures, railings, pilings, walls, fences, fence
posts, barriers and obstructions including but not limited to: logs, planks,
timbers, railroad ties, boulders, building blocks, building materials,
incinerators, trash-heaps, boats, trailers, disabled or abandoned vehicles,
signs or installations, except for the permitted uses in divisions (B), (C),
(D) and (E) below.
         (b)   At no time shall any track vehicles be driven on town streets in
direct contact with the road surface.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, cause to be
operated or be in physical control, upon any public road, street or highway
within the town limits, excepting therefrom any highways in the state highway
system and the state maintained routes thereof, any motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles having a maximum gross weight, with load, in excess of
50,000 pounds or a maximum gross axle weight with load in excess of 13,000
pounds for 4-tire axle and 10,000 pounds per 2-tire axle unless a written
permit therefore shall have been obtained from the Beverly Shores Street
Department.
      (6)   (a)   Any permit issued by the Beverly Shores Street Department
shall specify and direct in writing the streets and highways of the town that
may be utilized by the permittee.
         (b)   Permits shall be issued in triplicate: 1 copy to be retained in
the Beverly Shores Clerk-Treasurer’s office; 1 copy to be retained in the
Beverly Shores Marshal’s office; and 1 copy to be carried in the permitted
vehicle.
         (c)   The maximum speed limit for all motor vehicles requiring special
permits will be 20 mph.
   (B)   Sidewalks, driveways, curbs, gutters, drains and vehicle parking
spaces. Sidewalks, curbs, drains and vehicle parking spaces may be permitted by
the Town Council which do not obstruct the free flow of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic along the street rights-of-way.
   (C)   Lawns and landscaping. Lawns, either natural or artificial, and/or
appropriate landscaping may be permitted which do not in any way constitute a
visual or physical barrier to the free and safe flow of pedestrians and/or
vehicular traffic along the street rights-of-way.
   (D)   On-street parking areas.
      (1)   As a general rule, the Town Council of Beverly Shores, Indiana
extends to the owner(s) or occupant(s) of improved property (a lot or parcel)
upon which a house has been or is being constructed within the corporate limits
of the Town of Beverly Shores, the privilege of preferential use of that part
of the so-called untraveled area of the street right-of-way which is
immediately adjacent to and contiguous with the front property line of the
improved property, for the purpose of parking motor vehicles which are the
property of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the improved property, the guests of
the owners and/or occupants, the Town Council may rescind this privilege if the
use is not deemed in the public interest and safety.
      (2)   Maintenance and provision for public safety and care of parking
areas, lawns or landscaping shall be the sole responsibility of the adjoining
property owner(s) or occupant(s).
   (E)   Encroachment license. Retaining walls no taller than four feet,
stairs, railings, ramps, and elevators may be permitted in the unimproved
portion of the right-of-way provided the Building and Site Committees issues a
written approval of the location.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2017-15,
passed 12-12-2017) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.137 JUNK AND ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   No person shall park or store any wrecked, junked, inoperable or abandoned
automobile or vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property within
the town except in a garage or other enclosure so as rot to be exposed to
public view.
   (A)   License plate on vehicle. Any vehicle shall be deemed to be wrecked,
junked, inoperable or abandoned if the vehicle does not have, attached thereto,
a valid and current license plate, but the license plate shall not be the sole
factor in determining the status of the vehicle.
   (B)   Violation notice; towing procedure.
      (1)   The Police Department or any member thereof, is hereby authorized
to issue this written demand to the owner, occupant, agent or person in
possession of the premises on which any wrecked, junked, inoperable or
abandoned automobile or vehicle is kept in violation of this section, notifying
the person to remove the vehicle from the premises within 10 days from the
receipt of the notice.
      (2)   Upon failure or refusal of the person to remove the vehicle within
the time specified, the Police Department shall impound the vehicle and cause
it to be removed by a licensed towing agency. The owner will be charged the
cost of towing plus storage charges.
      (3)   A summons may also be issued charging the owner, occupant, agent or
person in possession of the premises on which any wrecked, junked, inoperable
or abandoned automobile or vehicle with a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Fee.
      (1)   Any person owning or having on their property, a motor vehicle
parked or stored in view of the public for the purpose of being repaired may
obtain a permit for that purpose from the Clerk-Treasurer at the Beverly Shores
Town Hall located at 500 Broadway, Beverly Shores, Indiana, for a fee of $25,
which may be amended from time to time by the Town Council and which permit
shall not be renewable.
      (2)   The permit shall expire within 30 days of the date that the permit
was issued. The permit shall be displayed on the inside front windshield on the
driver's side front of the vehicle for which the permit was issued.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.138 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   No driveway shall be constructed, resurfaced or replaced upon, over,
or under the street right-of-way, including the so-called untraveled area as
well as the so-called traveled area of the street right-of-way, until a
driveway permit to construct, resurface or replace the driveway has been
approved and issued by the Building Commissioner in accordance with rules,
regulations or ordinances relative thereto and the required permit fee has been
paid to the Clerk-Treasurer as provided in §
155.065. No permit shall be required for maintenance of an existing driveway,
so long as the same materials are used in the maintenance as the existing
driveway and the dimensions of the driveway are not changed.
   (B)   (1)   A driveway shall be constructed at the owner's risk and
responsibility.
      (2)   For a distance of two feet from the traveled portion of the right-
of-way, each driveway shall be at the same or lower grade and elevation as the
traveled portion of the right-of-way.
      (3)   Driveways shall be constructed of a material such as asphalt,
concrete, brick, pavers or other similar material as approved by the Building
Commissioner. A driveway shall be constructed of materials and in such a manner
which prevents sand, stone, cinders or other ground material from being washed,
thrown or carried onto public roads.
      (4)   Slag shall not be permitted as a base or surface of a driveway.
      (5)   The driveway in the residential district shall be limited to a
width of 16 feet and allowed a five-foot radius at the intersection of the
traveled portion of the right-of-way. Further limitations may apply if a
driveway is on a slope. A driveway located on or affecting a steep slope is
greatly discouraged and will only be permitted in extraordinary cases, see §
155.143. An apron at the garage may be allowed to accommodate up to two cars.
      (6)   No driveway in the residential district, or that is subject to the
regulations applicable to the residential district, shall be constructed on or
located within a required setback except as permitted in this division. A
driveway may be located in 1 of either the front setback or rear setback, or on
a corner lot in the side setback abutting the street, as applicable, and may
otherwise extend not more than 4 feet into one side setback, or on a corner lot
not more than 4 feet into one of the adjoining setbacks (additional limitations
apply if the construction of or location of the driveway would affect a steep
slope as provided in §§
155.140 through
155.145).
   (C)   Each driveway shall have constructed and installed a drainage system
(e.g. slotted drain into a drywell or culvert) approved by the Town Building
Commissioner and Building Committee to prevent storm water runoff from the
driveway onto the traveled portion of the right-of-way. Any pipe or trench used
must be sloped for self-cleaning with a velocity of three feet per second.
   (D)   Each owner shall, at its sole cost and expense, maintain the drainage
system in good working order and repair. If an owner fails or refuses to
maintain the drainage system or damage to the town’s right-of-way results from
storm water runoff from the owner’s lot, then the town shall have the right but
not the obligation to notify and advise the owner in writing.
   (E)   (1)   If the owner fails to maintain or repair the drainage system or
fails to repair the damage to the town’s right-of-way within 60 days after
receipt of the notice by the owner, the town may enter upon the lot to correct
any deficiencies in the maintenance or repair of the drainage system and to
repair the damage to the town’s right-of-way.
      (2)   The town may record a lien against the lot with the Recorder of
Porter County, Indiana for the town’s costs and expenses (including, without
limitation, attorneys fees and expenses), in correcting the deficiencies and
making repairs.
   (F)   Interest shall accrue on the amount paid by the town at the highest
rate permitted by law from the date payment is made by the town until the date
that the owner reimburses the town for its costs and expenses. Upon the town’s
receipt of reimbursement for its costs and expenses, the town shall promptly
execute, acknowledge and deliver any releases of lien as may be required to
release any claim of lien that may have been placed on record.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed - -; Am. Ord. 2021-09,
passed 7-20-2021; Am. Ord. 2022-07, passed 8-16-2022) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.139 SIGNS; PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Purpose of regulating signs. The purposes of regulating signs in §§
155.088,
155.110, this
155.139, and other sections of this zoning ordinance are as follows:
      (1)   To preserve the scenic and aesthetic beauty that now exists in the
Town of Beverly Shores;
      (2)   To preserve property values in the Town of Beverly Shores;
      (3)   The desirability of eliminating factors which may tend to detract
and degrade the community; and
      (4)   To promote the public health, welfare, and safety.
   (B)   Permits required.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in §
155.088, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate or
maintain any permanent sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the
Building Committee and making payment of the required fee to the Clerk-
Treasurer of the Town of Beverly Shores as provided in §
155.065.
         (a)   No permit or fee shall be required for the display of house
numbers; and
         (b)   No permit or fee shall be required for the display of the
accessory signs permitted by §
155.088(A)(2).
      (2)   All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the
provisions of the Town of Beverly Shores Building Code and the State of Indiana
Administrative Building Code.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in §
155.088, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any temporary
sign without first obtaining a temporary sign permit from the Clerk-Treasurer,
and making payment of the required fee to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of
Beverly Shores as provide in §
155.088.
   (C)   Application for a sign permit.
      (1)   Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by
the Plan Commission.
      (2)   The application shall contain information as the Plan Commission
shall deem necessary to show full compliance with this and all other
appropriate ordinances of the Town of Beverly Shores and where necessary with
the Administrative Building Code of the State of Indiana.
      (3)   The Building Committee shall, upon the filing of an application for
a permanent sign, examine the plans, specifications and other data, and the
premises upon which it is proposed for the sign to be constructed and, if it
shall appear that the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements
of this chapter, the Building Code and all other applicable ordinances and laws
of the Town of Beverly Shores, and the State of Indiana, and, after the
appropriate fee has been paid, a permit for erection shall be issued. If the
work authorized under the sign permit has not been completed within 60 days
after the date of issuance of the permit, the permit shall become null and
void.
      (4)   Temporary sign permits shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer. A
temporary sign shall not be posted for more than 60 days, unless a 120 day
permit is paid for, or the 60-day permit is renewed.
   (D)   Removal of signs.
      (1)   (a)   If the Building Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer
shall find that a sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or
has, subsequent to the effective date of this chapter been constructed or
erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Building
Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to permit
holder and the owner of the property on which the sign is located.
         (b)   If the permit holder or the owner of the property on which the
sign is located fails to remove, repair or alter the sign so as to comply with
the standards required by this chapter within 30 days, the Building
Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the removal of the sign
and any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the person, firm or
corporation having the ownership or right to possession of the building or
structure, or premises where the sign is located.
      (2)   Any sign located on a sign zoning parcel in the Commercial District
which is not being put to a commercial use, or that is vacant, for a six month
period, shall be taken down and removed by the firm, corporation or person
having ownership or right to possession of the building, structure or premises
upon which the sign may be found within 30 days after written notification from
the Building Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer. Upon failure to comply
with the notice, the Building Commissioner or Code Enforcement Officer shall
cause removal of the sign and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
person, firm or corporation having the ownership or right to possession of the
building, structure or premises where the sign is located.
   (E)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No sign shall be attached to any tree, utility pole or other
unapproved structure.
      (2)   No sign shall be constructed so as to interfere with or imitate any
standard traffic sign or signal nor shall any sign interfere with or obstruct
the view of traffic or traffic signs or signals and no sign shall be located on
the public right-of-way.
   (F)   Exemptions. Traffic or municipally authorized signs, legal notices,
railroad crossing signs, and danger signs are exempt from this chapter.
   (G)   Standards.
      (1)   All signs shall be maintained in a safe and attractive condition.
      (2)   Any and all signs erected prior to the adoption of this chapter
which are not in conformity with the provision of this chapter shall be allowed
to continue and exist for a period of 1 year from the date of the adoption of
this chapter, after which they shall be governed by this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2018-06, passed 8-21-2018) Penalty, see
§
155.999
§ 155.140 PROTECTION OF STEEP SLOPES.
   (A)   Steep slope protection. It is the policy of the town to protect the
fragile dune environment within the town. As a part of this policy, the town
will require planning to minimize or avoid damage to the dune environment and
in particular to steep slope dunes which are particularly fragile.
   (B)   Sections
155.140 et seq. comprise the steep slope protection provisions: these minimum
requirements supplement the applicable provisions of
Chapter 155 and are in addition to all other applicable requirements in the
Code. Reference to the Committee in these steep slope provisions refers to
either the Building Site Committee or the Building Committee, as applicable.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.141 DEFINITION OF STEEP SLOPE.
   A slope greater than a one-foot vertical rise in a three-foot horizontal
plane on a dune which is at least 20 feet in height measured from the lowest
point of elevation on the lot. A dune shall meet this definition if it rises or
falls continuously at least 20 feet or if it consists of a series of dunes and/
or swales on the lot that in the totality rise or fall at least 20 feet from
the lowest point of elevation on the lot.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.142 PROHIBITION AGAINST CONSTRUCTION ON A STEEP SLOPE EXCEPT AS PROVIDED.
   (A)   No construction, excavation, digging, grading, change of contour or
clear cutting of ground vegetation shall occur on or within ten feet of a steep
slope within the town except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Septic systems will be excepted if there will be no digging below four feet
from the surface of the slope at any point either during or after construction,
and the applicant otherwise demonstrates that the proposed septic system as
well as the construction related activities are consistent with the intent of
this chapter.
   (B)   If there is a steep slope within any setback of a lot, no construction
activities, including the removal of trees or vegetation, shall occur within
the side or rear yard setbacks which contain any portion of a steep slope.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.143 SUPPLEMENTARY CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN AND ISSUANCE OF
BUILDING PERMIT ON A LOT CONTAINING A STEEP SLOPE.
   (A)   (1)   The applicant's plans shall utilize areas of the lot that will
not affect the steep slope, for example, by utilizing areas that may have been
previously cleared or graded for construction. The Committee will recommend
adjustments in the applicant's plans in order to protect steep slopes and will
condition site plan approval or building permit approval on the applicant
utilizing an alternative site on the lot.
      (2)   Any proposed driveway shall be located on the portion of the lot
that does not affect the steep slope. A driveway located on or affecting a
steep slope is greatly discouraged and will only be permitted in extraordinary
cases where the Committee determines that the construction of and placement of
the driveway will not adversely impact the steep slope and the plans limit the
dimensions of the driveway to minimize the impact, and there is no practicable
alternative site on the lot.
   (B)   It is the applicant's burden to demonstrate that there is no
practicable alternative site on the lot or adjacent property available to the
applicant which would avoid or lessen the impact to the steep slope. The
applicant's plans must demonstrate to the Committee that no alternative
practicable site exists and that the proposed construction, and location of any
structure will not cause damage to the dune, roadway, or surrounding property
owners. If the proposed building site, or any preparation for construction,
staging or construction activities, excavation, grading or any other activity
is on or within ten feet of a steep slope or that disturbs or impacts the steep
slope, then no more than 120 cubic yards of sand or soil for septic and no more
than 180 cubic yards of sand or soil for the dwelling and all other structures,
including a driveway, if permitted, shall be removed, relocated, or added to
the dune.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.144 SUPPLEMENTAL SITE PLAN AND BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR STEEP
SLOPES.
   (A)   In addition to complying with all the requirements listed in §
155.040, the requirements of §
155.131, and §
155.056 the applicant must produce the information provided in divisions (B)
through (E) below.
   (B)   A geotechnical engineering report from an engineer licensed in
Indiana, Illinois or Michigan to demonstrate:
      (1)   An accurate estimate of the amount of sand or other material in
cubic yards expected to be excavated, graded, filled or transported during the
life of the permit, and if excavation is to occur, the location of where the
excavated material will be finally deposited;
      (2)   The construction, excavation, digging, grading, change of contour,
including of trees and vegetation, site restoration and remediation,
contemplated in the applicant's site plan will not damage or interfere with the
established slope terrain or slope stability; create erosion; cause water
drainage problems; change water drainage or obstruct or retard the flow of
water; or threaten the safety of neighboring properties; and
      (3)   A slope stability analysis of the dune including a discussion of
the effect of construction and excavation as well as the effect of the location
of the structure on the dune.
   (C)   The applicant's plans must show:
      (1)   A site diagram, in scale and adequate detail, that indicates the
areas of the site with contours of 0 to 10% slope, greater than 10% to 20%,
greater than 20% to 33%, and greater than 33%;
      (2)   A complete description of the area affected during construction or
excavation activities;
      (3)   All precautions which will be taken during construction to protect
the area;
      (4)   All monitoring which will occur, during construction or excavation;
      (5)   All efforts which will be taken to restore the site after
construction to the original slope;
      (6)   All studies conducted on the site to support any conclusions; and
      (7)   A three-dimensional drawing or model of the structure on the
proposed site.
   (D)   The applicant's plans shall adapt to and minimize disturbance of the
natural terrain, trees and other vegetation both during construction and after
construction, including plans for implementing the following storm water
controls:
      (1)   The location and placement of structural controls to eliminate soil
erosion and sedimentation from areas of the site where construction has
disturbed the preconstruction land surface; and
      (2)   Temporary stabilization of the disturbed land surface within five
business days of completion of construction to re-vegetate with sod, seed, soil
blanket, or implement similar measures followed by permanent stabilization
before project completion using measures such as landscaping, retaining walls,
hard surfaces, and water flow dissipators.
   (E)   The applicant's plans shall contain landscape enhancement and shall
provide for the planting of non-invasive trees and native vegetation designed
to stabilize the dune and protect it from future movement.
   (F)   The Committee may require a minimum setback for equipment movement or
storage.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.145 APPLICANT'S BURDEN TO DEMONSTRATE COMPLIANCE WITH STEEP SLOPE
PROVISIONS; APPLICANT'S RIGHT TO APPEAL FOR A VARIANCE TO THE B.Z.A.
   (A)   It is the applicant's burden to demonstrate to the Committee that it
has met the requirements for site approval and the issuance of a building
permit for construction on a lot containing a steep slope. If the Committee
determines that the applicant has failed to meet its burden, then it shall not
approve the site plan or building permit, as applicable. If the application is
disapproved, the Building Commissioner shall prepare a report summarizing the
concerns and issues resulting from the applicant's plans as related to the
steep slope and shall include the report with the records for the site plan
application. The Building Commissioner shall maintain records of all actions on
site plan applications.
   (B)   (1)   In that case, the applicant may file a petition for variance
before the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to §
155.034, in which case the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating the
standards for variance, as supplemented by the steep slope protection
provisions, §§
155.140 et seq., in addition to all other requirements for obtaining a variance
under §
155.034.
      (2)   The B.Z.A. in its discretion, may also take the following actions:
         (a)   The B.Z.A. may select a licensed Indiana geotechnical engineer
from a list of engineers approved by the town, to review the initial
engineering reports submitted by the applicant. All costs and professional fees
associated with this review shall be paid by the applicant.
         (b)   Approval may be conditioned upon receipt of an insurance policy
in the minimum combined single limit coverage amount of $1,000,000 with the
named insureds: the Town of Beverly Shores, the builder, the property owner,
and adjacent or other affected property owners. If special circumstances exist
in the discretion of the B.Z.A., it may require coverage in excess of
$1,000,000 up to the amount necessary to protect all the named insureds. The
insurance policy shall be approved by the Building Commissioner and shall
remain in force for a minimum of one year following granting of the occupancy
permit. If there are any issues remaining under the policy after the one-year
period and either the town, or any other affected landowner gives notice to the
insurance company and the property owner, then the policy shall remain in
effect until the remaining issues are resolved.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
GENERAL SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
§ 155.150 CITATION; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This subchapter and the next subchapter (§§
155.150 through
155.181) may be cited as the Beverly Shores Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   These subdivision control regulations shall apply to all
subdivisions of land, as defined herein, located within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Beverly Shores, Indiana.
      (2)   No land shall be subdivided within these boundaries until:
         (a)   The subdivider or his or her agent shall submit a proposed
subdivision plat to the Plan Commission;
         (b)   The Plan Commission grants primary and secondary approval of the
plat; and
         (c)   The approved plat is filed with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.151 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision that is not a minor subdivision.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land that does not involve the opening
of a new public way and that complies in all other respects with the Beverly
Shores Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance. A MINOR
SUBDIVISION may be granted primary approval by the Plan Commission without
public notice and hearing.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into lots, parcels, tracts,
units or interests in the manner defined and prescribed by this Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.152 SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   A person desiring the approval of a subdivision plat shall submit a
written application for approval in accordance with procedures prescribed by
this Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   (B)   No contract shall be made for the sale of any part of the subdivision
and no improvement or building shall be made on the property, until the
subdivider applies for and secures approval of the proposed subdivision in
accordance with the procedures set forth in §§
155.150 through
155.181. No subdivision plat shall be filed with the County Recorder until the
plat has been approved by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   No improvement, building or driveway permits shall be issued until the
approved plat is filed with the County Recorder.
   (D)   The procedural requirements vary depending on whether the proposed
subdivision is a minor or a major subdivision.
      (1)   Minor subdivision: No notice or public hearing required for either
primary or secondary approval.
      (2)   Major subdivision: Notice and public hearing required for the
primary approval but not required for secondary approval.
   (E)   In order for a piece of land resulting from a subdivision of a parcel,
zoning lot, or lot of record to qualify for a building permit issued by the
town, a parcel, lot of record, or zoning lot may only be subdivided with the
permission of the Town Plan Commission under the procedures set forth in this
Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   (F)   No parcel, zoning lot, lot of record, or other piece of land may be
divided or subdivided so as to make the length along any abutting street,
whether it is considered frontage or not, less that 100 feet in length. The
minimum dimension of any piece of land transferred in any way from one parcel,
zoning lot, lot of record, or other piece of land would have no dimension of
less than 35 feet in length and a minimum of 2,500 square feet.
   (G)   No subdivision of a parcel or lot upon which a residence currently
exists shall be permitted if the parcel or lot does not currently meet the area
and frontage requirements, or that would reduce the area or frontage of such a
parcel or lot below the minimum area and frontage requirements for a parcel as
defined in §
155.003.
   (H)   The total filing fee for this public hearing shall be as stated in the
Town Fee Schedule, §
10.99.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 11-17-2008) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.153 PRE-PLATTING CONFERENCE.
   (A)   (1)   Before submitting the subdivision plat for technical review, the
applicant shall discuss with the Building Commissioner the procedure for
adoption of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of
streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage,
fire protection and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing
services.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner may also advise the applicant, where
appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must
eventually approve the aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their
jurisdiction.
   (B)   The applicant has the option to request a conference with the
Commission, also, but not for overriding the Building Commissioner. This action
will not require application, but notification should provide sufficient time
for the matter to be placed on the agenda.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.154 APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for approval of a subdivision plat shall be filed
with the Plan Commission.
   (B)   The application shall:
      (1)   Be made in duplicate and presented at least 4 weeks prior to a
regular meeting of the Commission;
      (2)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer;
      (3)   Be accompanied by a fee required in §
155.065;
      (4)   Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and a
list of the record owners of real estate located within 300 feet of the
proposed subdivision as shown in the assessor's files. This information may be
shown on a separate current tax map or plat reproduction from the assessor's
office showing the subdivision superimposed thereon;
      (5)   Be accompanied by 7 copies of the proposed plat as described in
these regulations;
      (6)   Be accompanied by 7 copies of construction plans, as described in
these regulations;
      (7)   Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to
the public of all streets, utilities, parks, easements and other local
government uses, in a form approved by the Town Attorney. In addition, the
subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers
of dedication as follows:
         The owner or his or her representative, hereby irrevocably offers for
dedication to the Town of Beverly Shores all the streets, local government
uses, easements, parks and required utilities shown on the subdivision plat and
construction plans.
         Signature _________________________________    Date _______________
      (8)   Be accompanied by endorsements by appropriate authorities to assure
the Commission that the plat is in compliance with all rules, regulations and
requirements of local and state authorities.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.155 TECHNICAL REVIEW.
   Upon receipt of an application for primary approval the Plan Commission
President shall direct the Building Committee to review the application for
technical conformity with the standards fixed in the Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.156 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the Building Committee advises the Plan
Commission President of technical conformity with the standards fixed in the
Subdivision Control Ordinance, the President shall announce the date for a
hearing before the Plan Commission and by letter direct the applicant to
provide notice of the hearing as follows:
      (1)   Applicant shall give notice of the hearing by publication in
accordance with I.C. 5-3-1-1 et seq.; and
      (2)   Mail notice of the hearing by certified mail return receipt
requested to the record owners of real estate located within 300 feet of the
proposed subdivision;
   (B)   Publication and mailing shall occur at least 10 days before the date
set for the public hearing. The Plan Commission shall require the applicant to
bear the expense of notice of public hearing and to submit proof of notice to
the Plan Commission Attorney at least 3 days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.157 PRIMARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   In determining whether to grant primary approval of a plat, the Plan
Commission shall determine if the plat or subdivision qualifies for primary
approval under the standards prescribed by the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   (B)   The standards fixed in the Subdivision Control Ordinance may not be
lower than the minimum standards prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance for a
similar use.
   (C)   As a condition of primary approval of a plat, the Commission may
specify:
      (1)   The manner in which public ways shall be laid out, graded and
improved;
      (2)   A provision for water, sewage and other utility services;
      (3)   A provision for lot size, number and location;
      (4)   A provision for drainage design; and
      (5)   A provision for other services as specified in the Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.158 DECISION; WRITTEN FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   If, after the hearing, the Plan Commission determines that the
application and plat comply with the standards in the Subdivision Control
Ordinance it shall make written findings and a decision granting primary
approval to the plat and shall provide the applicant with a copy. This decision
must be signed by the Plan Commission President.
   (B)   If, after the hearing, the Plan Commission disapproves the plat, it
shall make written findings that set forth its reasons and a decision denying
primary approval and shall provide the applicant with a copy. This decision
must be signed by the Plan Commission President.
   (C)   In deciding whether to approve a request for approval of any
subdivision, as that term is defined in §
155.151, the Plan Commission shall pay reasonable regard to: (i) the
Comprehensive Plan, (ii) current conditions and the character of current
structures and uses in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision, (iii) the
conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction, and (iv)
responsible development and growth, and decide whether the proposed subdivision
meets the following standards:
      (1)   That the proposed subdivision will not adversely affect the
community;
      (2)   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property proposed to
be subdivided will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
      (3)   That the zoning district will not be disrupted or harmed;
      (4)   That the approval will not be injurious to the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community; and
      (5)   The resultant lots and parcels will not violate any of the
provisions of this chapter solely as a result of the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 155.159 APPEAL.
   The primary approval or disapproval of a plat by the Plan Commission or the
imposition of a condition on primary approval is a final decision of the Plan
Commission that may be reviewed as provided by I.C. 36-7-4-1016 as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.160 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   Completion of improvements.
      (1)   Subsequent to primary approval but before secondary approval all
applicants shall be required to complete all the streets, storm sewers, water
lines, street signs and other public improvements on and about the individual
lots of the subdivision as required in this chapter, specified in the approved
subdivision plat, or required by the Commission.
      (2)   The Commission in its discretion may waive the requirement that the
applicant complete all public improvements prior to secondary approval of the
subdivision plat, and, in lieu thereof, require the applicant to post bond
payable to the Town of Beverly Shores, hereinafter referred to as performance
bond, in an amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of completion of
the required public improvements, assuming a completion date 2 years after the
date of secondary approval, which shall be sufficient to secure the
satisfactory construction and installation of the public improvements.
      (3)   That in lieu of the bond, the developer may submit a certified
check made payable to the Town of Beverly Shores in an amount equivalent to
110% of the estimated cost of completion of the public improvements. Any check
shall be held by the Clerk-Treasurer.
      (4)   (a)   That in lieu of a bond, the developer may submit irrevocable
letters of credit on behalf of the developer and securable by the Town of
Beverly Shores in an amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of
satisfactory completion of the public improvements.
         (b)   In the event an irrevocable letter of credit is utilized it
shall be written for a maximum length of 1 year and the Commission shall after
a period of 10 months determine if the public improvements have been accepted
for maintenance by the governmental unit having jurisdiction over the public
improvement, and if they have not been accepted, shall so notify the subdivider
of intent to secure the funds and then commence procedures to secure the funds
pledged by a letter of credit, or at the discretion of the Commission to grant
an extension for a period fixed by the Commission not to exceed 1 year, and the
subdivider filing with the Commissioner a new letter of credit for the period
so fixed.
      (5)   That in lieu of a bond the subdivider may submit a certificate of
deposit made out to the Town of Beverly Shores in an amount equivalent to 110%
of the cost of satisfactory completion of the public improvements to be
deposited by the Clerk-Treasurer in an interest bearing account pending
certification of satisfactory completion. Absent certification, the town may
use the interest as additional funds for completion of the public improvements.
      (6)   (a)   The performance bond shall comply with all statutory
requirements and shall be satisfactory to the Commission Attorney as to form,
sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in this chapter.
         (b)   The period within which required public improvements must be
completed shall be specified by the Commission in the resolution granting
primary approval and shall be incorporated into the bond and shall not in any
event exceed 1 year from date of secondary approval.
         (c)   The bond shall be approved by the Plan Commission as to amount.
The Commission may, upon proof of difficulty, grant an extension of the
completion date set forth in the bond for a minimum period of 1 additional
year, provided that the bond submitted for this extension period meets all
other requirements herein.
         (d)   The Commission may at any time during the period of the bond
accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond.
      (7)   The security referred to in divisions (A)(1) through (6) above
shall not be released until the Building Commissioner certifies that the public
improvements have been completed in accordance with the grant of primary
approval.
   (B)   Effective period of primary approval.
      (1)   Unless extended, primary approval shall be effective for a period
of 1 year at the end of which time secondary approval on the subdivision must
have been obtained and certified by the President and Secretary of the
Commission.
      (2)   Any plats not receiving secondary approval within the period of
time set forth herein shall be null and void and the developer shall be
required to resubmit a new plat for primary approval subject to all new zoning
restrictions and subdivision regulations.
      (3)   Upon request of the applicant, the Commission may extend the period
of primary approval in increments of 6 months beyond an expiration date without
further notice and public hearing.
   (C)   Zoning ordinances. Every plat shall conform to existing zoning
ordinances and subdivision regulations applicable at the time of primary
approval, except that any application for primary approval proper in form shall
be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the zoning and subdivision
ordinances which would otherwise render the plat nonconforming as to size,
shape or use.
   (D)   Model homes.
      (1)   For the purpose of allowing the early construction of model homes
in a subdivision, the Commission, in its discretion, may permit a portion of a
major subdivision involving no more than 2 lots to be created in accordance
with the procedures for minor subdivisions, provided that the portion derives
access from an existing public street, and provided that no further road or
other improvements are anticipated where the lots are proposed.
      (2)   The subdivision plat for the minor portion shall be submitted to
the Commission simultaneously with the application for primary approval for the
entire major subdivision. Subsequent to the primary approval, the model home(s)
may be constructed, subject to additional requirements that the Commission may
require.
   (E)   Assurance for maintenance.
      (1)   General requirements. The applicant shall be required to maintain
all improvements on the subdivided areas and, if required, provide for snow
removal and traffic control on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the
improvements by the Town Council.
      (2)   Posting of maintenance bond. The applicant shall be required to
file a maintenance bond with the Town Council, prior to dedication, in an
amount considered adequate by the local Building Commissioner, in order to
assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements on the
individual subdivided lots for a period of 5 years after the date of their
acceptance by the Town Council and dedication of same to the local government.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.161 SECONDARY APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Plan Commission may grant secondary approval of a plat under this
section.
   (B)   The application for secondary approval shall:
      (1)   Be made on forms available in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer;
      (2)   Be accompanied by 7 copies of the application and any fee required
by this chapter; and
      (3)   Either:
         (a)   Warrant under oath that all improvements have been completed in
accordance with primary approval of plat and the requirements of the
Subdivision Control Ordinance; or
         (b)   Submit an itemized list reflecting costs for satisfactory
construction and completion of the subdivision plat improvements.
   (C)   Secondary approval may be granted, after expiration of the time
provided for appeal (30 days) per I.C. 36-7-4-1016 and 36-7-4-1003.
   (D)   No notice or public hearing is required for secondary approval.
   (E)   Secondary approval may be granted to the plat for a subdivision in
which the improvements and installments have not been completed as required by
the Subdivision Control Ordinance, if the applicant provides a bond, or other
proof of financial responsibility prescribed by §
155.160.
   (F)   Any money received from the bond or otherwise shall be used only for
making the improvements and installments for which the bond or other proof of
financial responsibility was provided. This money may be used for these
purposes without appropriation. The improvement or installation must conform to
the standards provided for the improvements or installations by ordinance and/
or law of the Town of Beverly Shores, Porter County, or the State of Indiana.
   (G)   (1)   Prior to secondary approval the Building Commissioner shall
report in writing to the Plan Commission whether all improvements and
installations have been constructed and completed as required by the
Subdivision Control Ordinance.
      (2)   To the extent the improvements and installations do not comply, the
Building Commissioner shall state specifically in what respects the
improvements and installations do not comply and submit his or her estimate of
the cost of satisfactory construction and completion of the improvements
assuming a completion date 2 years from the date of secondary approval.
      (3)   At all times during the development and construction of the
subdivision the Building Commissioner shall have the right to inspect all
construction and improvements.
   (H)   A plat of a subdivision may not be filed with the auditor, and the
Recorder may not record it, unless it has been granted secondary approval and
signed and certified by the Plan Commission President. The filing and recording
of the plat is without legal effect unless approved by the Plan Commission.
   (I)   (1)   When a bond is required, the President and the Secretary shall
endorse approval on the plat only after the bond has been approved by the Plan
Commission, and all the conditions of the approval pertaining to the plat have
been satisfied.
      (2)   When installation and improvement is required, the President and
the Secretary shall endorse approval on the plat after all conditions of the
resolution have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed.
      (3)   There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities
have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the local Superintendent of
Streets and Town Attorney that the necessary dedication of public lands and
improvements has been accomplished.
   (J)   (1)   President and Secretary shall sign the reproducible Mylar,
tracing cloth or sepia prints of the subdivision plat and return 2 copies to
the applicant, 1 of which is to be recorded with the County Recorder.
      (2)   A signed copy of the construction plans shall also be returned.
      (3)   Within 20 days of the date of signature the subdivider shall file
the plat with the County Recorder, record the agreement of dedication together
with the legal documents as shall be required to be recorded by the Town
Attorney and deliver record marked copies of same to the Town Attorney.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
SPECIFIC SUBDIVISION CONTROL REGULATIONS
§ 155.175 IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Plats. In addition to the requirements established herein, all
subdivision plats shall comply with the following rules, laws and regulations:
         (a)   All applicable statutory provisions;
         (b)   The local zoning ordinances, building and housing codes and all
other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions;
         (c)   The official Comprehensive Plan;
         (d)   The rules and regulations of the State Board of Health, the
Natural Resources Commission, Aeronautics Commission and other appropriate
state agencies;
         (e)   The rules, regulations and standards of the Indiana State
Highway Commission if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a
state highway;
         (f)   All applicable planning and regulatory guidelines, including
access control or driveway manuals, parking and traffic control ordinances and
other applicable guides of the Town of Beverly Shores; and
         (g)   The Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
installation of traffic control devices (see §
155.176(B)).
      (2)   Construction plans. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision
is not in general conformity with the above plat requirements or with the
following requirements for construction plans.
         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider of every
proposed subdivision to have a complete set of construction plans prepared by
an engineer licensed by the State of Indiana, including profiles, cross
sections, specifications and other supporting data for all required public
streets, utilities and other facilities.
         (b)   The final construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans
which have been approved with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared and
submitted in conjunction with the final plat.
         (c)   Construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the Town
of Beverly Shores standards and specifications.
      (3)   Material and construction control. To assure compliance with good
engineering practice, the subdivider, contractor or developer is required to
follow the latest issue of the Indiana State Highway; Standard Specifications
for material and construction control, except when different specifications are
explicitly described in these regulations, or adopted by the Town Council.
      (4)   Political and jurisdictional boundaries. To eliminate potential
jurisdictional disputes and to facilitate effective coordination and control of
development, the Plan Commission shall be guided by the following policy:
         (a)   Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in
another local government, the Commission shall request assurance from that
local governmental attorney that access is legally established, and from the
Building Commissioner that the access road is adequately improved, or that a
performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure
the construction of the access road; and
         (b)   Lot lines shall be laid out as not to cross boundary lines
between adjacent units of local government which have separate governing bodies
for the purpose of regulation and control of land use and development as well
as for tax purposes.
      (5)   Public improvements. Every subdivider shall be required to install
the following public and other improvements in accordance with the conditions
and specifications in these regulations.
         (a)   The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the
subdivision in accordance with §
155.176(A) and as approved by a registered land surveyor.
         (b)   All streets and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications of §
155.176(A) and as adopted and approved by the Town Council.
         (c)   All bridges and culverts shall be constructed in accordance with
applicable engineering standards as approved by the Building Commissioner.
         (d)   All driveways, and when approved or required, all median
openings and auxiliary lanes, shall be constructed as specified in the Town of
Beverly Shores regulations covering the construction of elements of the
streets.
         (e)   Underground installation of communication and electric utilities
is encouraged and may be required subject to the adopted policies of the Plan
Commission.
         (f)   The placement of fire hydrants and water mains for adequate fire
protection shall be in accordance with the Town of Beverly Shores standards.
         (g)   Street name signs shall be installed in the appropriate
locations at each street intersection in accordance with the Town of Beverly
Shores standards.
         (h)   Pedestrian walkways, when required, shall have easements at
least 10 feet in width and include a paved walk at least 4 feet in width.
         (i)   Greenbelts or landscape screening may be required for the
protection of residential properties from adjacent major arterial streets,
railroad rights-of-way, commercial or industrial areas or other features.
         (j)   Streetlights may be required to be installed at intersections
throughout the subdivision and the installations shall conform to the
requirements of the Town of Beverly Shores and the public utility providing the
lighting.
   (B)   Subdivision and lot layout.
      (1)   Street location and arrangements. Within a proposed subdivision,
arterial and collector streets shall be dedicated to the public in all cases.
In general, all other streets, including new collectors and locals, shall also
be dedicated to public use. The street layout shall conform to the following.
         (a)   Local streets shall be arranged so as to discourage their use by
through traffic.
         (b)   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions should be so that
the streets extend to the boundary line of the tract to make provisions for the
future extension of the streets into adjacent areas.
         (c)   Local streets shall be arranged in proper relation to topography
in a manner which results in usable lots, safe streets and acceptable gradients
without unnecessary destruction of drainage courses, trees and other natural
features of the land.
         (d)   Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling or commercial
subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service access and off-street
loading and unloading. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited.
         (e)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street, it
shall be required that frontage roads be constructed approximately parallel to
and on each side of the arterial street. The Commission may require other
treatment as is necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties
and to separate through traffic from local traffic. A single row of lots
backing up to the arterial will not be discouraged. However, vehicular access
from the lots to the arterial shall be prohibited.
         (f)   No intersection shall be constructed with more than 4 approach
legs and the development of 3-legged “T” intersections is encouraged due to the
increased safety of the intersections.
         (g)   Half streets shall be prohibited except where unusual
circumstances make a like facility necessary to the reasonable development of a
tract in conformance with these regulations and where satisfactory assurance
for dedication of the remaining part of the street is provided. Whenever a
tract to be subdivided borders on an existing half or partial street, the other
part of the street shall be dedicated within such tract.
         (h)   Whenever a proposed subdivision borders an existing street, the
Commission may require the reconstruction or widening of the street as a
condition of plat approval. Additional dedication of right-of-way may also be
required.
         (i)   When there is a situation of unusual physical conditions or a
controlled design environment in evidence and it can be satisfactorily
demonstrated to the Commission that a private street is the only feasible
solution, the private streets may be authorized provided pavement construction
standards shall be the same as the minimum public standard, and adequate
covenant provisions are made for direct responsibility and control by the
property owners involved to provide for the perpetual operation, liability and
maintenance of the private streets at no expense to the governmental unit.
      (2)   Lot arrangements.
         (a)   The lot arrangements shall be so that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with this chapter
and other regulations and in providing safe driveway access to buildings on
lots from an approved street.
         (b)   Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of this
chapter.
         (c)   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be discouraged
except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from
arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
         (d)   Lots shall not generally, derive access exclusively from an
arterial or major collector street. Where driveway access from an arterial or
major collector street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Plan
Commission may require that the lots be served by a common and combined
driveway in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street.
         (e)   Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away
from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the
general storm drainage for the area.
         (f)   Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as
spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least 6 inches of cover
between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
         (g)   No cut trees, timber debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk,
rubbish or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or
left deposited on any lot or street at the time the buildings are ready for
occupancy.
         (h)   Where individual septic tanks have been authorized, sufficient
area shall be provided for a replacement sewage disposal system.
      (3)   Block arrangements.
         (a)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for 2 tiers of
lots of appropriate depth. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to water courses and commercial areas.
         (b)   Whenever practical, blocks along arterials and major collector
streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length. As a general rule, blocks
in other residential areas shall not be more than 1,000 nor less than 400 feet
in length.
         (c)   In long blocks the Plan Commission may require an easement
through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or pedestrian
walkways.
         (d)   Where blocks are developed along arterial streets and/or
highways that shall contain alleys, those alleys, shall run parallel to the
arterial and not perpendicular or radial to it so as to create an intersection
between the arterial and alley.
      (4)   Subdivision and street names.
         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or too
closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the area
covered by these regulations. The Plan Commission shall have final authority to
approve the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at the time of
preliminary plat approval.
         (b)   Street names shall not duplicate any existing name within the
area covered by these regulations except where a new street is a continuation
of an existing street. Street names that may be spelled differently but sound
the same as existing streets shall not be used.
         (c)   The Plan Commission shall have final authority to name all
streets (in case of conflict) upon recommendation of the Building Committee at
the time of the preliminary plat approval.
      (5)   Public sites and open spaces.
         (a)   Where it is determined that a proposed park, playground, school
or other public use as shown on the local government's plan is located in whole
or in part within a proposed subdivision, sufficient area for the public use
shall be dedicated to the public or reserved and offered for public purchase.
If within 10 years of plat recording, the purchase is not agreed on, the
reservation shall be cancelled or shall automatically cease to exist.
         (b)   Existing natural features which add value to residential
development and enhance the attractiveness of the community shall be preserved
in the design of the subdivision.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.176 DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Monuments.
      (1)   General. All monuments shall properly set flush with the ground and
be approved by a registered land surveyor or engineer prior to the time the
Plan Commission recommends approval of the final plat.
      (2)   External boundaries.
         (a)   The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in
the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30 inches in length,
not less than 4 inches square or 5 inches in diameter, and marked on top with a
cross, brass plug, iron rod or other durable material securely embedded.
         (b)   The spacing and exact location requirements shall be established
by the Building Commissioner. The Plan Commission may amend these requirements.
      (3)   Internal boundaries. All internal boundaries and those corners and
points not covered by the preceding division (2) shall be monumented in the
field by steel or iron rods 1/2 inch in diameter or iron pipe 1 inch in
diameter and at least 24 inches long. These monuments shall be placed at all
block and lot corners, at each end of all curves (P.C. and P.T.), and at all
internal angle points as required by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Traffic-control devices.
      (1)   Street name and regulatory signs. The applicant shall install
street name signs in accordance with the Town of Beverly Shores design
standards and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices of Indiana. One
sign shall be installed at each intersection indicating the name of each street
thereat. Other regulatory signs shall be the responsibility of the Town of
Beverly Shores.
      (2)   Warning signs and other devices. Local government shall be
responsible for the installation of all warning signs and other traffic control
devices, except when warranted in commercial areas, the developer may be
required to pay the cost.
   (C)   Streets and roads.
      (1)   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location,
width and improvement to accommodate expected traffic and afford satisfactory
access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation and road maintenance
equipment, and to coordinate street development so as to compose a convenient
system, avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties and assure compatibility
with long range comprehensive plans, all streets shall be designed according to
the geometric standards set forth in these regulations.
      (2)   Principles of design. Subdivision street design shall follow
regulations for this purpose adopted by the Town Council of Beverly Shores.
   (D)   Drainage facilities.
      (1)   General. The Plan Commission shall not recommend for approval any
plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for a storm or
flood water runoff. The drainage system shall be separate and independent of
any sanitary sewerage system. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is
not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than
400 feet in any gutter. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each
lot and block.
      (2)   Requirements for storm sewers. The applicant may be required by the
Plan Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch, any spring or surface
water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of, the subdivision.
These drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where
feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width. Drain
facilities shall be provided under driveways so that the flow of water in
ditches is not impeded.
      (3)   Flood plain areas. The Plan Commission shall, when it deems
necessary for the health, safety or welfare of the present and future
population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage and
sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property
which lies within the floodplain. Any approvals within the floodplain shall, at
a minimum, meet the requirements of the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.
      (4)   Drainage easement. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, the subdivider shall provide a
storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the
lines of the watercourse, and of a width and construction as will be acceptable
to the Building Commissioner. The easement shall be adequately monumented, and
whenever possible it is desirable that the drainage be maintained by open
channel with landscaped banks.
   (E)   Water facilities.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or
create a water supply system capable of providing water for domestic use and
fire protection.
         (b)   The location of all water supply improvements, shall be shown on
the preliminary plat, and the cost of providing and installing same shall be
included in the performance bond.
      (2)   Individual wells and central water systems.
         (a)   In low-density zoning districts and in outlying or rural areas
where a public water system is not available, in the discretion of the Plan
Commission, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in
a manner so that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every
lot in the subdivision.
         (b)   Individual wells and central water systems shall be sampled and
approved by the appropriate health authorities.
   (F)   Sewage facilities.
      (1)   General. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a
manner prescribed by the Porter County Board of Health and subject to the
specifications, rules, regulations and guidelines of the Porter County Board of
Health.
      (2)   High-density Residential and Nonresidential Districts. Sanitary
sewer facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewer systems. Sewers shall
be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by appropriate
local officials and agencies. No individual disposal system or treatment plants
(private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted.
      (3)   Low and medium-density Residential Districts. Sanitary sewer
systems shall be constructed as follows.
         (a)   Where a public sanitary sewer system is reasonably accessible
(as determined by the Plan Commission) the applicant shall connect with same
and provide sewers to each lot in the subdivision.
         (b)   Where public sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably
accessible but will become available within a reasonable time not to exceed 15
years the applicant may choose to install 1 of the following alternatives:
            1.   Central sewage system with the maintenance cost to be assessed
against each property benefitted. Where plans for future public sanitary sewer
systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, mains in
conformance with plans and ready for connection to future sewer mains; or
            2.   Individual sewage disposal systems, provided the applicant
shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals and mains to a point in the
subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall
be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the individual dwellings to the street
line and a connection shall be available in each dwelling to connect from the
individual disposal system to the sewer system when the public sewers become
available. These sewer systems shall be appropriately capped until ready for
use.
         (c)   Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and
will not become available within an estimated 15-year period, the applicant may
install sewage systems as follows.
            1.   Medium-density Residential Districts shall have a central
sewage system. No individual disposal system will be permitted. The Commission
may however, where plans exist for a public sewer system to be built beyond a
period of 15 years, require that the applicant install all sewer lines,
laterals and mains in conformance with the plans and ready for connection to
the public sewer mains.
            2.   Low-density Residential Districts may have individual sewage
disposal systems or a central sewage system can be used.
      (4)   Mandatory connections to public sewers. If a public sanitary sewer
is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon
a property, the owner thereof shall be required to connect to the sewer for the
purpose of disposing of waste. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant
to maintain upon the property an individual sewage disposal system.
      (5)   Individual disposal system requirements. Minimum lot areas shall
conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and individual septic
systems shall conform to the requirements of the Porter County Health
Department requirements.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.177 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land
shall make a provision as the Plan Commission may require.
      (2)   A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all requirements
of site plan approval set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Site plan approval and
nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the
direction of the Commission.
      (3)   A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the
requirements of these regulations, as well as additional standards required by
the Commission, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards
established in the Comprehensive Plan and other plans of the Town of Beverly
Shores.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   In addition to the principles and standards in these regulations,
which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the street (parcel or
block) pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and
takes into account other uses in the vicinity.
      (2)   The following principles and standards shall be observed:
         (a)   Each nonresidential area or parcel shall be shown and marked on
the plat as to its intended use;
         (b)   Proposed parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the
types of development anticipated; and
         (c)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Town Council with
respect to the street, curb, driveway and sidewalk design and construction.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.178 SPECIFICATIONS FOR TECHNICAL REVIEW.
   (A)   General. The following items are required for the technical
conference:
      (1)   Location and description of property:
         (a)   Location of property by street, block and adjacent subdivisions
(with block and lot numbers) as applicable shall be specified or in the case of
unsubdivided properties, location by township range and section (metes and
bounds); and
         (b)   Size of tracts in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square
feet.
      (2)   Information as to ownership:
         (a)   Name(s), address(s) and telephone number(s) of the legal or
beneficial owner(s) of the property;
         (b)   Description of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements
affecting the property; and
         (c)   Listing of any existing covenants on the property.
   (B)   Drawing showing existing features. A hand-drawn sketch at a scale of
approximately 50 feet to the inch shall show information for the property which
is proposed to be subdivided, and for adjoining properties for a distance of
not less than 500 feet, which will include:
      (1)   A general layout of streets, blocks and lots for the entire tract
under control of the subdivider;
      (2)   Identification of any general area to be set aside for schools,
parks or other community facilities;
      (3)   Identification of sites for uses other than single-family
dwellings; and
      (4)   General indications of how the subdivision is to be provided with
water service, sanitary sewers and storm drainage.
   (C)   Supplemental information:
      (1)   The boundary of the property and its true relationship to the
right-of-way of the existing road(s) upon which it may border;
      (2)   The location and name of all adjacent subdivisions, if any, and
names of owners of adjacent unsubdivided property;
      (3)   Present zoning classification;
      (4)   The location, width and type of use of any existing roads, rights-
of-way, easements or other special purpose areas within the property, or
immediately adjacent thereto, the location of towers, poles or other structures
in connection with electric transmission lines;
      (5)   Approximate location of any existing underground utilities, such as
sewers, water mains, storm drains, gas or oil transmission lines and the like,
within the property or immediately adjacent thereto, with approximate pipe size
and directions of slope; and
      (6)   (a)   Existing topography with suitable contour intervals, giving
bench marks, not greater than 5 feet, together with drainage channels, streams,
springs, flood zones, rock outcrops, buildings, wooded areas or other features
likely to affect the plan.
         (b)   The source and accuracy of the topographic details shown on the
plan shall be in terms of U.S.G.S. data and/or field survey.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.179 PRIMARY PLAT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The primary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or
engineer at a scale of not more than 1 inch equals 100 feet.
      (2)   It may be prepared in pen or pencil and the sheets shall be
numbered in sequence if more than 1 sheet is used.
      (3)   All sheets shall be of a size as is acceptable for filing in the
office of the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 34 by 44 inches.
      (4)   The map prepared for the preliminary plat may be drawn on tracing
cloth or reproducible Mylar.
   (B)   Name:
      (1)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision;
and
      (2)   Proposed name, if not within a previously platted subdivision.
   (C)   Ownership:
      (1)   Name(s) and address(s), including telephone number(s), of legal or
beneficial owner(s) or agent of property;
      (2)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property;
      (3)   Existing covenants on the property, if any; and
      (4)   Name and address, telephone number and registration number of the
professional engineer and surveyor responsible for subdivision design, for the
design of public improvements and for surveys.
   (D)   Description:
      (1)   Location of property by lot or section, township, range and county
(metes and bounds); and
      (2)   Graphic scale, north arrow and date shall be included.
   (E)   Features:
      (1)   Location of property line, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses and existing wooded areas or trees 12
inches or more in diameter, measured 4 feet above ground level; location, width
and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within the
tract;
      (2)   The location of property with respect to surrounding property and
streets, including the names of all adjoining property owners of record, the
names of adjoining developments and names of adjoining streets;
      (3)   Location, size, invert elevations and slopes of existing sewers,
water mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract and
existing permanent buildings and utility poles on the tract;
      (4)   Approximate topographic contours shown at 5-foot intervals in
rolling or hilly terrain and 2-foot intervals in level terrain, referenced to
sea level datum and an established bench mark;
      (5)   The approximate location and width of proposed streets;
      (6)   Proposals for a means of providing water supply and sanitary waste
disposal and treatment; preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging
surface water drainage;
      (7)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of all proposed or
existing lots;
      (8)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use,
or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision;
      (9)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the local officials to
find and appraise features of the proposed layout of the field, if needed;
      (10)   Whenever the primary plat covers only a part of the applicant's
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit at the scale of no more than 1
inch equals 500 feet, a sketch of the entire holdings, including the proposed
subdivision area, showing an indication of the probable future street and
drainage systems, for the remaining portion of the tract; and
      (11)   (a)   A vicinity map showing streets and other general development
of the surrounding area.
         (b)   The primary plat shall show all school and improvement district
lines with the districts properly designated.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.180 SECONDARY PLAT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The secondary plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor
or engineer at a scale of not more than 1 inch equals 100 feet.
      (2)   It shall be prepared in pen and ink and the sheets shall be
numbered in sequence if more than 1 sheet is used.
      (3)   All sheets shall be of a size as is acceptable for filing in the
office of the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 34 by 44 inches.
      (4)   The map prepared for final plat shall be drawn on tracing cloth or
reproducible Mylar.
   (B)   Features. The secondary plat shall show the following:
      (1)   The dimensions of all boundary lines of the property expressed in
feet and hundredths of a foot, the bearings of all lines to a minimum of 1/
2 minute;
      (2)   The location, width or size of existing streets, easements, water
bodies and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings,
parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and culverts, as determined by the
Plan Commission;
      (3)   The location and width of all proposed streets, easements, alleys
and other public ways and proposed street rights-of-way and building setback
lines;
      (4)   The locations, dimensions and areas of all proposed or existing
lots including dimensions of all lot lines expressed in feet and hundredths of
a foot, and bearings of all lines to a minimum of 1/2 minute;
      (5)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of dedication or
reservation;
      (6)   The name and address of the owner of land to subdivided; the name
and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner; and the name and
address of the land surveyor or engineer. Also, citation of last instrument
conveying title to each parcel of property involved, giving grantor, grantee,
date and land record reference;
      (7)   The date, north arrow and scale;
      (8)   Sufficient data acceptable to the Building Commissioner to
determine readily the location, bearing and length of lines for reproduction of
lines upon the ground;
      (9)   The location of all proposed and existing monuments;
      (10)   Name of the subdivision;
      (11)   Indication of the use of any single-family residential lot and all
uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider;
      (12)   Lots shall be consecutively numbered, and blocks shall be lettered
in alphabetical order;
      (13)   The plat should include the following notations:
         (a)   Explanation of drainage easements (if any);
         (b)   Explanation of site easements (if any);
         (c)   Explanation of reservations (if any); and
         (d)   Endorsement of owner with date and signature.
      (14)   A block or space shall be set aside on the final plat in the
following form for endorsement by the Commission President:
            Approved by Resolution of the __________________ Plan Commission.
             _______________ ________
               President Date
              _______________ ________
               ATTEST: Secretary Date
      (15)   The lack of information under any item specified herein, or
improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be cause for disapproval
of a final plat.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.181 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements to
be installed by the subdivider. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than
50 feet to the inch, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the
preliminary plat.
   (B)   The following shall be shown:
      (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center
lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads,
the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within 100
feet of the intersection, shall be shown, plus approximate radii of all curves,
lengths of tangents and central angles on all streets;
      (2)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross
sections of all proposed streets at 100 foot stations shall be shown at 5
points as follows: One line at right angles to the center line of the street;
each property line; and points 25 feet inside each property line;
      (3)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross section
of street pavements including curbs and gutters; sidewalks, drainage easements,
servitudes, rights-of-way and catch basins; the location of street signs; the
location, size and invert elevations and of existing proposed sanitary sewers,
storm water drains and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or
proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, or other
underground utilities or structures;
      (4)   Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, drains, easements, water bodies, streams, floodplains and other
pertinent features within the proposed subdivision;
      (5)   Topographic at the same scale as the preliminary plat with a
contour interval of 2 feet, referred to sea level datum. All datum provided
shall be latest applicable U.S. Coast Guard and Geodetic Survey datum and
should be so noted on the plat;
      (6)   All specifications and references required by the local
government's construction standards and specifications, including a site
grading plan for the entire subdivision; and
      (7)   Title(s), name(s), address(s) and signature(s) of registered
engineer and land surveyor, and date.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.182 TOWN OWNERSHIP OF ALL INSPECTED AND APPROVED STREET AND WATER MAIN
EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any street extension, pavement installation, or water main
extension is constructed to the town's streets or water system by someone other
than the town, the person or entity constructing the extension or installation
shall have plans and specifications therefor prepared and stamped by an
engineer licensed to practice in the State of Indiana, which plans and
specifications are to be included with the application for a building permit.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to issuing a building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall verify that the plans and specifications meet or exceed the standards set
therefor by the town, and that written approval, as appropriate, of the
Michigan City Water Department or any other government agency has been obtained
for the construction or installation.
      (2)   Issuance of the building permit shall be evidence that the Building
Commissioner has approved the plans and specifications and obtained copies of
the other necessary approvals.
   (C)   As necessary during construction, and, in any event, before any
covering of the work has taken place, the Building Commissioner shall inspect
the construction and verify compliance with the approved plans and
specifications.
      (1)   The Building Commissioner shall either issue a written approval of
the construction or installation or a written description of any deficiencies
in the construction or installation.
      (2)   Any such deficiencies must be cured promptly.
      (3)   A failure to do so may be considered by the Building Commissioner
to be cause to stop all construction on the related project until such
deficiencies are cured.
   (D)   Upon completion of the above described construction or installation
and the issuance of written approval thereof by the Building Commissioner and
any other necessary government agency, the street extension, new pavement, and
installed water main shall, without more, become the property and
responsibility of the town or, in the case of an installed water main, the
Michigan City Water Department after it acquires ownership of the town's water
delivery system.
   (E)   (1)   Nothing in this section relieves any person or entity from
complying with any and all laws, rules, regulations and ordinances applicable
to their building project, or to grant the Building Commissioner or anyone else
the power to waive any such compliance.
      (2)   It is the sole responsibility of the permittee to determine the
means and methods for any construction and/or installation, and to insure that
all design, construction and installation work is done in conformance with all
applicable laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
   (F)   (1)   No occupancy permit shall be issued unless the Building
Commissioner has certified, in writing, that he or she has verified that the
complete project has been constructed in compliance with this section, all
relevant permits, and all applicable laws, rules, regulations and ordinances.
      (2)   The written verification is to be placed in the town's record for
that project and a copy given to the permittee.
(Ord. 09-03, passed 3-16-2009) Penalty, see §
155.999
Cross-reference:
   Water, see Ch.
50
   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch.
153
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 155.195 PURPOSE; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Residents of Beverly Shores have chosen to live in the community
because Beverly Shores is relatively free of smoke odors, vibrations, loud
noises and other irritants which often characterize a more urban environment.
   (B)   The purpose of these performance standards herein listed is to ensure
that Beverly Shores rural character is maintained.
   (C)   The performance standards of this subchapter are part of the general
standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.196 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING A PERMIT.
   (A)   Before issuing any building permit or certificate of occupancy, the
Building Committee shall be given detailed information by the applicant
sufficient to enable the Committee to determine that all performance standards
of this subchapter shall be complied with at all times.
   (B)   This information shall include:
      (1)   The extent to which the proposed use shall produce waste products,
conditions or external effects which are regulated or otherwise limited by this
subchapter;
      (2)   The type and location of any abatement devices or recording
instrument used to control or measure conformity with any of the standards set
forth herein; and
      (3)   Other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the
Building Committee to reach a determination.
   (C)   All information and evidence submitted in or with an application for a
building permit or a certificate of occupancy that the proposed use will
conform with the performance standards set forth herein shall constitute a
warranty and an agreement on the part of the applicant that the proposed use
can and will conform to these standards at all times.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.197 NOISE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No operation or activity directly under the control of person, firm or
corporation using property in Beverly Shores shall cause or create noise in
excess of the sound level standards listed in division (B) below.
   (B)   At no point on the boundary of a Residential or Commercial District
shall the sound pressure level of any individual operation exceed the decibel
levels in any 1 of the designated octave bands shown hereafter.
Octave Band Cycles per Maximum Permitted in      Maximum Permitted in Decibels
Second                 Decibels Along Commercial Along Residential District
                       District Boundaries       Boundaries
Octave Band Cycles per Maximum Permitted in      Maximum Permitted in Decibels
Second                 Decibels Along Commercial Along Residential District
                       District Boundaries       Boundaries
20-75                  79                        72
75-150                 74                        67
150-300                66                        59
300-600                59                        52
600-1200               53                        45
1200-2400              47                        40
2400-4800              41                        34
above 480              39                        32
 
   (C)   (1)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band analyzer manufactured according to standards prescribed
and calibrated to the preferred frequencies prescribed by the American
Standards Association.
      (2)   The flat network slow meter response of the sound level meter shall
be used. Impulsive type noises shall be measured with an Impact Noise Analyzer,
and the peak values so measured shall not exceed the sound pressure levels in
the appropriate table by more than 3 decibels. The reference level for the
decibel is 0.0002 microbar.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.198 EXEMPTIONS FROM NOISE REGULATIONS.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level
regulations:
   (A)   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., noises customarily
resulting from construction work for any activities conducted pursuant to a
building permit;
   (B)   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., noises customarily
resulting from construction work, which are not subject to the requirement to
obtain a building permit under §
155.059(D), and noises customarily resulting from the maintenance of grounds;
   (C)   The noises of safety signals, burglar alarms, emergency valves,
warning devices, aircraft and railroads and snow removal; and
   (D)   Church bells, chimes and carillons.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983; Am. Ord. 2021-09, passed 7-20-2021)
§ 155.199 AIR POLLUTION REGULATIONS.
   No operation or activity directly under the control of the property user
shall cause or create air pollution in excess of the standards prescribed
herein:
   (A)   Dust. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from
sources such as storage areas, yards, driveways and roads shall be kept to a
minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, wetting and other
acceptable means;
   (B)   Smoke density. The emission of smoke of a density greater than No.2 on
the Ringlemann Chart (as published by the United States Bureau of Mines) is
prohibited except that smoke not exceeding a density of No. 3 on the Ringlemann
Chart may be emitted for not to exceed 6 minutes during any 8-hour period;
   (C)   Odors. No emissions of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be
permitted at or beyond the lot lines in any Residential or Commercial District;
   (D)   Toxic or noxious matter. No emission will be permitted which would be
demonstrably injurious to human health, or animal or plant life common to the
region or at or beyond the lot line. Where an emission could be produced as a
result of accident or equipment misfunction, adequate safeguards considered
standard for safe operation in the activity involved shall be taken; and
   (E)   Emissions. In addition to the performance standards herein specified,
the emission of smoke or particulate matter, as determined by standards
accepted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, in a manner or
quantity as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort
or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.200 VIBRATION REGULATIONS.
   No operation or activity under the control of the property user other than
well drilling or railroad train operations shall cause or create vibration in
excess of the limits herein permitted.
   (A)   Permitted vibration levels. Vibration levels may not exceed those
shown in either column of the following table when measured at the lot line, or
at any point in any Residential District outside the lot, respectively.
 
Vibration               Maximum Particle Velocity Maximum Particle Velocity in
                        at Lot Line               Residential District
Steady vibrations       0.015                     0.003
Impulsive vibrations    0.030                     0.006
Intermittent vibrations 0.075                     0.015
 
   (B)   Measurement.
      (1)   Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument
capable of simultaneously measuring in 3 mutually perpendicular directions.
      (2)   Particle velocity is to be determined by the formula 8.2 FA, where
F is the frequency of the vibration in cycles per second and A is the maximum
single amplitude displacement of the vibrations in inches.
      (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, STEADY VIBRATIONS are vibrations
in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute.
      (4)   Vibrations in discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute
but exceed 8 per 24 hours shall be considered IMPULSIVE VIBRATIONS.
      (5)   Vibrations in discrete impulses which do not exceed 8 per 24-hour
period shall be considered INTERMITTENT.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.201 HEAT AND GLARE REGULATIONS.
   No operation or activity under the control of the property user shall cause
or generate heat or glare in excess of the limits provided herein:
   (A)   Heat. Every use and activity shall be so operated that it does not
raise the ambient temperature at or beyond any lot line more than 2°F; and
   (B)   Glare. In addition to the standards imposed by particular use district
regulations, no operation shall, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
cause illumination in excess of 0.05-foot candles at a point 40 feet from the
street line in a Residential District.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.202 ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE REGULATIONS.
   No operation or activity under the control of the property user shall cause
or create electromagnetic interference affects at any point in the operation of
any equipment other than that belonging to the creator of the interference or
that violates any regulation of the Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.203 NUISANCES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing,
leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of the
following items, conditions or actions are hereby declared to be and constitute
a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or
construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
         (a)   Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk or other abandoned
materials, metals, lumber or other things;
         (b)   Any human-made condition which provides harborage for rats,
mice, snakes and other vermin;
         (c)   Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated
condition that it is unfit for human habitation; kept in an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity
thereof; or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the
vicinity where it is located;
         (d)   All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations;
         (e)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as
conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of like odors and stenches;
         (f)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a
reasonable time after death;
         (g)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal
or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other
substances;
         (h)   Any building, structure or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained;
         (i)   Any unnatural accumulation of stagnant water permitted or
maintained on any lot or piece of ground with the exception of wetlands;
         (j)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;
         (k)   The unauthorized obstruction of any public street, road or
sidewalk; or
         (l)   Any abandoned vehicle, unlicensed vehicles, abandoned trailer or
unlicensed trailer or boat.
      NUISANCE. The doing of an unlawful act, or the omitting to perform a
duty, or the suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist,
which act, omission, condition or thing either:
         (a)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;
         (b)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk,
stream, ditch or drainage;
         (c)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of
property; or
         (d)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
   (B)   Prohibited. Any person who causes, permits, maintains or allows the
creation or maintenance of a nuisance shall be punishable as provided in §
155.999.
   (C)   Notice to abate. Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the
town, a duly designated officer of the town may give written notice to the
owner or occupant of the property upon which the nuisance exists or upon the
person causing or maintaining the nuisance as provided in §
155.999.
   (D)   Contents of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the
provisions of this subchapter shall contain:
      (1)   An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a
stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstance;
      (2)   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
      (3)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance; and
      (4)   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the town may abate the
nuisance and assess the cost thereof against the person.
   (E)   Service of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served as
authorized by law and provided in §
155.999.
   (F)   Abatement by town. Upon failure of the person upon whom notice to
abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this section to abate
the same, a duly designated officer or employee of the town may proceed to
abate the nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the
abatement thereof.
   (G)   Recovery of town’s costs.
      (1)   Any and all costs incurred by the town in the abatement of a
nuisance under the provisions of this section shall constitute a lien against
the property upon which the nuisance existed and shall be certified by the
Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor who shall cause the costs to be placed
upon the tax duplicate of the owner(s) of the property and the costs shall then
be collected from the owner as other taxes are collected.
      (2)   In addition, the costs shall be a debt which may be collected by
the town in an appropriate civil action.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
Statutory reference:
   Power of town to correct conditions which are in violation of ordinances,
see I.C. 36-1-6-2
§ 155.204 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The regulations of this subchapter shall be enforced in the same
manner as all other provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition, however, and without any limitation upon the foregoing,
the regulations of this subchapter may also be enforced through the procedures
in §§
155.205(B) through
155.206.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.205 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Application of performance standards. After the effective date of this
chapter:
      (1)   Any use established or changed to, and any building, structure or
land developed, constructed or used for any permitted principal use, or any use
permissible as a special exception, or any accessory use, shall comply with all
of the performance standards herein set for the district involved;
      (2)   If any existing use or building or other structure is extended,
enlarged or reconstructed, the performance standards for the district involved
shall apply with respect to the extended, enlarged or reconstructed portion or
portions of the use, building or other structures; and
      (3)   Within periods as listed below, all presently existing uses of
lands, buildings or other structures shall comply with the performance
standards herein: within a reasonable time in light of the nature of the
violation in the Residential District and within 1 year in the Commercial
District.
   (B)   Administration of performance standards; intent concerning
determinations involved in administration and enforcement of performance
standards.
      (1)   Determinations necessary for administration and enforcement of
performance standards set forth herein range from those which can be made with
satisfactory accuracy by a reasonable person using normal senses and no
mechanical equipment to those requiring great technical competence and complex
equipment for precise measurement.
      (2)   It is the intent of this chapter that:
         (a)   Where determination can be made by the Building Commissioner
using equipment normally available to the town or obtainable without
extraordinary expense, determinations shall be so made before notice of
violation is issued; and
         (b)   Where technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it
unreasonable for the town to maintain the personnel or equipment necessary for
making difficult or unusual determinations, procedures shall be available for
causing corrections of apparent violations of performance standards, for
protecting individuals from arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable
administration and enforcement of performance standard regulations and for
protecting the general public from unnecessary costs for administration and
enforcement.
   (C)   Performance standards relating to emission of smoke, fire and
explosive hazards where flash point of flammable materials is known, humidity,
heat, glare and electromagnetic interference.
      (1)   If the Building Commissioner finds, after making determinations in
the manner set forth in §§
155.197 through
155.202 that there is violation of performance standards relating to emission
of smoke, fire and explosive hazards where flash point of flammable materials
is known, humidity, heat, glare or electromagnetic influence, he or she shall
take or cause to be taken lawful action to cause correction to within the
limits set by the performance standards.
      (2)   Failure to obey lawful orders concerning the correction shall be
punishable as provided in §
155.065.
   (D)   Performance standards relating to measurement of particulate matter,
vibration, noise, fire and explosive hazards where flash point of flammable
materials is not known, toxic or noxious matter, odorous matter and radiation
hazards.
      (1)   If, in the considered judgment of the Building Commissioner there
is probable violation of the performance standards as set forth in §§
155.197 through
155.202 concerning emission of particulate matter, vibration, noise, fire and
explosive hazards where flash point of flammable materials is not known, toxic
or noxious matter, odorous matter or radiation hazards the following procedure
shall be followed.
         (a)   The Building Commissioner shall give written notice, by
registered mail to the person or persons responsible for the alleged violation.
         (b)   The notice shall describe the particulars of the alleged
violation and the reasons why the Building Commissioner believes there is a
violation in fact, and shall require an answer or correction of the alleged
violation to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner within a reasonable
time limit set by the Building Commissioner, taking into account weather
conditions.
         (c)   The notice shall state and it is hereby declared, that failure
to reply or to correct the alleged violation to compliance with this chapter
within the time limit set constitutes admission of violation of the terms of
this chapter.
         (d)   The notice shall further state that upon request of those to
whom it is directed, technical determinations as described in this chapter will
be made, and that if violations as alleged are found, costs of the
determinations shall be charged against those responsible for the violation, in
addition to other penalties as may be appropriate, but that if it is determined
that no violation exists, the cost of the determination will be paid by the
town.
         (e)   If there is no reply within the time limit set, but the alleged
violation is corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner, he or
she shall note “violation corrected”on his or her copy of the notice and shall
retain it among his or her official records, taking other action as may be
warranted.
         (f)   If there is no reply within 30 days of receiving the letter
(thus establishing admission of violation) and the alleged violation is not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner within the time
limit set, he or she shall proceed to take or cause to be taken action as is
warranted by continuation of a violation after notice to cease.
         (g)   If a reply is received within the time limit set indicating that
the alleged violation will be corrected to the satisfaction of the Building
Commissioner, but requesting additional time, the Building Commissioner may
grant an extension if he or she deems it warranted in the circumstances of the
case and if the extension will not, in his or her opinion, cause immediate
peril to life, health or property.
         (h)   If reply is received within the time limit set requesting
technical determination as provided in this chapter and if the alleged
violations continue, the Building Commissioner may call in properly qualified
experts to make the determinations. If expert findings indicate violation of
the performance standards, the costs of the determination shall be assessed
against the properties or persons responsible for the violation, in addition to
other penalties as may be appropriate under the terms of §
155.065.
      (2)   If no violation is found, the costs of the determinations shall be
paid by the town without assessment against the properties or persons involved.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.206 ESCROW DEPOSIT.
   (A)   When new or altered commercial use or occupancy is proposed that may,
in the opinion of the Building Committee, involve a possible violation of the
regulations of this subchapter, then the Building Commissioner shall, as a
condition precedent to the issuing of a permit for the use or occupancy,
require the deposit in escrow of $1,000 for a period of 1 year from the date of
the new or altered use or occupancy.
   (B)   If, during the 1-year period, the Building Committee believes there is
reasonable probability that the regulations of this subchapter are being
violated they may employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform
measurement, investigations and analysis to determine whether or not the
regulations of this subchapter are being violated, and they may pay their
reasonable fees out of the aforementioned escrow deposit, regardless of the
outcome of the investigation.
   (C)   If the reasonable fees of the technician or technicians exceed the
amount of any available escrow deposit, and if a violation of this subchapter
is discovered, the fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as,
and in addition to, the penalties otherwise provided for the violation of this
chapter. Escrow deposits or remainders of escrow deposits shall be returned to
the depositor at the expiration of the escrow period.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
WETLAND PROTECTION
§ 155.220 TITLE, FACT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Title. This subchapter may be cited as the Beverly Shores Wetland
Protection Ordinance.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The wetlands of Beverly Shores are indispensable and fragile
natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding,
erosion and soil imitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve humans and
nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water
quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; shoreline erosion
control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and
recreation opportunities.
      (2)   A considerable number of these important natural resources have
been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building,
pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses may, over time,
destroy remaining wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public
safety and the general welfare.
      (3)   It is therefore necessary for Beverly Shores to ensure maximum
protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities in wetlands and
those activities at adjacent upland sites that may adversely affect wetlands
and to encourage restoration of already degraded or destroyed systems.
   (C)   Purpose.
      (1)   It is the policy of Beverly Shores to:
         (a)   Encourage or require planning to avoid or minimize damage to
wetlands wherever prudent or feasible;
         (b)   Require that activities not dependent upon a wetland location be
located at upland sites;
         (c)   Allow wetland losses only where all practicable measures have
been applied to reduce those losses that are unavoidable and in the public
interest;
         (d)   Provide for compensation in the form of wetland restoration or
creation to offset further losses; and
         (e)   Provide for the protection of wetlands under additional
ordinances already adopted by Beverly Shores.
      (2)   Furthermore, activities must not threaten public safety or cause
nuisances by:
         (a)   Blocking flood flows, destroying flood storage area or
destroying storm barriers, thereby raising flood heights or velocities on other
land and increasing flood damages;
         (b)   Causing water pollution through any means, including location of
waste water disposal systems in wet soils, unauthorized application of
pesticides, herbicides and algaecides; disposal of solid wastes or storm water
runoff at inappropriate sites; or the creation of unstabilized fills;
         (c)   Increasing erosion; or
         (d)   Increasing runoff of sediment and storm water.
      (3)   In addition, it is the policy of Beverly Shores that activities in
or affecting wetlands do not destroy natural wetland functions important to the
general welfare by:
         (a)   Decreasing breeding, spawning, nesting, wintering, feeding or
other critical habitat for fish and wildlife, including rare, threatened and
endangered plant and animal species and commercially and recreationally
important wildlife;
         (b)   Interfering with the exchange of nutrients needed by fish or
other forms of wildlife;
         (c)   Decreasing groundwater recharge;
         (d)   Destroying sites needed for education and scientific research as
outdoor biophysical laboratories, living classrooms and training areas;
         (e)   Interfering with public rights in waters and the recreation
opportunities for fishing, boating, hiking, bird watching, photography, camping
and other activities in wetlands; or
         (f)   Destroying aesthetic and property values.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.221 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUFFER. A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area established or managed
to protect wetlands from human disturbances.
   CREATION. A human activity bringing a wetland into existence at a site in
which it did not formerly exist.
   FUNCTIONS. The beneficial roles wetlands serve, including storage,
conveyance and attenuation of flood waters and storm waters; groundwater
recharge and discharge; protection of water quality and reduction of sediment
and erosion; production of waterfowl, game and nongame birds, mammals and other
living resources; protection of habitat for rare, threatened and endangered
species; food chain support for a broad range of wildlife and fisheries;
educational, historical and archeological value protection; and scenic,
aesthetic and recreational amenities.
   HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION. Macrophytic plant life growing in water or a
substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of
excessive water content.
   IN-KIND. The restoration or creation of a wetland with vegetation and other
characteristics closely approximating those of a specific wetland.
   OFF SITE. Restoration or creation of a wetland at a location not adjacent to
(or within 25 feet of) a previous, specified wetland.
   ON SITE. Restoration or creation of a wetland adjacent to (or within 25 feet
of) a previous, specified wetland.
   OUT-OF-KIND. The restoration or creation of a wetland with vegetation or
other characteristics not resembling those of a specified wetland.
   PRACTICABLE ALTERNATIVE. An alternative to the proposed project that would
accomplish the basic purpose of the project and avoid or have less adverse
impact on a wetland.
   REGULATED ACTIVITY. An activity with a significant impact on wetlands,
including:
      (1)   The removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel,
minerals, organic matter or materials of any kind;
      (2)   The changing of existing drainage characteristics, sedimentation
patterns, flow patterns or flood retention characteristics;
      (3)   The disturbance of the wetland water level or water table by
drainage, impoundment or other means;
      (4)   The dumping or discharging of material, or the filling of a wetland
with material;
      (5)   The placing of fill or the grading or removal of material that
would alter existing topography;
      (6)   The driving of piles, placement of obstructions and erection or
repair of buildings or structures of any kind;
      (7)   The destruction or removal of plant life that would alter the
character of a wetland; and
      (8)   The conduct of an activity that results in a significant change of
water temperature, a significant change of physical or chemical characteristics
of wetland water sources or the introduction of pollutants.
   RESTORATION. A human activity that returns a wetland or former wetland from
a disturbed or altered condition with lesser acreage or functions to a previous
condition with greater wetland acreage or functions.
   WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.222 LANDS TO WHICH SUBCHAPTER APPLIES.
   (A)   Wetland District.
      (1)   This subchapter shall apply to all lands in or within 25 feet of a
wetland located within the jurisdiction of Beverly Shores. Areas shown on the
official wetlands map as being wetlands are presumed to be wetlands consistent
with the definitions thereof.
      (2)   Wetlands not shown on the official wetlands map are presumed to
exist in Beverly Shores and are hereby designated to be within the wetlands and
are protected under all of the terms and provisions of this subchapter. The
official wetlands map shows only the general location of wetlands and should be
consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands before
engaging in a regulated activity.
      (3)   The official wetlands map, together with all explanatory matter
thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be
a part of this subchapter. The official wetlands map shall be on file in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (B)   Rules for interpretation of wetland district boundaries.
      (1)   The boundaries of a wetland shall ordinarily be determined by the
applicant through the performance of a field survey applying the wetland
definition.
      (2)   The official wetlands map is to be used as a guide to the general
location of wetlands.
      (3)   The applicant is required under §
155.225(B) to show a wetland boundary on a scaled drawing submitted as part of
the permit application.
      (4)   Wetland delineations shall be performed in accordance with the
procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands and any subsequent amendments thereto. Evidence
documenting the results of the boundary survey may be required by the Beverly
Shores Plan Commission.
      (5)   The Beverly Shores Building Commissioner, when requested by the
applicant, may waive the delineation and, in the applicant, may waive the
delineation and, in lieu of direct action by the applicant, perform the
delineation.
         (a)   The Beverly Shores Building Commissioner may use remote sensing,
hydrologists, soil scientists or other experts as needed to perform the
delineation.
         (b)   The applicant may be charged for costs incurred in accordance
with the provisions of §
155.225(B).
      (6)   Where the Beverly Shores Building Commissioner performs a wetland
determination at the request of the applicant, the applicant may appeal the
determination to the Beverly Shores Plan Commission which shall have the
authority to review the evidence presented to the Beverly Shores Building
Commissioner and to obtain additional information as it deems necessary to
review the Beverly Shores Building Commissioner's determination. The decision
of the Beverly Shores Plan Commission shall be considered a final
determination.
      (7)   Where the applicant has provided a determination of the wetland
boundary, the Beverly Shores Plan Commission shall verify the accuracy of, and
may render adjustments to, the boundary delineation.
      (8)   In the event the adjusted boundary delineation is contested by the
applicant, the Beverly Shores Plan Commission may attempt to set mutually
agreeable boundaries; or, when an attempt is unsuccessful, shall, at the
applicant's expense, obtain competent expert services to render a final
delineation.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.223 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Permit requirements, compliance.
      (1)   No activity in or within 25 feet of a wetland may be conducted
without a permit from the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals and full
compliance with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations.
      (2)   All activities that are not permitted as of right or as special
permit uses shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Temporary emergency permit.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter or any other law
to the contrary, the Beverly Shores Building Commissioner may issue a temporary
wetlands permit through oral or written authorization, provided a written
permit is accomplished within 5 days, if he or she deems that an unacceptable
threat to life or severe loss of property will occur if an emergency permit is
not granted.
      (2)   The emergency permit may be terminated at any time without process
upon a determination by the Beverly Shores Building Commissioner that the
action was not or is no longer necessary to protect human health or the
environment.
      (3)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may, within 90 days of
the emergency permit, require that the action be reconsidered as an after-the-
fact permit, subject to any or all of the terms and provisions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The Beverly Shores Plan Commission, its agents, officers and
employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the
purpose of performing their duties under this subchapter and may take or cause
to be made examinations, surveys or sampling as the Beverly Shores Plan
Commission deems necessary.
      (2)   The Beverly Shores Plan Commission shall have authority to enforce
this subchapter; a permit issued thereto; and a violation or threatened
violation thereof by violation notices, administrative orders and civil and
criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with these actions
may be recovered as damages against the violator.
      (3)   Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers
shall have authority to assist the Beverly Shores Plan Commission in
enforcement.
      (4)   Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation
of any provision of this subchapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined
no more than $20,000, which may be amended from time to time by the Town
Council, for each offense. Each violation of this subchapter shall be a
separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance shall be deemed to be separate and distinct offense.
      (5)   (a)   In the event of a violation, the Beverly Shores Plan
Commission shall have the power to order wetland restoration and creation
measures for the damaged or destroyed wetland area by the person or agent
responsible for the violation.
         (b)   If the responsible person or agent does not complete these
measures within a reasonable time following the order, the Town of Beverly
Shores may restore the affected wetland to its prior condition and create or
restore other wetlands for the purpose of offsetting losses sustained as a
result of the violation. The person or agent responsible for the original
violation shall be liable to the Town of Beverly Shores for the cost of those
actions.
      (6)   To guide restoration and creation actions, the Beverly Shores Plan
Commission shall have the power to order the violator to develop a plan as
described in §
155.225(H) for the approval of the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
      (1)   It is not intended that this subchapter repeal, abrogate or impair
any existing state and federal laws, regulations, easements, covenants and deed
restrictions.
      (2)   However, where this subchapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.
   (E)   Interpretation. The provisions of this subchapter shall be held to be
minimum requirements in their interpretation and application and shall be
liberally construed to serve the purposes of this subchapter.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.224 USES BY RIGHT; SPECIAL PERMIT USES IN WETLAND.
   (A)   Uses by right. The following uses shall be allowed as a right within a
wetland to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or
law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or
dredging except as provided herein or authorized by special permit:
      (1)   Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish,
shellfish and other wildlife;
      (2)   Outdoor recreational activities, including fishing, trapping, bird
watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, swimming and canoeing;
      (3)   The harvesting of wild crops, such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, wild
rice, berries, tree fruits and seeds in a manner that is not injurious to
natural reproduction of crops and provided the harvesting does not require
alteration of the wetland by changing existing wetland water conditions or
sources, tilling of soil or planting of crops:
      (4)   Education, scientific research and nature trails; and
      (5)   Uses by right that do not require a special permit and that may
involve filling, flooding, draining, dredging, ditching or excavating to the
extent specifically provided herein: maintenance or repair of lawfully located
roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to
provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph,
telecommunication or other services, provided that the roads, structures or
facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice prior to
the commencement of work has been given to the Beverly Shores Plan Commission
and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to
ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological
characteristics of the wetland, are not impaired and that any adverse effect on
the aquatic environment will be minimized.
   (B)   Special permit uses. Regulated activities other than those specified
in division (A) above may not be conducted except upon application to the
Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals and issuance of a special permit.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.225 STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Special permits.
      (1)   Application for a special permit to conduct a regulated activity
shall be made in duplicate to the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals on
forms furnished by that office. Permits shall ordinarily be valid for a period
of 1 year from the date of issue and shall expire at the end of that time
unless a longer period is specified by the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning
Appeals upon issuance of the permit.
      (2)   An extension of an original permit may be granted upon written
request to the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals by the original permit
holder or the successor in title.
      (3)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may require additional
hearings if, in its judgment, the original intent of the permit is altered or
extended by the renewal or if the applicant failed to abide by the terms of the
original permit.
      (4)   The request for renewal of a permit shall follow the same form and
procedure as the original application except that the Beverly Shores Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have the option of not holding a hearing if the original
intent of the permit is not altered or extended in any significant way.
   (B)   Permit applications.
      (1)   Unless the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals waives 1 or more
of the following information requirements, applications for a special permit
for a regulated activity shall include:
         (a)   The purposes of the project and an explanation of why the
proposed activity requires a wetland location or access to wetlands, or cannot
be located at other sites;
         (b)   A site plan drawn to scale showing the wetland boundary as
determined by field survey, the width, depth and length of all existing and
proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainage ways; water, waste water
and storm water facilities; utility installations within 200 feet of a wetland;
and the relationship of the proposed activity and any potentially affected
wetland to the entire parcel of land owned by the applicant;
         (c)   A description of the wetland or wetlands that will be affected
by the regulated activity, including a sketch plan at the scale of 1 inch
equals 10 feet for the wetland within 200 feet of the site; the area that may
be filled or impacted, vegetation type; wetland water sources; and a general
characterization of the habitat, wildlife and common plants;
         (d)   Soil types on the site and the exact locations and
specifications for all proposed draining, filling, grading, dredging and
vegetation removal, including the amounts and methods;
         (e)   Adjacent land use; and
         (f)   Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the
site at contour intervals of no greater than 5 feet.
      (2)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may require additional
information, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Documentation and evidence of a wetland boundary determination
by field survey;
         (b)   An assessment of wetland functional characteristics;
         (c)   Documentation of the ecological, aesthetic, economic or other
values of a wetland;
         (d)   A study of flood, erosion or other hazards at the site;
         (e)   Evidence of any protective measures that might be taken to
reduce those hazards; and
         (f)   Any other information deemed necessary to verify compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of
the purposes of this subchapter.
      (3)   Any person who wants to know whether a proposed activity or an area
is subject this subchapter may request in writing a determination from the
Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals. A request for determination shall
contain plans, data and other information as may be specified by the Beverly
Shores Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   (a)   At the time of an application or request for determination,
the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the Beverly Shores Board of
Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   Filing fees, which may be amended from time to time by the Town
Council, of up to $2,500 may be required to evaluate the application or request
for determination.
         (c)   These fees may be used to retain expert consultants who will
provide services pertaining to wetland boundary determinations, functional
assessment and mitigation measures, as deemed necessary by the Beverly Shores
Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (5)   Upon receipt of the completed application, the Beverly Shores Board
of Zoning Appeals shall notify the individuals and agencies having jurisdiction
over or an interest in the matter including the Army Corps of Engineers, the
Environmental Protection Agency and the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management to provide individuals and agencies an opportunity to comment.
      (6)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals shall establish a
mailing list of all interested persons and agencies who wish to be notified of
the applications.
   (C)   Public hearing and recommendations.
      (1)   No later than 60 days after receipt of the permit application and
after at least 10 days advance notice of the hearing has been published in 2
newspapers in Porter County representing the 2 political parties receiving the
highest number of votes in Beverly Shores in the last preceding election for
the Secretary of State and posted at the Beverly Shores Town Hall and the
Beverly Shores Post Office and mailed certified mail return receipt requested
to the record owners of property within 300 feet of the applicant's property,
the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the
application, unless the Beverly Shores Building Commissioner finds that the
activity is so minor as to not affect the wetland and the Beverly Shores Board
of Zoning Appeals concurs.
      (2)   (a)   All hearings shall be open to the public.
         (b)   Minutes of the hearing shall be made.
         (c)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the final
determination on all special permit applications.
      (3)   Any person may present evidence and testimony at the hearing. At
the hearing, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
proposed activity will be in accordance with the purposes of this subchapter
and the standards set forth below.
   (D)   Standards for special permits. The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning
Appeals, after according consideration to the comments of the general public,
other affected municipalities and counties and federal and state agencies with
jurisdiction over the area in question, shall issue a wetland permit only if it
is found that the regulated activity is determined to be in the public interest
in accordance with §
155.225(F) below and that the applicant has demonstrated by a preponderance of
the evidence that the regulated activity:
      (1)   Is water-dependent or requires access to the wetland as a central
element of its basic function, or is not water-dependent but has no practicable
alternative;
      (2)   Will result in minimum feasible alteration or impairment to the
wetland's functional characteristics and its existing contour, vegetation, fish
and wildlife resources and hydrological conditions;
      (3)   Will not jeopardize the continued existence of species that appear
on federal or state rare, threatened or endangered species lists;
      (4)   Will not cause significant degradation of groundwater or surface-
water quality;
      (5)   Complies with all applicable state, local and federal laws,
including those related to sediment control, pollution control, floodplain
zoning and on-site waste water disposal;
      (6)   Will provide a wetland buffer area of not less than 25 feet between
the wetland and upland activities for those portions of a regulated activity
that need not be conducted in the wetland; and
      (7)   Complies with other standards contained in this subchapter,
including those pertaining to wetland creation and restoration as required.
   (E)   Practicable alternative test.
      (1)   For all permit applications, an alternative site for the proposed
activity shall be considered practicable if it is available and the proposed
activity can be carried out on that site after taking into consideration costs,
existing technology, infrastructure and logistics, in light of overall project
purposes.
      (2)   There is no practicable alternative if the applicant demonstrates
all of the following to the satisfaction of the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning
Appeals:
         (a)   The basic purpose of the project cannot reasonably be
accomplished using 1 or more other sites in the general region that would avoid
or result in less adverse impact on a wetland;
         (b)   The basic purpose of the project cannot be accomplished by a
reduction in the size, scope, configuration or density of the project as
proposed or by changing the design of the project in a way that would avoid or
result in fewer adverse effects on the wetland; and
         (c)   In cases where the applicant has rejected alternatives to the
project as proposed due to constraints such as inadequate zoning,
infrastructure or parcel size, the applicant has made reasonable attempts to
remove or accommodate such constraints.
   (F)   Public interest test. In determining whether a proposed regulated
activity in any wetland is in the public interest, the Beverly Shores Board of
Zoning Appeals shall consider the following:
      (1)   The extent of the public need for the proposed activity;
      (2)   The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects
that the proposed regulated activity may have on the public and private uses
for which the property is suited;
      (3)   The quality of the wetland that may be affected and the amount of
wetland to be disturbed;
      (4)   The economic value of the proposed regulated activity to the
general area; and
      (5)   The ecological value of the wetland and probable impact on public
health and safety, fish, plants and wildlife.
   (G)   Special use permit conditions.
      (1)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may attach conditions to
the granting of a special use permit as deemed necessary to carry out the
purposes of this subchapter.
      (2)   These conditions may include but are not limited to:
         (a)   Limitations on minimum lot size for any regulated activity;
         (b)   Requirements that structures be elevated on piles and otherwise
protected against natural hazards;
         (c)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
         (d)   Imposition of operational control, sureties and deed
restrictions concerning future use and subdivision of lands, such as flood
warnings, preservation of undeveloped areas in open space use and limitation of
vegetation removal;
         (e)   Dedication of easements to protect wetlands;
         (f)   Establishment of vegetated buffer zones separating and
protecting the wetland from proposed activities;
         (g)   Erosion control and storm water management measures;
         (h)   Setbacks for structures and restrictions on fill, deposit of
soil and other activities in the wetland;
         (i)   Modification in project design to ensure continued water supply
to the wetland and circulation of water;
         (j)   Creation or restoration of an area of wetland; and
         (j)   Development of a plan to guide actions involving the creation of
a new wetland or the restoration of a damaged or degraded wetland.
      (3)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may require a bond in an
amount and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the
conditions and limitations set forth in the permit.
      (4)   The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be
consistent with the purposes of this subchapter. In the event of a breach of
any condition of any bond, the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may
institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon the bond and
prosecute the same to judgment and execution.
   (H)   Wetland restoration and creation.
      (1)   As a condition of a permit issued or as an enforcement action under
this subchapter, the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may require that
the applicant engage in the restoration or creation of wetlands in order to
offset, in whole or in part, the losses resulting from an applicant's or
violator's actions.
      (2)   In making a determination of whether a like requirement will be
imposed, and if so, the degree to which it would be required, the Beverly
Shores Board of Zoning Appeals will consider the following:
         (a)   The long and short-term effects of the action upon the wetland
and associated aquatic ecosystem, and the reversible or irreversible nature of
the impairment or loss;
         (b)   The type and benefit of the wetland functions and associated
resources lost;
         (c)   The type, size and location of the wetland altered, and the
effect it may have upon the remaining system or watershed of which the wetland
is a part;
         (d)   Observed or predicted trends with regard to the gains or losses
of this type of wetland in the watershed, in light of natural and human
processes;
         (e)   The cost and likely success of the possible compensation
measures in relation to the magnitude of the proposed project or violation; and
         (f)   The degree to which the applicant has demonstrated a good-faith
effort to incorporate measures to minimize and avoid wetland impacts within the
proposed project.
      (3)   The applicant or violator may prepare or be required by the Beverly
Shores Board of Zoning Appeals to develop a wetland restoration or creation
plan for review and approval of the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals. The
creation or restoration of wetlands shall not be an alternative to the
standards set forth in division (D) above but shall be used only to compensate
for unavoidable losses.
      (4)   The plan should state the location, by metes and bounds
description, of the proposed site; ownership; size, type and complete
ecological assessment (flora, fauna, hydrology, wetland functions and the like)
of the wetland being restored or the area where a new wetland will be created;
and the natural suitability of the proposed site for establishing the
replacement wetland (i.e., water source and drainage patterns, topographic
position, wildlife habitat opportunities, value of the existing area to be
converted and the like).
      (5)   In addition, plane view and cross-sectional, scaled drawings;
topographic survey data, including slope percentage and final grade elevations;
and other technical information are required in sufficient detail to explain,
illustrate and provide for:
         (a)   Soil and substrate conditions; topographic elevations; grading
and excavation; erosion and sediment control needed for wetland construction
and long-term survival;
         (b)   Planting plans specifying plant species types, quantities,
locations, size, spacing or density; source of plant materials, propagules or
seeds; timing, season, water and nutrient requirements for planting; and where
appropriate, measures to protect plants from predation;
         (c)   Water-quality parameters, water source, water depths, water-
control structures and water-level maintenance practices needed to achieve the
necessary ambient water conditions and hydrocycle/hydroperiod characteristics;
         (d)   Mid-course corrections and a 3-year monitoring and replacement
plan establishing responsibility for removal of exotic and nuisance vegetation
and permanent establishment of the wetland system and all its component parts;
and
         (e)   A demonstration of fiscal, administrative and technical
competence of sufficient standing to successfully execute the overall project.
   (I)   Wetland restoration and creation alternatives.
      (1)   Ordinarily, the applicant or violator shall undertake restoration
or creation efforts on or adjacent to the site where permanent losses have been
sustained or where restoration of a former wetland is possible. Replication
“in-kind” of the impacted wetland will be the preferred alternative for
creation or restoration efforts.
      (2)   Where the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals that this approach is infeasible due to
technical constraints, such as parcel or wetland size or wetland type, or that
a wetland of a different type or location is strongly justified based on
regional needs or the functional value of the impacted wetland, the Beverly
Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may accept or recommend an alternative proposal.
      (3)   The proposal may involve monetary compensation as provided for in
this section or the creation or restoration “out-of-kind” and “off site.”
      (4)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals shall set reasonable
fees for compensation of wetland losses based upon the amount that would be
required to perform on-site, in-kind restoration or creation.
      (5)   Where the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals determines that
the public interest is better served, the Beverly Shores Board of Zoning
Appeals may require a fee in lieu of direct action on behalf of the applicant
or violator to initiate restoration or creation projects.
      (6)   The fees shall be held in escrow for the express use of wetland
creation and restoration projects and shall not be commingled with other funds.
   (J)   Suspension; revocation.
      (1)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals may suspend or revoke a
permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or
limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set
forth in the permit.
      (2)   The Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals shall cause notice of
its denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a
permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the
area wherein the wetland lies.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.226 NONCONFORMING ACTIVITIES.
   A regulated or use activity that was lawful before the passage of this
subchapter, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter, may be continued subject to the following.
   (A)   No activity shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in any way
that increases its value at the time of its becoming a nonconforming structure,
unless the structure is permanently changed to a conforming use.
   (B)   No structural alteration or addition to any nonconforming structure
over the life of the structure shall exceed 50% of all its value at the time of
its becoming a nonconforming structure, unless the structure is permanently
changed to a conforming use.
   (C)   If a nonconforming use or activity is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months, any resumption of the activity shall conform to this subchapter.
   (D)   If any nonconforming use or activity is destroyed by human activity or
an act of God, it shall not be resumed except in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter.
   (E)   Activities or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall be
not entitled to continue as nonconforming activities.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.227 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   All final decisions of Beverly Shores Board of Zoning Appeals
concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a special permit shall
be reviewable in the Porter Circuit Court.
   (B)   Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, Town Council
of the Town of Beverly Shores may, within the time specified by the court,
elect to:
      (1)   Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to
acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land;
      (2)   Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or
conditions; or
      (3)   Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall
within the jurisdiction of the Town Council.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.228 AMENDMENTS.
   These regulations and the official wetlands map may from time to time be
amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes
and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding
or botanical species peculiar to wetlands become available.
(Ord. 208, passed 12-19-1983)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the fine provisions in §§
10.97 and
10.98.
CHAPTER 156: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
156.01   Incorporated by reference
§ 156.01 INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Comprehensive Plan for Beverly Shores is incorporated by reference as if
set forth in full herein. The entire Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from
time to time, is available for review by the general public in the Office of
the Clerk-Treasurer during regular office hours.
(Ord. 2012-11, passed 6-15-2012)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   STREETS, EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
II.   CONTRACTS AND FRANCHISES
      
III.   TAX AND FINANCE
      
IV.   PROPERTY AND AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: STREETS, EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
90-4  4-16-  Vacates portions of north-south alley lying between Broadway and Eaton Avenue
      1990
90-8  10-15- Opposes inclusion of Beverly Drive for U.S. 12 scenic road
      1990
92-02 2-17-  Supports renovation and repair of Calumet Bike Trail for recreational use
      1992
92-04 5-19-  Vacates a portion of alley running north and south between Atwater Avenue and
      1992   Stillwater Avenue
94-03 7-11-  Vacates a portion of alley locates south of Wilson Avenue, and which abuts Lots
      1994   1, 2 and a part of 21
95-03 7-10-  Vacates a portion of a platted utility easement located north of Stillwater
      1995   Avenue
95-04 8-14-  Vacates a portion of an alley located south of Ripplewater Avenue
      1995
95-05 9-11-  Vacates a portion of an alley located between Leewater and Fairwater Avenues
      1995
95-06 9-11-  Vacates a portion of a public way; the easternmost 10 feet of Derby Avenue,
      1995   beginning at its intersection with Fairwater Avenue
96-02 3-18-  Vacates a platted street in Block 207, north of Lot 20
      1996
97-01 1-20-  Vacates alley on the east side of Broadway between Stillwater and Ripplewater
      1997
97-08 7-21-  Vacates alley at Lots 5, 6 and 7, Block 10, Bartlett’s Unit A
      1997
98-02 1-19-  Vacates several streets, rights-of-way, roads, alleys and public ways; a
      1998   requirement of a land exchange
88-04 10-17- Vacates easement; all of Lot 7 and Lot 8 except the southwesterly 72.74 feet as
      1998   measured on the northerly and southerly lot lines in Block 89
      10-19- Vacates a portion of an alley; the easternmost 10 feet of Derby Avenue,
98-08 1998   beginning at its intersection with Lake Front Drive at the northwest corner of
             Lot 26 in Block 134
99-10 12-20- Vacates an alley located 125 feet west of Broadway commencing with its
      1999   intersection and the 50 feet adjacent to west side of Lot 4
2000- 5-22-  Vacates a public way; the easternmost 10 by 20-foot section of Wilson Avenue
4     2000   adjacent to Lot 1
02-01 4-15-  Vacates a platted public alleyway which abuts Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 20, in
      2002   Block 6 in Frederick H. Bartlett’s Unit A
03-01 3-17-  Vacates alley in Block 190, west of Lot 8, east of Lot 9, south of Cornada
      2003   Avenue and north of Lots 15 and 16
03-02 4-21-  Vacates the alley adjacent to Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 (on the west) and
      2003   Lot 18 (on the east) in Block 191
03-05 7-21-  Vacates a portion of the alley in Block 191 lying east of lots 1, 2 and 3 and
      2003   west of Lots 22 and the north 30 feet of Lot 21
04-03 6-21-  Vacates the alley in Lake Shore Unit 3, Block 191, west of Lot 19, east of Lots
      2004   8 and 9
06-05 9-18-  Vacates the alley in Lake Shore Unit 3, Block 191, west of Lots 18 and 19, east
      2006   of Lots 10 and 11
08-10 11-17- Vacates an 8-foot wide portion of the utility easement lying near the end of Lot
      2008   1 and Lot 2 in Block 16 of Frederick H. Bartlett's Beverly Shores Unit A.
09-07 6-15-  Vacates an 8-foot wide portion of the utility easement lying near the end of
      2009   Lots 39, 40 and 41 in Block 16 of Frederick H. Bartlett's Beverly Shores Unit A.
2014- 3-17-  Vacates a 16-foot wide utility easement; Lots 30 through 33 in Block 10 in
02    2014   Frederick H. Bartlett’s Beverly Shores Unit “A”
2017- 1-16-  Vacates a 20-foot wide alley along the west line of Lots 4 and 5 lying between
01    2017   the south line of Lot 4 extended and the north line of Lot 5 extended, in Block
             130 of Frederick H. Bartlett’s Beverly Shores Unit “F.”
2019- 8-20-  Vacating all that portion of a platted 20-foot wide alley beginning at the
06    2019   southeast corner of Lot 33, Block 131 of Frederick H. Bartlett's Beverly Shores
             Unit F.
             Vacating the 16-foot wide platted utility and drainage easement running east to
2021- 8-17-  west and lying between Lake Front Drive and Fairwater Avenue, described as
10    2021   follows: the south 8 feet of Lots 18 and 19, Block 134, and the north 8 feet of
             Lots 33, 34, and 35 in Block 134, both in Frederick H. Bartlett's Beverly Shores
             Unit F.
            
 
TABLE II: CONTRACTS AND FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
47 (84-13)  9-9-1960    Approves an electric franchise, grant and contract with
                        Northern Indiana Public Service Company
49 (84-14)  9-9-1960    Approves a gas franchise, grant and contract with
                        Northern Indiana Public Service Company
158 (84-27) 5-21-1979   Approves a street lighting contract; with Northern
                        Indiana Public Service Company
90-1        2-19-1990   Awards a non-exclusive franchise for a cable
                        communications system to U.S. Cable of Northern Indiana
96-02       7-15-1996   Induces a non-exclusive cable television franchise with
                        Multimedia Cablevision
                        Grants franchise to Multimedia Cablevision, Inc. to
97-02       1-20-1997   construct, operate and maintain a broadband
                        telecommunications network in certain areas in the town
                        Grants a franchise to Tar River Communications, Inc. to
97-02       2-17-1997   construct, operate and maintain a broadband
                        telecommunications network in certain areas in the town
98-05       5-18-1998   Consents to the assignment of the cable television
                        system franchise held by Tar River Communications, Inc.
 
TABLE III: TAX AND FINANCE
 
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
2012- 4-16-  Re-establishes the tax levy for the town’s Cumulative Capital Development
03    2012   Fund
2012- 6-18-  Re-establishes the tax levy for the town’s Cumulative Capital Development
05    2912   Fund to $.04 per each $100 assessed value
2013- 3-18-  Re-establishes the tax levy for the town’s Cumulative Capital Development
1     2013   Fund to $.04 per each $100 assessed value with taxes assessed for 2013 and
             payable in 2014
2014- 7-21-  Re-establishes the tax levy for the town’s Cumulative Capital Development
03    2014   Fund to $.04 per each $100 assessed value with taxes assessed for 2014 and
             payable in 2015
2015- 6-15-  Re-establishes the tax levy for the town’s Cumulative Capital Development
04    2015   Fund to $.04 per each $100 assessed value with taxes assessed for 2015 and
             payable in 2016
 
TABLE IV: PROPERTY AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
39          Provides for the renaming of that area known as Town Park, to Lithuania
(B)  - -    Park, in honor of the fiftieth anniversary of the independence of
(84-        Lithuania
12)
23   4-2-   Makes appropriation for the purchase of certain real estate and
(84- 1951   buildings in the town, to be used as a Town Hall and buildings for the
6)          housing of the Fire Department and the road machinery
187  4-2-
(84- 1982   Divides town into 5 wards
24)
89-  6-15-  Supports the extension of reservations of use and occupancy in the
06   1989   Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore
90-  4-28-  Quit-claim deed of Lot 1, in Block 161 in Frederick H. Bartlett’s Park
03   1990   Addition; Lot 4 in Block 6; Lot 7 in Block 127; Lot 24 in Block 48; and
            Blocks 31 and 35
92-  1-20-  Opposes acquisition and development of Greco property
01   1992
99-  2-15-  Provides for regulation of temporary fences within the town
01   1999
01-  3-19-  Provides for regulation of temporary fences within town; amends Ord. 99-
08   2001   01
03-  6-2-   Regards the preliminary determination to enter into a lease, approving a
04   2003   form of lease and related matters
03-  6-16-  Regards the execution of a lease relating to the lease of the Town Hall
05   2003   and the financing and of the construction of a water distribution system
04-  5-17-  Town adopts Keystone Consulting Services, Inc. financial software
02   2004   systems
04-  6-21-  Provides for the regulation of temporary fences within the town
01   2004
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section                                Code Section
1-1-1-5                                     10.04
1-1-1-7                                     10.12
1-1-1-8                                     10.07
1-1-4-5                                     10.06
1-1-5-1                                     10.11
1-1-6-1                                     10.09
Ch. 3                                       31.09
3-5-2-40.1                                  31.09
5-3-1-1                                     155.006
5-3-1-1 et seq.                             155.156
5-11-1-27                                   30.10
5-11-10 et seq.                             10.35
5-11-10-2                                   32.10
5-11-13-1                                   30.09,
                                            31.09
5-13-5 et seq.                              10.35
5-13-5-5                                    10.35
5-14-3-8                                    30.04
5-22                                        30.09,
                                            30.20
6-1.1-41 et seq.                            35.07
6-3.5-7-13.1(c)(1)                          35.12
6-3.5-7-13.1(c)(2)(A)–6-3.5-7-13.1(c)(2)(K35.12
6-7-1-31.1                                  35.11
7.1-1-3-5                                   70.04
7.1-1-3-13                                  70.04
8-14-14-6(a)(3)                             35.12
8-14-16-5                                   35.12
8-16-3                                      35.07
8-23-4                                      93.07
8-23-5                                      35.14
9-13-2-1                                    93.02
9-13-2-1(2)                                 93.07
9-13-2-8                                    93.02
9-13-2-16                                   93.02
9-13-2-63                                   93.02
9-13-2-105                                  70.04
9-13-2-121(c)                               93.02
9-13-2-122                                  93.02
9-13-2-136                                  93.02
9-13-2-144                                  93.02
9-13-2-150                                  70.04
9-13-2-179                                  93.02
9-13-2-196(d)                               93.02
9-17                                        93.02
9-18-12                                     93.03
9-22-1-1                                    93.03
9-22-1-2                                    93.02
9-22-1-4(a), (b), (e)                       93.04
9-22-1-5                                    93.05
9-22-1-7                                    93.05
9-22-1-8                                    93.05
9-22-1-11                                   93.07
9-22-1-12                                   93.07
9-22-1-13(a), (b)                           93.07
9-22-1-14                                   93.07
9-22-1-18                                   93.07
9-22-1-19                                   93.08
9-22-1-31                                   93.09
9-22-1-32                                   93.10
9-24-3                                      70.02
9-24-4                                      70.02
14-8-169                                    91.03
14-8-2-202.5                                91.03
14-8-2-305                                  91.03
14-9-1                                      150.45
14-27-6-48                                  35.07
14-28-1                                     150.45
14-33-14                                    35.07
22-13-2                                     152.11
22-13-2-2                                   152.01
24-14                                       93.05
24-14-10-1                                  93.05
24-14-15                                    93.05
31-6-4-15.7                                 131.02
31-37-1 et seq.                             131.99
31-37-2-5                                   131.03
31-37-3-2                                   131.01
31-37-3-3                                   131.01
31-37-3-3.5                                 131.02
31-37-6-6                                   131.03
31-37-19-27                                 131.02
32-5-25 et seq.                             155.135
33-36-2-1                                   36.01
35-2-4.1 et seq.                            30.06
35-23-4.1                                   30.06
35-44-1-3                                   30.09
35-47-2 et seq.                             30.06
35-47-2-3                                   10.99,
                                            30.06
36-1-3-1 et seq.                            152.01
36-1-3-8(a)(8)-(10)                         10.97
36-1-4-11                                   150.01
36-1-5                                      Adopting Ordinance
36-1-5-4                                    152.02
36-1-6-2                                    155.203
36-1-7                                      35.12
36-1-8-2                                    30.23
36-1-8-3                                    30.22
36-1-8-11                                   10.32
36-1-12                                     30.09
36-4-18-4                                   33.05
36-5-2-8                                    33.03
36-5-4 et seq.                              10.35
36-5-6-3                                    33.02
36-5-6-4                                    33.02
36-5-6-5                                    33.03
36-5-6-7                                    33.04
36-7-1-100 et seq.                          34.03
36-7-4                                      150.01
36-7-4-101–36-7-4-1213                    155.035
36-7-4-401 et seq.                          155.029
36-7-4-901 et seq.                          34.04
36-7-4-1003                                 155.161
36-7-4-1016                                 155.159,
                                            155.161
36-7-9                                      151.01
36-7-9-2                                    151.04
36-7-9-4(a)                                 151.04
36-7-9-4(b) and (c)                         151.04
36-7-9-4.5                                  151.04
36-7-14                                     34.56,
                                            34.57
36-7-14.5-7                                 34.56
36-7-14.5-7                                 34.65,
                                            34.66
36-7-25                                     34.56,
                                            34.57
36-7.5                                      35.12
36-8-2-3                                    34.05
36-8-3-4                                    34.21-
                                            34.23
36-8-3-4.1                                  34.19
36-9-15.5 et seq.                           35.07
36-9-16-2                                   35.11
36-9-16-3                                   35.11
36-9-25-11                                  51.01
36-9-30-21                                  51.01
36-10-3-13                                  34.42
36-10-3-18                                  35.01
36-10-3-28                                  34.41
                                            
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
05-11    - -         130.02
96-02    - -         10.17
90-6     8-27-1990   30.01
95-07    11-13-1995  30.02
2000-05  12-12-2000  50.03
02-02    2-18-2002   130.01
02-04    4-15-2002   Ch. 73, Sch. II
04-08    1-6-2004    130.02
11-06    6-20-2011   51.03
2012-09  6-18-2012   31.09
2012-10  6-18-2012   30.09
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
-             - -         10.17,
                          31.08
18            - -         33.01
39(B) (84-12) - -         TSO IV
84-14         - -         10.17
84-27         - -         10.17
84-28         - -         10.17
84-34         - -         10.17
92-07         - -         71.06
97-02         - -         10.17
97-06         - -         10.17
99-02         - -         Ch. 73, Sch. I
2000-05       - -         35.03
05-08         - -         153.03
4             7-21-1947   91.03,
                          91.99
20            8-21-1950   91.03,
                          91.99
21            3-19-1951   154.01-
                          154.09
23 (84-6)     4-2-1951    TSO IV
28            12-18-1953  110.10
34            4-13-1956   34.03
35            5-11-1956   34.04
39            2-8-1957    91.01
47 (84-13)    9-9-1960    TSO II
49 (84-14)    9-9-1960    TSO II
85            6-12-1971   34.44-
                          34.46
93            12-27-1971  34.05
119           5-19-1975   35.11
130           8-30-1976   51.02
78            4-16-1979   51.02
158 (84-27)   5-21-1979   TSO II
174           10-27-1980  152.13
                          70.01,
                          71.01–
179           4-20-1981   71.06,
                          71.98,
                          72.01,
                          72.02
184           11-16-1981  30.06
186           2-15-1982   30.05
187 (84-24)   4-2-1982    TSO IV
191           8-9-1982    153.04
194           10-7-1982   51.01
                          152.01,
195           11-5-1982   152.02,
                          152.04–
                          152.12
199A          5-16-1983   34.15–
                          34.26
205A          11-21-1983  32.03–
                          32.09
207           12-19-1983  51.01
                          10.17,
                          155.001–
                          155.004 ,
                          155.007,
                          155.025–
                          155.042,
                          155.056–
                          155.067,
                          155.080–
                          155.090,
208           12-19-1983  155.105–155.115,
                          155.130–
                          155.139,
                          155.150–
                          155.161,
                          155.175–
                          155.181,
                          155.195–
                          155.206,
                          155.220–
                          155.228
217           7-15-1985   TSO II
232           3-23-1987   TSO I
88-1          8-15-1988   91.03
89-1          3-16-1989   70.03
89-4          5-15-1989   70.02
89-06         6-15-1989   TSO IV
89-10         9-18-1989   51.02,
                          51.99
90-1          2-19-1990   TSO II
                          Ch. 73, Schs.
90-2          4-16-1990   I &
                          II
90-4          4-16-1990   TSO I
90-03         4-28-1990   TSO IV
90-8          10-15-1990  TSO I
                          111.01,
91-03         7-1-1991    111.02,
                          111.05–
                          111.09
92-01         1-20-1992   TSO IV
92-02         2-17-1992   TSO I
92-04         5-19-1992   TSO I
92-05         6-22-1992   30.03
92-2          7-8-1992    33.05
93-01         2-8-1993    70.05
                          150.01,
                          150.03–
                          150.05,
                          150.07,
                          150.08,
93-04         11-8-1993   150.13,
                          150.46,
                          150.47,
                          150.49,
                          150.68,
                          150.99
94-03         7-11-1994   TSO I
                          36.01–
94-06         11-14-1994  36.04,
                          51.01
94-09         11-14-1994  153.02
95-03         7-10-1995   TSO I
95-04         8-14-1995   TSO I
95-05         9-11-1995   TSO I
95-06         9-11-1995   TSO I
96-02         3-18-1996   TSO I
                          92.01,
96-04         5-13-1996   92.03–
                          92.06
96-05         6-15-1996   35.08
96-02         7-15-1996   TSO II
96-12         7-15-1996   71.06
96-11         12-16-1996  35.09
97-01         1-20-1997   TSO I
97-02         1-20-1997   TSO II
97-02         2-17-1997   TSO II
97-04A        3-17-1997   35.10
97-08         7-21-1997   TSO I
98-02         1-19-1998   TSO I
98-03         5-18-1998   Ch. 73, Sch. I
98-04         5-18-1998   Ch. 73, Sch. II
98-05         5-18-1998   TSO II
98-04         6-15-1998   30.20
98-05         7-20-1998   30.21
88-3          10-17-1998  91.02,
                          91.99
88-04         10-17-1998  TSO I
98-08         10-19-1998  TSO I
99-01         2-15-1999   TSO IV
99-03         6-30-1999   34.27
99-05         8-6-1999    35.06
99-04         9-20-1999   31.02
99-10         12-20-1999  TSO I
2000-03       4-17-2000   35.04
2000-4        5-22-2000   TSO I
00-08         11-13-2000  50.01
01-08         3-19-2001   TSO IV
01-06         12-17-2001  35.05
02-05         3-18-2002   31.01–
                          31.05
02-01         4-15-2002   TSO I
03-01         3-17-2003   TSO I
03-02         4-21-2003   TSO I
03-04         6-1-2003    50.02
03-04         6-2-2003    TSO IV
03-05         6-16-2003   TSO IV
03-05         7-21-2003   TSO I
03-06         10-20-2003  34.01
03-07         10-20-2003  34.02
04-01         3-18-2004   TSO III
04-02         5-17-2004   TSO IV
04-01         6-21-2004   TSO IV
04-03         6-21-2004   TSO I
04-05         10-18-2004  50.02
04-02         12-20-2004  90.01-
                          90.04
05-04         10-17-2005  30.04
05-05         8-15-2005   35.01
05-09         12-19-2005  35.02
05-12         12-19-2005  51.01
06-02         7-17-2006   155.003,
                          155.086
06-03         8-21-2006   155.065
06-05         9-18-2006   TSO I
06-06         9-18-2006   10.99,
                          50.02
06-09         9-18-2006   35.12
06-10         12-18-2006  155.060
06-15         12-18-2006  155.003
                          150.01–
                          150.13,
                          150.30–
                          150.32,
                          150.46,
07-01         2-19-2007   150.47,
                          150.49,
                          150.50,
                          150.65–
                          150.69,
                          150.99
07-02         2-19-2007   30.22
07-03         2-18-2007   30.23
07-07         6-18-2007   155.010
07-08         9-10-2007   155.082
08-01         4-21-2008   50.01
                          10.99,
08-04         5-19-2008   50.01,
                          50.02,
                          50.03
08-06         9-15-2008   10.98,
                          30.07
08-07         10-20-2008  30.08
08-10         11-17-2008  TSO I
                          10.99,
                          155.002,
08-11         11-17-2008  155.003,
                          155.152,
                          155.158
09-02         1-26-2009   153.03
09-03         1-26-2009   155.182
09-04         4-20-2009   155.082,
                          155.083
                          10.98,
09-06         6-15-2009   10.99,
                          91.03
09-07         6-15-2009   TSO I
09-08         9-21-2009   10.99,
                          155.065
09-09         10-19-2009  10.99
09-11         11-9-2009   10.99,
                          51.01
                          10.98,
                          155.003,
                          155.040,
09-12         11-16-2009  155.042,
                          155.055,
                          155.060,
                          155.063,
                          155.064
09-14         9-21-2009   10.99,
                          155.065
10-01         2-15-2010   Ch. 73, Sch.
                          III
10-02         5-17-2009   70.02
10-03         6-21-2010   155.003,
                          155.082
10-04         6-21-2010   34.01,
                          155.033
10-05         6-21-2010   155.010
10-07         10-25-2010  155.067
11-27         11-27-2010  155.010
10-08         11-30-2010  Adopting Ordinance
10-09         11-30-2010  51.99
10-10         11-30-2010  10.99,
                          51.01
10-11         11-30-2010  10.98
10-12         11-30-2010  10.99
11-01         5-16-2011   10.99,
                          34.28
11-03         5-16-2011   10.99,
                          34.29
2011-05       12-19-2011  10.30–
                          10.35
2011-07       7-18-2011   35.07
2011-08       7-18-2011   10.99,
                          34.05
                          155.003,
                          155.034,
11-11         9-19-2011   155.037,
                          155.040,
                          155.042,
                          155.131
11-20         3-19-2011   35.13
11-21         11-21-2011  152.03,
                          155.055
11-22         11-21-2011  10.99,
                          50.02
11-24         11-21-2011  155.026
11-25         11-27-2011  10.99,
                          153.04
                          151.01–
11-26         3-11-2012   151.04,
                          151.99
2012-01       4-16-2012   10.98
                          91.15–
2012-02       4-16-2012   91.24,
                          91.99
2012-03       4-16-2012   TSO III
2012-05       6-18-2012   TSO III
2012-06       6-18-2012   91.03
2012-07       9-17-2012   Ch. 73, Sch. II
2012-08       9-17-2012   155.026 ,
                          155.027
                          10.98 ,
                          36.01 –
2012-10       11-19-2012  36.03 ,
                          Ch. 73, Schs. I  and
                          II
2012-11       6-15-2012   156.01
2012-14       12-17-2012  155.080
2013-1        3-18-2013   35.07 ,
                          TSO III
                          10.98 ,
                          36.01 –
2013-02       4-5-2013    36.03 ,
                          70.01 ,
                          Ch. 73, Schs. I  and
                          II
2013-03       4-15-2013   32.10
2013-04       7-15-2013   91.04 ,
                          91.99
13-05         7-15-2013   90.05
2013-07       7-15-2013   91.03
                          155.105 ,
2013-09       12-16-2013  155.106 ,
                          155.108 –
                          155.112
                          10.99 ,
                          70.02 ,
2014-01       2-17-2014   71.06 ,
                          91.03 ,
                          155.003
2014-02       3-17-2014   TSO I
2014-03       7-21-2014   35.07,
                          TSO III
                          155.003,
                          155.010,
                          155.029,
                          155.055,
                          155.059,
2014-04       - -         155.063,
                          155.064,
                          155.083,
                          155.086,
                          155.136,
                          155.138
2015-04       6-15-2015   35.07,
                          TSO III
                          150.01–
                          150.13,
                          150.30–
                          150.32,
                          150.46,
2015-05       8-17-2015   150.47,
                          150.49,
                          150.50,
                          150.65–
                          150.69,
                          150.99
2015-08       12-21-2015  71.06
2016-01       5-16-2016   10.99,
                          71.06
2016-02       4-18-2016   30.10
2016-03       5-16-2016   35.14
2016-04       9- -2016    130.02
2016-07       10-17-2016  35.15
2016-08       10-17-2016  71.07
                          155.040,
                          155.055,
                          155.059,
2016-11       12-19-2016  155.064,
                          155.067,
                          155.082,
                          155.086
2017-01       1-16-2017   TSO I
2017-02       1-16-2017   10.99
2017-03       2-20-2017   35.16
2017-08       9-18-2017   35.17
2017-09       9-18-2017   35.18
                          10.99,
                          110.09,
2017-13       11-20-2017  110.11,
                          110.99,
                          111.06
2017-15       12-12-2017  155.136
2018-01       5-15-2018   10.99,
                          155.064
2018-02       5-15-2018   Adopting Ordinance
2018-03       5-15-2018   155.025,
                          155.026
2018-05       7-17-2018   10.99,
                          71.07
                          10.99,
                          155.003,
2018-06       8-21-2018   155.088,
                          155.106,
                          155.110,
                          155.139
2018-11       11-20-2018  Adopting Ordinance
2018-12       12-18-2018  Ch. 73, Sch. IV
2018-13       12-18-2018  91.03
2019-02       1-15-2019   35.19
2019-03       2-19-2019   10.99
2019-04       4-16-2019   35.11
2019-06       8-20-2019   T.S.O. I
2019-07       9-17-2019   30.24
2019-11       12-17-2019  Adopting Ordinance
2020-01       2-18-2020   31.01–
                          31.09
2020-02       2-18-2020   34.04
2020-03       3-17-2020   34.55–
                          34.57
2020-04       3-20-2020   34.65,
                          34.66
2020-14       8-18-2020   35.20
2021-06       3-16-2021   34.01
2021-07       4-20-2021   35.21
2021-08       6-15-2021   10.99
                          155.003,
                          155.034,
                          155.037,
                          155.042,
                          155.055,
                          155.058,
                          155.059,
2021-09       7-20-2021   155.065,
                          155.067,
                          155.082,
                          155.086,
                          155.131,
                          155.138,
                          155.140–
                          155.145,
                          155.198
2021-10       8-17-2021   T.S.O. I
2021-14       11-16-2021  35.22
2022-03       5-17-2022   35.21
2022-06       8-16-2022   31.02
                          155.003,
2022-07       8-16-2022   155.082,
                          155.138
2022-08       8-16-2022   30.25
                          150.01–
                          150.13,
                          150.30–
                          150.32,
2022-09       9-20-2022   150.45–
                          150.50,
                          150.65–
                          150.69,
                          150.99
2023-06       12-19-2023  10.99
                          34.02,
                          34.06,
2023-08       12-19-2023  34.39–
                          34.47,
                          35.01,
                          71.06
2024-05       10-15-2024  35.23
2024-08       11-19-2024  35.24
2024-09       12-17-2024  10.99,
                          51.01
2025-02       2-18-2025   35.05
2025-04       5-20-2025   35.25
2025-07       7-15-2025   10.99
                         
 
 
