TOWN OF BUNKER HILL, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025
State legislation current through 2025 ALS Pamphlet #3
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Bunker Hill Town
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town Council.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana.
      COUNTY. Miami County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Indiana.
      TOWN. The Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana
      TOWNSHIP. Pipe Creek Township, Miami County, Indiana.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law, see I.C. 1-1-4-5
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
   (B)   (1)   Except in the case of an amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any provision or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
         (a)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with,
and so dependent upon, the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
         (b)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
      (2)   This division (B) applies to every section, regardless of whether
enacted before or after the passage of P.L. 2025-242, sec. 5. The General
Assembly may preserve the legislative history of this division (B) by adoption
of a concurrent resolution and publication of the resolution in the legislative
journals.
   (C)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) with respect to that chapter,
subchapter or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and re-enactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in and subsequently amended, the previous code
section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §      ).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
35.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Composition
   
30.02   Council members
   
30.03   Meetings
   
30.04   Agenda
   
30.05   Motions generally
   
30.06   Making or amending a motion
   
30.07   Rules of debate; decorum and ethics
   
30.08   Non-public meetings
§ 30.01 COMPOSITION.
   The Council consists of five elected or appointed members as determined by
local ordinance. Council members must reside in the town and forfeit the office
if town residency is not maintained. Persons with a felony conviction are not
permitted to hold office. There is no limitation to the number of terms that
may be served.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-5-1-10.1, 36-5-2-3 and 36-5-2-4.1
§ 30.02 COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members of the Town Council include:
      (1)   The President. The President is chosen from the elected or
appointed members of the Town Council at the first meeting in January. He or
she serves a one-year term. Duties include:
         (a)   Choosing a Vice President;
         (b)   Being the Chief Executive Officer of the town;
         (c)   Selecting Council liaisons from the members to each of the town
departments (see § 31.04);
         (d)   Being in charge of all the non-elected personnel;
         (e)   Presiding over all Town Council meetings and preserving order
and decorum;
         (f)   Being the official head of the town in all ceremonial purposes;
         (g)   Carrying out the wishes of the Council; and
         (h)   Functioning as the media spokesperson unless otherwise assigning
the duty to the Vice President or Town Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   The Vice President. In the absence of the President, the Vice
President serves in the same capacity and with the same responsibilities and
authority as the President.
   (B)   Whether elected or appointed, the members of the Town Council are
individuals who serve the public welfare. Members are to arrive on time. It is
the responsibility of each member to have his or her packet prior to the
meeting in order to be prepared to conduct town business and discuss pertinent
issues. Packets are available by 12:00 p.m. on the Friday before the Monday
meeting at the Town Hall mail room.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 30.03 MEETINGS.
   (A)   General information.
      (1)   All Town Council members are required to attend a monthly meeting,
and all other meetings called by the President. If a Town Council member moves
out of town, is convicted with a felony or wishes to resign, he or she shall
submit a resignation letter to both the Council as well as to voters
registration. The Town Council will announce to the public the vacancy and
shall notify the party’s committee. If the party’s committee does not replace
the member within 30 days, then the Town Council will vote with the majority
present for a replacement.
      (2)   All members shall be paid according to the current wage and salary
ordinance. Town Council members will be paid the pay period that directly falls
after the town’s first regular meeting of the month. Direct deposit is
available. There is also a process for those members who do not wish to
receive payment for their services.
   (B)   Regular monthly meetings.
      (1)   The Town Council will meet regularly on the second Monday of each
month in the Town Community Center. When the second Monday falls on a federal
or state holiday, the regular meetings shall be held on the following day. The
day, time and place of the meeting may be changed by a majority vote of the
Council.
      (2)   The meeting dates will be set at the first meeting of January. It
will be advertised in the local newspaper and posted at the Town Clerk-
Treasurer’s office.
      (3)   Unless otherwise voted upon by a majority of the Town Council, all
meetings will begin at 6:30 p.m. and adjourn by 8:00 p.m. If necessary or
requested, an extension can be voted on. Any extension shall be for 15 minutes
only, and no more than two 15-minute extensions shall be allowed at any one
meeting without a two-thirds’ vote of the members present to change the time of
adjournment.
   (C)   Special meetings. Special meetings are held between regular meetings.
Any member of the Town Council can request a special meeting, but the specific
business must be such that it cannot wait until the next regularly scheduled
Town Council meeting. The President decides if a special meeting is warranted
or not and has the final say in the matter. Boards are required to give
adequate notice of the special meeting and allow public attendance at such
meetings. These meetings will follow the same guidelines as the regular monthly
meeting.
   (D)   Executive meetings. Executive meetings may be called for by any
Council member and address issues involving privileged information and matters
of a private nature. Only subjects/items that are listed in I.C. 5-14-1.5-6.1
will be considered. The President decides if an executive meeting is warranted
or not and has the final say in the matter. Boards are required to give notice
of the executive meeting, but the public does not have the right to attend
these. No recordings or written minutes are kept of the proceedings, except
those used by members during the executive meeting. Discussion is kept
confidential between the Council members and the individual(s) directly
involved in the meeting. Any decisions requiring a vote will be taken at the
next Town Council meeting.
   (E)   Emergency meetings. An emergency meeting will be called if extreme
circumstances that could not have been reasonably foreseen which require
immediate attention and possible action by the Town Council and which out of
necessity make it impractical or impossible to provide notice to the public. In
the case of an emergency, whether declared on a national, state or county
level, the Town Council may postpone or cancel a meeting by the Town Council
President with a majority vote from the Town Council members by either verbal
or electronic messaging. The postponement shall be posted, if possible, on the
town’s website as soon as practicable after the vote is taken.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 30.04 AGENDA.
   (A)   The Town Council utilizes the agenda to provide an outline of the
order of business for the meeting. The Town Council maintains the right to add
or amend items from the agenda as necessary. The agenda will be posted at the
Town Clerk-Treasurer and Utility Clerk’s office door and on both doors of the
Town Hall Building. Copies of the agenda shall be made readily available to the
public during office hours at the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s office. Notice of
regular monthly meetings will be published in the local newspaper one time at
the beginning of the year. Additional meetings (special, executive or public
hearing) will be run in the newspaper no less than 48 hours prior to the day of
the meeting.
   (B)   The agenda is set by the Town Clerk-Treasurer and the Town Council
President seven days prior to the meeting. Each department is responsible to
provide its Town Council representative with its monthly report by 12:00 p.m.
on the Thursday prior to the Town Council meeting. The departments are not
required to attend the meeting, and compensation will not be given for
attendance unless their presence is required by the Town Clerk-Treasurer and/or
Town Council President. All request forms must be turned in by 12:00 p.m. on
the Thursday prior to the Town Council meeting to be considered for payment.
Late request forms will be held until the next monthly meeting.
      (1)   Call to order. The Town Council President will welcome Town Council
members and public and announce the time and state that the meeting will begin.
All cell phones are to be silenced at this time. The President will request
that all stand to face the flag and recite the Pledge of Allegiance.
      (2)   Roll call and determination of a quorum. The Town Clerk-Treasurer
will then call the roll to determine if a quorum is present and to identify the
members of the Town Council, the Town Attorney and the Town Marshal, who also
functions as Sergeant-at-Arms during the meeting. A quorum for the Town Council
is a minimum of three of the five members present. If a quorum is present, the
meeting will continue. If not, it will be determined if the absent member(s)
will be present or not. If so, the President can request a ten-minute delay,
after which the same procedure as if the absent member will not be in
attendance will be followed. If there is no quorum, the meeting will be
postponed until the following day. The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall keep his or
her minutes in a correct record of attendance of the Council members at
meetings of the Council and of all the motions/seconds and individual votes of
said Council members.
      (3)   Acceptance of minutes. The President will ask if there is a motion
to accept the minutes of the previous meeting. This requires a motion or a
second and recorded voice vote.
      (4)   Claims. At this time, claims will be reviewed by the Council
members. All claims for payment must be provided to the Town Clerk-Treasurer by
the Thursday prior to the meeting to be considered for payment. Claims received
after that time will be subject to the discretion of the Town Clerk-Treasurer
and/or Town Council President. At this time, claims will be reviewed by the
Council members. Claims can only be paid by the Town Clerk-Treasurer; no
Council member or department head can authorize payment of any bills or make
promises of payment.
      (5)   Public comments.
         (a)   The President will ask for the attendance sheet from which he or
she will know if there is anyone from the public audience who wishes to speak
or make a comment. The attendance sheet will have the date, name, address and
yes/no checkmark to indicate intention to speak. Public comments are welcome
and encouraged. The President will take public comments in the order listed. He
or she will identify the individual then ask them to address the Council. No
one may speak without the acknowledgment of the Council President. There is a
two-minute time limit for the comment, unless there are specific questions from
the Town Council for that individual on that specific topic, then one two-
minute extension will be allowed for the answer. Personal attacks of a
malicious nature will not be tolerated, and the President will order that
person to cease or risk being removed by the Sergeant-at-Arms.
         (b)   The public shall have a reasonable right to participate in any
matter being considered by the Town Council. They will be held to the same
standards of conduct and decorum as the Town Council members and subject to the
same limitations. The Council will make reasonable efforts to comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act and accommodate any other special needs of the
public. Members of the public shall have the right to bring before the Council
issues of public concern. This section does not apply to executive sessions of
the Town Council held under I.C. 5-14-1.5, the State Open Door Law, as it is
from time to time amended. Public comments will also be accepted prior to
voting on any ordinances and/or resolutions subject to the same two-minute time
limit and guidelines as for public comments.
      (6)   Unfinished business. Unfinished business, as determined by the Town
Clerk-Treasurer and/or Town Council President, is based on prior meetings. This
would include changes in the ordinance, insurance or other pertinent matters
that were not resolved at the previous meeting.
      (7)   Special business. Special business, as determined by the Town
Clerk-Treasurer and/or Town Council President, shall include reviewing
candidates for open Council seats, discussion of wage changes and employee
benefits, discussions of personnel and reading of ordinances. It shall also
include anything that is out of the ordinary for general Council meetings.
      (8)   New business. New business, as determined by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer and/or Town Council President, shall include any last minute
information or changes. Any items tabled or not acted upon shall remain on the
regular meetings agenda or special meeting if called for that particular item.
      (9)   Approval of requests. Requests received by the Town Clerk-Treasurer
by 12:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the meeting will be discussed and voted
on at this time. Requests received after Thursday at 12:00 p.m. will be held
until the following month’s meeting.
      (10)   Council reports. Each Council member will state the department he
or she oversees and provide a report, to include new or vital information that
he or she receives from his or her department head. All papers addressed to the
Town Council shall be presented by the head of the department in advance.
Pertinent information regarding the town or its citizens can be announced to
the Town Council at this time, there is a two-minute time limit for each
subject presented by a Council member.
      (11)   Department reports. Unless so ordered by the Town Clerk-Treasurer
and/or Town Council President, the department heads, representatives or
employees are not required to attend the meetings. There will be no
compensation for those who attend without a request and/or approval by the
Council President and/or Town Clerk. If a department does not have a Council
member to oversee it, the department may give its written report directly to
the Town Clerk-Treasurer by 12:00 pm. the Thursday prior to the meeting.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 30.05 MOTIONS GENERALLY.
   There are four kinds of motions: main (or principal) motions; subsidiary
motions; incidental motions; and privileged motions.
   (A)   Main/principal motions.
      (1)   These motions are made to bring any particular subject before the
group for consideration. It may take the forms of a simple motion or a
resolution. Such a motion cannot be made when any other question is before the
group, and it must give way to all other motions.
      (2)   Main/principal motions are:
         (a)   Adoption of a motion or resolution;
         (b)   Rescind or repeal a previous motion; and
         (c)   Ratify or confirm an action taken.
   (B)   Subsidiary motions.
      (1)   This motion is used to modify the principal motion or to dispose of
it in some way other than by direct vote. It must be decided before the main
motion and is considered after privileged and incidental motions.
      (2)   The subsidiary motions are:
         (a)   To postpone indefinitely;
         (b)   To amend;
         (c)   To refer to committee (commit or recommit);
         (d)   To postpone to a certain day;
         (e)   To limit or extend debate;
         (f)   To move the previous question (to stop debate); and
         (g)   To lay on the table.
      (3)   These subsidiary motions are listed here in their order of
importance to the principal motion, but must be considered in the reverse
order. Thus a motion “to lay on the table” comes before all others, while a
motion “to amend” takes precedence only over a motion “to postpone
indefinitely.”
   (C)   Incidental motions.
      (1)   An incidental motion is one that comes up incidentally when other
motions are being considered and must be disposed of before the principal
motion or a subsidiary motion can be acted upon.
      (2)   The incidental motions are:
         (a)   To suspend the rules;
         (b)   To withdraw a motion;
         (c)   Reading of papers;
         (d)   Objection to consideration of a question; and
         (e)   Appeals (from decision of President, division of house or point
of order).
   (D)   Privileged motions.
      (1)   A privileged motion is one relating to the well-being of the group
or of any of its members. Because of its importance to individual members it
takes precedence over all other questions.
      (2)   The privileged motions are:
         (a)   Orders of the day;
         (b)   Questions of privilege;
         (c)   To take a recess;
         (d)   To adjourn; and
         (e)   To fix time to adjourn.
      (3)   These privileged motions are also listed in their order of
importance to the principal motion, but must be taken up in the reverse order.
Thus a motion “to fix the time to adjourn” must be considered first, next a
motion “to adjourn” and then a motion “to take a recess.”
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 30.06 MAKING OR AMENDING A MOTION.
   (A)   Making a motion. The following procedure is recognized and will be
utilized by the Town Council:
      (1)   Obtain the floor as follows: raise your hand and address the
President, saying “Mr. President or Madam President.” The President will then
recognize the speaker by saying, “Mr. Smith or Miss/Mrs. Jones.” The speaker
may not present the motion until recognized by the President.
      (2)   State the motion carefully: This is done by saying, “I move that
            .”
      (3)   The motion must then be seconded. It cannot be discussed unless
there is a second. If there is no second, the motion is lost. To second a
motion, the words, “I second the motion” are used.
      (4)   The President must repeat the motion in full, by saying, “The
motion has been made and seconded that                 . Is there any
discussion?”
      (5)   The motion is then open for discussion by the Council. This is done
by the same process as when making a motion. A good President will encourage as
much discussion as possible. In this way, the facts and merits of the question
are brought out and the members can vote more intelligently. Thorough
discussion often prevents people from being dissatisfied afterwards. The person
who made the motion is given the opportunity to open and close the discussion.
Again, the two-minute time limit must be observed.
      (6)   After the discussion, a voice vote is taken by the President. The
Town Clerk-Treasurer will record the “ayes” and “nays” in the minutes. If an
ordinance or resolution is voted on, then the Town Clerk-Treasurer sill make a
roll call vote and record it in the minutes.
   (B)   How to amend a motion.
      (1)   An amendment to a motion is really a new motion made to change or
modify the previous motion which is under consideration. An amendment may do
one of four things:
         (a)   Add or insert a certain word or words, or a sentence, to the
motion under consideration;
         (b)   Strike out a certain word, or words, or sentence, in the motion
under consideration;
         (c)   Substitute another motion for the one being considered; or
         (d)   Substitute words or replace wording under consideration.
      (2)   An amendment, like a main/principal motion, must be second. It is
also debatable, and may again be amended. The proper form for making an
amendment is: “I move to amend the motion to read              ” or “I move to
amend the motion by         .”
      (3)   The amendment to a motion, if seconded, must be voted upon before
the original motion. If the amendment to the motion is carried, the original
motion, must be voted upon as amended. On the other hand, if the amendment is
lost, the motion is voted upon as originally stated.
      (4)   In case of an amendment to an amendment, the last amendment is
always voted upon first. If it is carried, the preceding amendment is then
voted upon as amended.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 30.07 RULES OF DEBATE; DECORUM AND ETHICS.
   It is the responsibility of the Town Council President to maintain
professional order during the meeting.
   (A)   To obtain the floor, the member must raise a hand and address the
President by saying, “Mr. or Madam President.” The President recognizes the
member by saying the member’s name, “Mr. Smith or Miss/Mrs. Jones.” If the
request is to speak on the issue at hand, the President will the member allow
two minutes to present his or her point. After two minutes are up, the Council
member must wait until all other Council members are given the opportunity to
speak on that topic before requesting to speak again on the same topic. The
two-minute rule applies to all members equally. Members should not speak more
than twice on any motion. Members are not allowed to yield their unelapsed time
to another member to allow one member a particularly long speech.
   (B)   When a Council member is speaking, no one other than the President can
interrupt him or her. The Council member must confine his or her remarks to the
matter that is under debate only. The use of obscene, threatening, derogatory
or inflammatory language will be grounds for immediate dismissal from that
meeting. Council members and the public are advised that any private
conversation, unnecessary noise, moving about or leaving the room unnecessarily
will be grounds for dismissal from the meeting.
   (C)   Furthermore, if any member in any way transgresses the rules of the
Council, any of the other members or the President may call him or her to
order, in which case the alleged offender shall immediately cease and desist
such activity, unless permitted to explain.
   (D)   If the alleged offender continues his or her behavior, the President
may call upon the Town Marshal to act in his or her capacity as Sergeant-at-
Arms to escort the individual from the meeting room and/or building. Before the
Sergeant-at-Arms is directed to remove the offender, he or she will be given
one warning from the President to cease the behavior. If, at anytime, the Town
Marshal has a concern regarding the safety or welfare of any individual or
individuals, he or she may use his or her own discretion.
   (E)   Any of the following shall be sufficient cause for removal from the
room/building for the duration of the meeting:
      (1)   Unreasonably loud or disruptive language, noise (this includes
disruptive cell phone usage) or conduct that obstructs the work or the
conduction of Council business;
      (2)   Refusal to obey the rules of conduct provided in this chapter,
including the limitation of occupancy and seating capacity as determined by the
Fire Marshal;
      (3)   Refusal to obey an order of the President or an order issued by a
Council member which has been approved by a majority of the Council present;
and
      (4)   If a meeting is disrupted by members of the audience, the President
or a majority of the Council present may order that the Council room or
building be cleared.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 30.08 NON-PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Council shall not have a majority of members meet without
considering that to be a public meeting. The Town Council shall follow I.C. 5-
14-1.5-3.1 for serial meetings.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, the governing body of
a public agency violates this chapter if members of the governing body
participate in a series of at least two gatherings of members of the governing
body and the series of gatherings meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   One of the gatherings is attended by at least three members but
less than quorum of the members of the governing body and the other gatherings
include at least two members of the governing body; and
         (b)   The sum of the number of different members of the governing body
attending any of the gatherings at least equals a quorum of the governing body.
      (2)   All the gatherings concern the same subject matter and are held
within a period of not more than seven consecutive days.
      (3)   The gatherings are held to take official action on public business.
For the purpose of this division (A), a member of a governing body attends a
gathering if the member is present at the gathering in person or if the member
participates in the gathering by telephone or other electronic means, excluding
electronic mail.
   (B)   A gathering under division (A) above does not include:
      (1)   A social or chance gathering not intended by any member of the
governing body to avoid the requirements of this chapter;
      (2)   An on-site inspection of any:
         (a)   Project;
         (b)   Program; or
         (c)   Facilities of applicants for incentives or assistance from the
governing body.
      (3)   Traveling to and attending meetings of organizations devoted to the
betterment of government;
      (4)   A caucus;
      (5)   A gathering to discuss an industrial or a commercial prospect that
does not include a conclusion as to recommendations, policy, decisions or final
action on the terms of a request or an offer of public financial resources;
      (6)   An orientation of members of the governing body on their role and
responsibilities as public officials, but not for any other official action;
      (7)   A gathering for the sole purpose of administering an oath of office
to an individual; and
      (8)   A gathering between less than a quorum of the members of the
governing body intended solely for members to receive information and
deliberate on whether a member or members may be inclined to support a member’s
proposal or a particular piece of legislation and at which no other official
action will occur.
   (C)   A violation described in division (A)(1) above is subject to §
10.99. See Pub. Law No. 179-2007, § 4.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
Elected and Appointed Officials
   
31.01   Town Clerk-Treasurer
   
31.02   Town Marshal
   
31.03   Town Attorney
   
31.04   Department heads
Town Marshal
   
31.15   Appointment
   
31.16   Compensation and benefits
   
31.17   Duty hours
   
31.18   Duties and responsibilities
   
31.19   Appointment of Deputy Marshal
   
31.20   Rules and regulations
   
31.21   Jurisdiction
ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS
§ 31.01 TOWN CLERK-TREASURER.
   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is an elected official who serves as the
fiscal officer of the town. The office is tasked with the responsibility to
receive and distribute monies on the order of the Town Council, keep financial
accounts and provide financial statements to the Town Council, maintaining
custody of records, books and papers of the Town Council, attend all meetings
of the Council and record the proceedings of them, issue licenses, administer
oaths and take depositions, under certain circumstances, break tie votes of the
Town Council and maintain custody of the town seal.
   (B)   He or she shall arrange a roll call of members and perform all duties
as set forth in I.C. 36-4-6-9. The agenda of the Council shall be made provided
to the Council members at least 48 hours prior to the meeting in order for them
to be prepared for the meeting.
   (C)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer will be responsible for utilizing a roll call
and recording the “ayes” and “nays” of respective members for all voting. This
will be recorded in the minutes.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-5-2-8
§ 31.02 TOWN MARSHAL.
   The Town Marshal is selected by the Town Council and is charged with
executing the orders of the Town Council and enforcing the laws of the town and
state and has the power and duty to serve all process directed to the Marshal
by the Town Council or town court. The Marshal serves at the pleasure of the
Council but may not be dismissed or suspended from the force without a hearing
if the officer has served six months after completion of the state training
requirements. He or she is also serving as Sergeant-at-Arms and is tasked with
preserving public safety and order during all Council meetings. Further
information regarding the Town Marshal can be found in §§
31.15 through
31.21.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 36-5-7-3 and 36-5-7-4
§ 31.03 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Town Attorney is the legal advisor of the town who represents the town
in legal proceedings and serves at the pleasure of the Council. There is no
statute governing the responsibilities of the Town Attorney, who represents the
town in much the same manner as an attorney does any other client.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 31.04 DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   (A)   Council President. The Council President shall:
      (1)   Be Chief Executive Officer for the town;
      (2)   Be in charge of all non-elected personnel;
      (3)   Be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the town;
      (4)   Preside over all Town Council meetings;
      (5)   Appoint department heads and makes committee appointments;
      (6)   Work closely with the Clerk-Treasurer on budget and fiscal matters;
      (7)   Carry out the wishes of the Town Council; and
      (8)   Address the concerns of town residents.
   (B)   Utilities. The department head for utilities shall:
      (1)   Be knowledgeable about the town’s water and wastewater systems and
their operation;
      (2)   Stay current with the systems’ problems, corrective procedures and
improvements;
      (3)   Be in communication with the Utility Superintendent and town
workers regarding the current condition of the systems;
      (4)   Assist in making recommendations for the water and sewage systems’
operations;
      (5)   Reports to the Council regularly concerning the utilities condition
and operation;
      (6)   Have other responsibilities as deemed necessary by a majority of
the Council;
      (7)   Actively pursue grants to assist with upkeep and/or improvements in
the department; and
      (8)   Attend County Sewage Board meetings monthly.
   (C)   Parks and equipment. The department head for parks and equipment
shall:
      (1)   Attend Park Board meetings;
      (2)   Assist the Park Board President in informing the rest of the
Council as to the Park Board decisions and activities;
      (3)   Relay Council concerns and information to the Park Board;
      (4)   In conjunction with the Park Board, oversee the maintenance of the
park;
      (5)   Know what equipment is owned by the town and the condition of said
equipment;
      (6)   Communicate with the town workers concerning the town’s equipment
and maintenance of that equipment;
      (7)   Be involved in the decisions made to repair or replace equipment
and provide to the entire Council the necessary quotes;
      (8)   Assist with opening and closing of park bathrooms; and
      (9)   Actively pursue grants to assist with upkeep and/or improvements in
the department.
   (D)   Buildings and grounds.
      (1)   The department head for buildings and grounds shall:
         (a)   Oversee the care and maintenance of the town owned grounds and
buildings;
         (b)   Recommend to the entire Council when buildings need repaired and
the type of repairs needed;
         (c)   Provide necessary estimates or quotes for buildings and grounds
improvements; and
         (d)   Actively pursue grants to assist with upkeep and/or improvements
in the department.
      (2)   Certain content of town owned buildings are excluded from the
department head’s supervision. These include, but are not limited to, such
things as: town equipment; office records in the Clerk-Treasurer’s, Marshal’s,
Judge’s and Building Commissioner’s offices; and the personal and private
property belonging to:
         (a)   Private industries renting the town buildings; and
         (b)   Other groups authorized to use the town buildings.
   (E)   Streets and alleys. The department head for streets and alleys shall:
      (1)   Communicate with town workers regarding the care and maintenance of
the town’s streets and alleys;
      (2)   Recommend to the Council repairs needed and companies available to
do the repairs;
      (3)   Obtain necessary quotes for paving and repairs of streets and
alleys;
      (4)   Advise the Council of street signs that need replaced and other
street related problems; and
      (5)   Actively pursue grants to assist with upkeep and/or improvements in
the department.
(Ord. 2-2017, passed 7-10-2017)
TOWN MARSHAL
§ 31.15 APPOINTMENT.
   Applicants for the position of Town Marshal shall meet all of the following
requirements to be eligible for appointment:
   (A)   Be a citizen of the United States and reside within the county, or a
county contiguous to the county, if residence is outside the corporate limits,
must have adequate means of transportation into the town;
   (B)   Be a high school graduate or equivalent;
   (C)   Be a least 21 years of age;
   (D)   Be physically fit and no history of mental illness;
   (E)   Have successfully completed or be able to complete within six months
after appointment, the basic requirements established by the Law Enforcement
Training Board;
   (F)   Town Marshals requiring Law Enforcement Academy training after hiring
will be required to sign a written agreement that they will complete a minimum
of three years of employment or reimburse the town for the cost of training and
uniforms. The three-year term starts at the successful completion of the
Academy;
   (G)   Town Marshals with Law Enforcement Academy completed prior to hiring
shall be required to sign a written agreement to complete one year of
employment or reimburse the town for the cost of uniforms. The one-year term
starts at the hire date; and
   (H)   Being discharged due to violations of this subchapter shall not void
the reimbursement of divisions (F) and (G) above.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 31.16 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS.
   Compensation shall be in accordance with the Wage, Salary and Fringe Benefit
Ordinance of the town, and part-time employment is devoid of benefits.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 31.17 DUTY HOURS.
   The appointment of a Town Marshal is a full-time position, and the hours
shall be set forth by the Town Council. Hours may be amended from time to time
as the need arises but shall not exceed the hours set forth for full-time
employees in the Personnel Policy Handbook of the town. Only one officer shall
be on duty at a time unless training or authorized by Town Council.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 31.18 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Marshal is the police officer of the town and has the powers of
other law enforcement officers in executing the orders of the legislative body
and enforcing laws.
   (B)   The Marshal:
      (1)   Shall serve all process directed to him or her by the Town Council
or legislative body;
      (2)   Shall arrest without process, all persons who commit an offense
within his or her view, take them before a court having jurisdiction and detain
them in custody until the cause of the arrest has been investigated;
      (3)   Shall suppress breaches of the peace;
      (4)   May, if necessary, call the power of the town to his or her aid;
      (5)   May execute search warrants and arrest warrants;
      (6)   May pursue and jail persons who commit an offense; and
      (7)   Shall comply with all applicable provisions of the town’s Personal
Policy Handbook.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 31.19 APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY MARSHAL.
   The Town Marshal, only with the approval of the Town Council, may appoint a
Deputy Town Marshal(s). The Deputy Town Marshal(s) shall perform the same
duties as the Town Marshal. Deputy Town Marshal is a part-time position, and
the hours shall be set forth by the Town Council. Hours may be amended from
time to time as the need arises but shall not exceed the hours set forth for
part-time employees in the Personnel Policy Handbook of the town.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 31.20 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Standard operating procedures. The Town Marshal shall follow and
comply with provisions in §§
32.20 through
32.22 and the standard operating procedures for the Police Department.
   (B)   Reports.
      (1)   Whenever the Town Marshal goes on duty, whether regular scheduled
duty or a call-out, he or she shall fill out the daily activity report noting
times, contacts, incidents, miles logged and any action taken by the Marshal.
      (2)   All reports shall be started immediately when a complaint is
logged.
      (3)   The Town Marshal will not leave a tour of duty without submitting a
report and progress noted, unless investigation is continuous or urgent
circumstances do not allow sufficient time to complete the report.
      (4)   Reports shall be made available to the Town Council.
   (C)   Scheduling duty hours. The normal duty periods will be at the
discretion of the Town Marshal.
   (D)   Accident investigations. All personal injury accidents investigated by
the Town Marshal shall be handled as follows:
      (1)   Ambulance summoned to the scene;
      (2)   Advise Central Dispatch upon arrival at the scene and upon
determination, report situation to dispatcher; and
      (3)   Investigate a personal injury accident, which is more than minor
injury with the State Police or County Sheriff’s Department, combining data at
the scene in order to obtain all basic information.
   (E)   Accidents involving town vehicles. The Town Marshal shall not
investigate any accident where vehicles owned by the town are involved, said
Marshal shall call the State Police or County Sheriff’s Department and request
an officer be dispatched to investigate such accident.
   (F)   Patrol cars upkeep, area of responsibility.
      (1)   The patrol cars will be kept in first class condition, the Town
Marshal, having any complaint or service regarding the patrol cars, shall
contact the Town Council member in charge of equipment as soon as possible.
      (2)   All equipment in the patrol cars will be neat, orderly, in its
proper place and in good working condition. Interior of vehicles shall be clear
of all objects, other than necessary equipment. In no instance will ropes,
various articles of evidence and the like be allowed in the vehicle. The
vehicle shall be used for official business and patrol duty only. For the
purpose of this division (F), ROUTINE PATROL AREA is defined as the corporate
limits of the town and includes: State Road 218 from Strawtown Pike to Angling
Road, to include sections of Angling Road; and County Road 800 South from
Strawtown Pike to Angling Road, to include section of Strawtown Pike from
County Road 800 South to State Road 218, and also to include the town’s Sewage
Plant. The Town Marshal is also charged with enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance within the town’s two-mile jurisdiction, upon request from Building
Commissioner. For the purpose of this division (F)(2), OFFICIAL BUSINESS is
defined as, but not limited to:
         (a)   Trips to the Courthouse/County Prosecutor;
         (b)   Transporting to the County Jail;
         (c)   Transporting to State Police post;
         (d)   Responding to calls initiated by the County Sheriff’s Department
or State Police requesting his or her services specifically by unit number only
within a two-mile radius of the corporate town limits;
         (e)   Other uses as directed by the Town Council. However, neither the
Town Marshal nor any other officer of the Town Police Department shall be
permitted to take department vehicles home; and
         (f)   Getting fuel at the Marathon on State Road 218 and 31.
      (3)   Unless emergency conditions exist, all persons wishing to observe
the Town Marshal in the performance of his or her assigned duties and/or to
participate in town operational activities shall obtain prior approval and
execute a liability release form prior to participation except:
         (a)   Law enforcement officers on official business;
         (b)   Town Council members on official business; and
         (c)   Those persons whose transport is necessary during the conduct of
their official business.
   (G)   Police ride along procedure; short-term participation by persons 18
years of age or older.
      (1)   The Town Council’s approval shall be obtained prior to any
applicant’s observation or participation in the activity/operation.
      (2)   After initial approval above and prior to said applicants’ approval
for ride along, a properly endorsed liability release form shall be executed by
the prospective applicant. The original copy shall be placed in Town Council
President’s file, and the second will be maintained in the Town Marshal’s file.
      (3)   The Town Marshal shall take every precaution to ensure the safety
of the participant and to prevent the participant from becoming involved in a
dangerous situation. Any injury, no matter the severity, shall be reported to
the Town Council President.
      (4)   This program shall be limited to one shift duration.
      (5)   At no time shall any persons under 18 years of age be permitted to
participate in this ride along program.
   (H)   Ambulance calls. The Town Marshal shall, whenever possible or
practical, assist the ambulance service that serves the town’s area. Many
ambulance calls are of an unknown nature, and many times the Town Marshal is
needed to either protect the patient or the EMTs answering the calls.
   (I)   Photographs and documents.
      (1)   Any photograph or document furnished by any other department for
sharing, as a result of a cooperative investigation, or for any other reason,
shall not under any condition, be sold or made available for copying.
      (2)   Any photograph or document in the Town Marshal’s files belonging to
another shall not be released to any person or persons without the written
consent of the originating department.
      (3)   No officer of the Town Police Department shall ever post on social
media photos, videos or any other recording taken as a part of the officer’s
official duties.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 31.21 JURISDICTION.
   The Town Council, recognizing the authority of duly appointed law
enforcement officers as outlined in I.C. 36-5-7-4, 35-33-1-1 and 36-1-7-7 and
further clarified in case law (Warner vs. State, 406 N. E.2d 971) and further
upheld by the State Court of Appeals, empowers such authority to the Town
Marshal without further restriction.
(Ord. 5, 2004, passed 6-13-2016)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Town Marshal Police Reserve Program
   
32.01   Established
   
32.02   Appointment
   
32.03   Staffing
   
32.04   Identification
   
32.05   Restrictions to appointment
   
32.06   Jurisdictional authority
   
32.07   Compensation
Police Department
   
32.20   State deadly force policy adopted
   
32.21   State minimum standards policy adopted
   
32.22   Reserve Deputy program
Main Street Committee
   
32.35   Main Street Committee established
   
32.36   Meetings
   
32.37   Purchasing
   
32.38   Bank account
TOWN MARSHAL POLICE RESERVE PROGRAM
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHED.
   The town hereby establishes a Town Marshal Police Reserve Program with the
following procedures.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 32.02 APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Town Marshal Police Reserve officer(s) will be appointed by the Town
Council from recommendations of the Town Marshal.
   (B)   No person shall be appointed until an State Law Enforcement Training
Board (LETB) approved course is completed.
   (C)   No person shall be appointed until a six-month probationary period is
served satisfactorily and is recommended for the appointment by the Town
Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 32.02) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 5-2-1-9(f)
§ 32.03 STAFFING.
   Town Marshal Police Reserves are limited to two active members at any time.
(Prior Code, § 32.03) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 32.04 IDENTIFICATION.
   Any person(s) appointed under this subchapter shall be known as a Town
Marshal Police Reserve(s).
(Prior Code, § 32.04) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 32.05 RESTRICTIONS TO APPOINTMENT.
   No member of the Town Marshal Police Reserve may be a member of another duly
sworn police agency.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 32.06 JURISDICTIONAL AUTHORITY.
   A Town Marshal Police Reserve has all police powers after appointment but is
limited to the corporate boundaries of the town enforcement area. A Town
Marshal Police Reserve officer will not be granted police powers outside of the
corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 32.06) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 32.07 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Town Marshal Police Reserve officer(s) serve in an unpaid status.
   (B)   As appropriations are made to the program, the Town Marshal Police
Reserve officers may receive from the town:
      (1)   Uniforms and a uniform allowance; and
      (2)   Compensation for time lost from other employment because of court
appearances directly related to the Town Marshal Police Reserve activity only.
(Prior Code, § 32.07) (Ord. 11, passed 11-18-1997)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.20 STATE DEADLY FORCE POLICY ADOPTED.
   (A)   Policy. The document titled “LETB Uniform Statewide Policy” is the
entirety of the deadly force policy which shall be added to the Town Police
Department standard operating procedures.
   (B)   Usage.
      (1)   The policy adopted in this section shall be implemented by the Town
Police Department upon passage of the ordinance codified in this section. The
attached policy shall not be added to, modified or altered.
      (2)   In the event that this policy should contradict any portion of the
Town Police Department’s standard operating procedure (SOP), this policy should
be followed over any contrary language in the current SOP.
(Ord. 4, 2022, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 32.21 STATE MINIMUM STANDARDS POLICY ADOPTED.
   (A)   Policy. The document titled “LETB Uniform Statewide Policy; Subject
Vehicle Pursuits; Minimum Standards” is the entirety of the policy which shall
be added to the Town Police Department standard operating procedures.
   (B)   Usage.
      (1)   The policy adopted in this section shall be implemented by the Town
Police Department upon passage of ordinance codified in this section. The
attached policy shall not be added to, modified or altered.
      (2)   In the event that this policy should contradict any portion of the
Town Police Department’s standard operating procedure (SOP), this policy should
be followed over any contrary language in the current SOP.
(Ord. 3, 2022, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 32.22 RESERVE DEPUTY PROGRAM.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be known as and may be cited as the “Reserve
Deputy Ordinance” of the town.
   (B)   Administration. It shall be the duty of the Town Council for the
administration of this section.
   (C)   Appointment.
      (1)   No person shall be appointed until he or she have successfully
completed the basic requirements established by the Law Enforcement Training
Board under I.C. 5-2-1-9, and he or she must:
         (a)   Be a citizen of the United States and reside in the county or
contiguous counties. If residence is outside the corporate limits, must have
adequate means of transportation into the town;
         (b)   Be a high school graduate or equivalent;
         (c)   Be at least 21 years of age;
         (d)   Be physically fit with no history of mental illness;
         (e)   Have a valid state driver’s license;
         (f)   Never have been convicted of a felony;
         (g)   Maintain active member status; and
         (h)   Be approved by Town Council for training.
   (2)   No person shall be appointed until a minimum three-month probationary
period is satisfactorily completed and is recommended by the Town Marshal.
Reserve Deputies are appointed by the Town Council upon the recommendation of
the Town Marshal.
   (D)   Number of Reserve Deputies. The Town Police Department shall not have
an excess of six Reserve Deputies at any time.
   (E)   Reserve program levels. The Town Police Department has three levels of
the Reserve program: Auxiliary, Reserve Class 2 and Reserve Class 1. All new
officers will begin in the Auxiliary level and will move unto the highest level
of Reserve Class 1. Each level requires mandatory training prior to moving to a
higher level. Previous law enforcement experience may override the levels
required to become a Class 1 Reserve. The Town Marshal must investigate the
Deputies’ prior enforcement experience before permitting a Reserve Deputy to
move through the levels without completing the mandatory training.
   (F)   Reserve level training.
      (1)   Auxiliary level training. After completing the application process
and being approved by the Town Marshal, the Auxiliary Reserve will begin the
necessary training described below and shall be known as an Auxiliary Reserve.
         (a)   Auxiliary Reserve must complete the 40-hour pre-basic course.
After successfully completing this course, the Auxiliary Reserve may be signed
off by the Town Marshal and moved up to the next level in the Reserve Deputy
program.
         (b)   Prior to the successful completion of the 40-hour pre-basic
course, the Auxiliary Reserve shall not receive a badge or I.D. The Auxiliary
Reserves are not permitted to wear any piece of clothing with the Town Police
Department insignia, nor shall the Auxiliary Reserve be permitted to carry a
firearm until the 40-hour pre-basic course is successfully completed.
      (2)   Reserve Class 2 training. After successfully completing the 40-hour
pre-basic course described in the auxiliary training section, Reserves will be
issued a badge and uniform from the Town Marshal and promoted to Reserve Class
2. Reserves will be required to be in full uniform as stated in the standard
operating procedures. Reserve Class 2 must successfully complete the following
training prior to moving on to the next level.
         (a)   Reserve must complete 150 hours of documented ride time with an
officer approved by the Town Marshal. The first 75 hours will be as a passenger
with the approved officer. The last 75 hours will be as the operator of the
vehicle with the approved officer as the passenger. During the last 75 hours,
the Reserve will begin answering calls and conducting traffic stops. The final
eight hours of the 150 hours of documented ride time must be with the Town
Marshal. During the 150 hours, the approved officer must confirm that the
reserve has covered all of the following: emergency vehicle operations; vehicle
and felony stops; police radio operations and communications procedures.
         (b)   After successfully completing all of the training listed in the
prior section, the Reserve may be approved by the Town Marshal to move up to
the final level of the Reserve program.
      (3)   Reserve officer Class 1 training. A Reserve officer Class 1 is the
final level of the Police Department Reserve program. A Reserve officer Class 1
will be able to patrol on his or her own. A Reserve officer Class 1 must follow
all of the department standard operating procedures and present themselves in a
professional manner. A Reserve officer Class 1 must at all times maintain an
active member status.
      (4)   Additional requirements.
         (a)   All Reserves are required to maintain the same annual in-service
training as the paid officers in order to maintain active member status.
         (b)   All Reserves are required to drive 2011 Dodge Charger unless
inclement weather requires the use of the 2016 Ford Explorer or said Dodge
Charger is out of service.
   (G)   Adoption by reference. The provisions in §§
31.18 and
31.20, relating to the duties and responsibilities and the rules the
regulations of the Town Marshal, are made a part of this section by reference.
   (H)   Duty hours. Scheduling duty hours for Reserve Deputies shall be the
responsibility of the Town Marshal. However, all reserve officers must work a
minimum of 16 hours per month to maintain active member status. Only one
officer on duty at a time unless training or authorized by Town Council.
   (I)   Compensation. Reserve Deputies are volunteers and serve in an unpaid
status. However, as appropriations are made, Reserve Deputies may receive
compensation for time lost from other employment due to court appearances
directly related to Reserve Deputy activity. Time paid for Reserves court
appearance would be paid from User Fee Fund. The town shall furnish uniforms
and badges. Uniforms are defined as: one short sleeve shirt; one long sleeve
shirt; and one pair of pants. Side arms, weapons belts, name plates and cost of
necessary training to become a Reserve Deputy are the responsibility of the
Reserve Deputy applicant.
(Ord. 1, 2005, passed 6-13-2016)
MAIN STREET COMMITTEE
§ 32.35 MAIN STREET COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Town Main Street Committee shall consist of three members.
   (B)   One member shall be a Council member from the Town Council. The other
two members shall be selected by the Town Council.
   (C)   The term for members of the Main Street Committee shall be 12 months.
There shall not be a term limit for the members, but any member can be removed
for good cause after a vote to remove the member by the Town Council.
   (D)   The members of the Main Street Committee shall be selected by the Town
Council in January of each year.
(Ord. 5, 2022, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 32.36 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Main Street Committee shall meet at least once a year. However,
the Committee may meet more often if it so chooses.
   (B)   The purpose of the meeting shall be to discuss and decide upon how to
use the funding in the bank account described herein, as permitted within this
subchapter.
   (C)   Should there be any disagreement upon how to use the funding for the
purposes authorized in this subchapter, the Committee that take a vote with the
majority vote determining how to proceed.
(Ord. 5, 2022, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 32.37 PURCHASING.
   (A)   The Main Street Committee may elect to make purchases of $100 or less
without the authorization of the Town Council.
   (B)   The Main Street Committee must obtain the approval of the Town Council
to spend more than $100 on any one item. The Main Street Committee shall attend
the next Town Council public meeting to make the request for authority to make
said purchase.
   (C)   All purchases shall be made through the Town Clerk-Treasurer and/or
the Town Administrative Assistant Clerk. The Town Main Street Committee shall
provide documentation in support of the requested purchase. The Town Clerk-
Treasurer and/or the Town Administrative Assistant Clerk shall then either
directly make the purchase or provide the funds to the Town Main Street
Committee to make the purchase.
   (D)   Documentation of all purchases made for or by the Town Main Street
Committee shall be retained and made available to the Town Council upon
request.
(Ord. 5, 2022, passed 12-27-2022)
§ 32.38 BANK ACCOUNT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   The bank account which is the basis of this subchapter is at the
First Bank of Berne under the name of the Downtown Revitalization with the last
four digits of 4702.
      (2)   This bank account shall be treated as an official non-appropriated
fund for the town.
   (B)   Bank authorization.
      (1)   The President of the Main Street Committee shall have his or her
name removed from the list of authorized users of this account.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer and/or the town Administrative Assistant Clerk
for the town shall be the only individuals permitted to be listed as authorized
users for the account.
   (C)   Authorized usage for the account. The Main Street Committee bank
account shall be used to purchase the following:
      (1)   Items to decorate the town. This would include, but is not limited
to, items such as: flowers, holiday decorations, flags and the like;
      (2)   An annual Christmas dinner for the employees and elected officials
for the town;
      (3)   An annual Christmas gift cards to the employees for the town; and
      (4)   Cards and/or flowers for any sick town employees and town elected
officials.
   (D)   Funding the Main Street Committee bank account.
      (1)   The Main Street Committee bank account shall be funded by free will
donations from the citizens of the town and any other person and/or business/
organization that wishes to donate.
      (2)   Donations shall be made at the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
(Ord. 5, 2022, passed 12-27-2022)
CHAPTER 33: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES
Section
   
33.01   Town workers; general laborers
   
33.02   Nepotism policy
   
33.03   Complaint resolution
   
33.04   ADA transition plan adopted
   
33.05   Schedule of fees and charges for services
§ 33.01 TOWN WORKERS; GENERAL LABORERS.
   (A)   Position of town workers. The Town Council shall establish the
position(s) of town worker(s) for the purpose of general repair and maintenance
of town property within the town. The town worker(s) shall also be called
general laborer(s) of the town.
   (B)   Minimum personal requirements and qualifications.
      (1)   Must be at least 18 years of age, have a valid state driver’s
license and be able to attain a commercial driver’s license if necessary.
      (2)   Must be able to perform the following physical activities,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Hand excavation;
         (b)   Working at routine heights of 60 feet and occasionally heights
up to 125 feet;
         (c)   Walking and stooping for extended periods of time; and
         (d)   Lifting by hand reasonable amounts of weight necessary to
perform a given task efficiently, and yet safely and without personal injury.
      (3)   Must be able to perform the following general functions, including,
but not limited to:
         (a)   Basic math calculations;
         (b)   Basic writing skills; and
         (c)   Calculations with weights and measures.
      (4)   Must be willing to perform work under emergency and/or stressful
situations;
      (5)   Must be able and willing to be on the on-call rotation, and to
respond, when necessary, to after hours situations;
      (6)   Must be willing to gain thorough working knowledge of the function
(s) of the following:
         (a)   Each utility;
         (b)   The town’s water and sewage system; and
         (c)   The town’s equipment.
      (7)   Must be willing to develop craftsmanship skills in, but not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Carpentry and plumbing;
         (b)   Construction; and
         (c)   Equipment operation and maintenance; and
         (d)   Street and alley construction and repairs.
      (8)   Must be willing to become knowledgeable in applicable regulations
that effects the safety and well-being of other town employees as well as the
safety and well-being of the general public. These regulations include, but are
not limited to, local ordinances, OSHA, EPA and IDEM;
      (9)   Must be willing to attend training seminars, conferences and/or
attend classes to become more knowledgeable or licensed to be more effective
and efficient in performing the functions of a town worker;
      (10)   Must be willing to attend town meetings in order to report the
status of projects, maintenance, equipment needs and the like; and
      (11)   Must be willing to perform general janitorial and maintenance
duties which include, but are not limited to, sweeping, scrubbing, polishing,
waxing and painting.
   (C)   Establishment of the Foreperson’s position and duties.
      (1)   One of the full-time general laborers may be appointed as a
Foreperson to function in a working supervisory position. The Foreperson shall
work with as well as supervise the other general laborers.
      (2)   The Foreperson shall receive compensation in accordance with the
Wage, Salary and Fringe Benefit Ordinance.
      (3)   The Foreperson shall meet all of the requirements and
qualifications listed in division (B) above.
      (4)   In addition to working along with the other general laborers, the
Foreperson shall perform the following additional duties:
         (a)   Work planning.
            1.   Align the work crews to ensure the effective and efficient use
of personnel;
            2.   Plan and direct the work effort(s) of all town workers; and
            3.   Use knowledge gained from training classes, seminars and
conferences to train and cross-train other workers to ensure craftsmanship on
all work assignments.
         (b)   Materials, tools and equipment management.
            1.   Maintain an inventory of equipment management;
            2.   Recommend to the Town Council representative the necessary
tools and equipment replacement based on life cycle and condition; and
            3.   Determine the need for repair parts, materials and supplies,
and obtain procurement of the necessary items with the Clerk-Treasurer and the
Town Council’s approval.
         (c)   Personnel management.
            1.   Monitor and report all absenteeism;
            2.   Make requests for vacations and other excused absences, paid
or unpaid;
            3.   Discuss with the Town Council, or Council’s representative,
disciplinary action needed, including discharge of a town worker;
            4.   Follow up as needed on probationary cases;
            5.   Take part in interviewing prospective town workers if request
to do so by the Town Council;
            6.   Monitor and control compensatory time;
            7.   Monitor and control overtime;
            8.   Provide the necessary keys to the town workers; and
            9.   Ensure that all town workers are courteous and cooperative
with town residents, supply salespersons and other business and professional
personnel doing business with the town.
(Ord. 4, 1998, passed 9-2-1998)
§ 33.02 NEPOTISM POLICY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DIRECT LINE OF SUPERVISION. An elected officer or employee who is in a
position to affect the terms and conditions of another individual’s employment,
including making decisions about work assignments, compensation, grievances,
advancements or performance evaluation. The term does not include the
responsibilities of the executive, legislative or fiscal body of a unit, as
provided by law, to make decisions regarding salary ordinances, budgets or
personal policies of the unit.
      EMPLOYEE. An individual who is employed by a unit on a full-time, part-
time, temporary, intermittent or hourly basis. The term does not include an
individual who holds only an elected office. The terms includes an individual
who is a part to an employment contract with the unit.
      MEMBER OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Chief or a firefighter appointed
to the Department.
      MEMBER OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Chief or a police officer
appointed to the Department.
      RELATIVE.
         (a)   Any of the following:
            1.   A spouse;
            2.   A parent or step-parent;
            3.   A child or step-child, including an adopted child or step-
child;
            4.   A brother, sister, step-brother or step-sister;
            5.   A niece or nephew;
            6.   An aunt or uncle; and
            7.   A daughter-in-law or son-in-law.
         (b)   An adopted child of an individual is treated as a natural child
of the individual. The terms BROTHER and SISTER include a brother and sister by
half blood.
   (B)   Employment practices.
      (1)   Individuals who are relatives may not be employed by a unit in a
position that results in once relative being the direct line of supervision of
the other relative, with regard to an individual who:
         (a)   Is employed by a unit on the date the individual’s relative
begins serving a term of an elected office of the unit; and
         (b)   Is not exempt from the application of this section.
      (2)   Unless the policy adopted by the unit provides otherwise, an
individual may remain employed by a unit and maintain the individual’s position
or rank even if the individual’s employment would violate the prohibition
against one relative being in the direct line of supervision of the other
relative.
      (3)   Unless the unit’s policy provides otherwise, the individual
described above may not:
         (a)   Be promoted to a position; or
         (b)   Be promoted to a position that is not within the merit rank, in
the case of an individual who is a member of a merit Police Department or merit
Fire Department if the new position would violate the prohibition against one
relative being in the direct line of supervision of the other relative.
   (C)   Exclusions.
      (1)   An individual who is employed by a unit of July 1, 2012, is not
subject to these policies unless the individual has a break in employment with
the unit. Breaks in employment do not include the following:
         (a)   The individual is absent from the workplace while on paid or
unpaid leave, including vacation, sick or family medical leave or workers’
compensation; and
         (b)   The individual’s employment with the unit is terminated followed
by immediate re- employment by the unit, without loss of payroll time.
      (2)   These policies do not apply to performance of duties as a:
         (a)   A precinct election officer, as defined in I.C.  3-5-2.1-82 ; or
         (b)   A volunteer firefighter.
      (3)   This statute does not abrogate or affect an employment contract
with a unit that:
         (a)   An individual is a party to; and
         (b)   Is in effect on the date the individual’s relative beings
serving a term of an elected office of the unit.
   (D)   Contracting with a unit.
      (1)   A unit may enter into a contract or renew a contract for the
procurement of goods and services or a contract for public works with:
         (a)   An individual who is a relative or an elected official;
         (b)   A business entity that is wholly or partially owned by a
relative of an elected official; or
         (c)   Only if the requirements below are satisfied and the elected
official does not violate I.C. 4-2-6-16.
      (2)   A unit may enter into a contract or renew a contract with an
individual or business entity described above if:
         (a)   The elected official filed with the unit a full disclosure,
which must:
            1.   Be in writing;
            2.   Describe the contract or purchase to be made by the unit;
            3.   Describe the relationship that the elected official has to the
individual or business entity that contracts or purchases;
            4.   Be affirmed under penalty of perjury;
            5.   Be submitted to the legislative body of the unit and be
accepted by the legislative body in a public meeting of the unit prior to final
action on the contract or purchase; and
            6.   Be filed, not later than 15 days after final action on the
contract or purchase, with:
               a.   State Board of Accounts; and
               b.   The clerk of the circuit court in the county where the unit
takes final action on the contract or purchase.
         (b)   The appropriate agency of the unit:
            1.   Makes a certified statement that the contract amount or
purchase price was the lowest amount or price bid or offered; or
            2.   Makes a certified statement of the reasons why the vendor or
contractor was selected.
         (c)   The unit satisfies any other requirement under I.C. 5-22 or 36-
1-12.
      (3)   An elected official must also comply with the disclosure provisions
of I.C. 4-2-6-16, if applicable.
      (4)   These provisions do not affect the initial term of a contract in
existence at the time the term of office of the elected official of the unit
begins.
   (E)   Certification.
      (1)   The annual report filed by a unit with State Board of Accounts
under I.C. 5-11-13-1 must include a statement by the executive of the town
stating whether the town has implemented an anti-nepotism policy.
      (2)   Each elected office of a united must annual certify in writing,
subject to the penalties for perjury, that the officer has not violated this
statute. Each officer must submit the certificate to the executive of the unit
not later than December 31 of each year.
      (3)   If the unit has not implemented such a policy, the Department may
not approve:
         (a)   The unit’s budget; or
         (b)   Any additional appropriations for the unit;
      (4)   For the ensuing calendar year until State Board of Accounts
certified to the Department that the unit is in compliance with I.C. 36-1-20.2.
(Ord. 14, 2012, passed 6- -2012)
§ 33.03 COMPLAINT RESOLUTION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide guidance to the
Town Council, staff and citizens of the town for filing, investigating and
researching complaints against city employees/elected officials. Also, to
establish a formal procedure affording public officials and city staff an
opportunity to remedy or determine a resolution to matter, if and when
applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMPLAINT. Written allegation by a citizen or employee of the town of a
violation of a town ordinance by one of its citizens or employees which is
drafted on a town complaint form.
      COMPLAINANT. Any citizen/employee of the town who believes another has
violated a town ordinance.
   (C)   Procedure for filing a complaint.
      (1)   A complainant shall obtain a town complaint form from the Town
Clerk-Treasurer’s office. A sample of this form is in division (D) below. The
complainant shall then complete the first page of this form in its entirety and
sign and date the form. Any form which is not completed pursuant to the
instructions on the form shall be disregarded with no further action taken by
the town. The complainant shall submit the form to the Town Council President,
head of the department or Clerk-Treasurer, who will then sign and date the
form. A copy of the signed/dated complaint form will be given to the
complainant. The original is filed in the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
      (2)   All complaint forms will be turned over to the Town President who
will confirm the complaint is completed by the complainant as required by this
section. Once determined, the Town Council President or his or her designee
will communicate to the complainant/potential offender the course of action.
Matters not found to be valid will be dismissed without action or discussion.
complainant/potential offender will be notified of the decision not to pursue
the complaint and the reason thereby. The result of the investigation and the
method of how the complainant/potential offender was notified shall be recorded
on the town complaint form. All town officials who received and reviewed the
complaint shall sign in the appropriate lines on the town complaint form.
      (3)   If the complaint is in reference to misconduct by an employee or
elected official of the town, the complaint form will be first forwarded to the
Town Council President and the employee’s direct supervisor. If the complaint
is about a department head, the complaint will be forwarded to the Town
President.
         (a)   The Town Council President will make the determination as to how
the complaint handling will proceed.
         (b)   If legal counsel is required, the Town Council President will
consult with the Town Attorney.
         (c)   If a closed session is required and permitted by state law, the
Town Council President may call an executive meeting with the Town Council upon
written request of the employee.
         (d)   If disciplinary action is required, the disciplinary procedures
laid out in the Employee Handbook will be followed.
   (D)   Example of town complaint form.
 
   TOWN OF BUNKER HILL COMPLAINT FORM
 
Please complete the following information so the Town Council can investigate your complaint. Please print clearly.
 
                   : check this box if you wish to remain anonymous. If you check this box you do not need to fill out the name, address, phone number or sign the form, but you must still write the date you submitted the form. If you choose to remain
anonymous, you understand that by doing so you may hinder the town’s ability to investigate this complaint. You further understand the town will be unable to inform you of any result of its investigation.
 
NAME:                            
ADDRESS:                                       
PHONE NUMBER:                               
 
NATURE OF COMPLAINT (include date, time, place and names of all involved):
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                 
 
WILL YOU ATTEND THE TOWN COUNCIL MEETING TO EXPLAIN YOUR COMPLAINT: (check “yes” or “no”)
Yes                   No                   
 
                                                                                                             
Signature of Complainant Date
 
 
   TOWN OFFICE USE ONLY
                                                                                                             
Signature of Official taking complaint Date
 
NAME OF COUNCIL MEMBER OR DEPARTMENT HEAD COMPLAINT WAS FORWARDED TO AND DATE COMPLAINT WAS FORWARDED:                   
 
Name:                   Date:                   
 
SIGNATURE AND DATE OF RECEIVING COUNCIL MEMBER/DEPARTMENT HEAD
 
                                                                                                             
Signature Date
 
RESULT OF INVESTIGATION:                   
 
                                                                                                             
Bunker Hill Town Council President Date
 
WHEN AND HOW WAS THE COMPLAINTANT INFORMED OF THE RESULT:                   
 
(Ord. 8, 2018, passed 12-10-2018)
§ 33.04 ADA TRANSITION PLAN ADOPTED.
   The Town Council hereby approves the ADA Transition Plan, Pedestrian
Network.
(Res. 01-2014, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 33.05 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES FOR SERVICES.
   (A)   A fee of $1 per five pages will be charged for notary public services.
A minimum of $1 will be charged.
   (B)   A fee of $1 per five pages will be charged for fax service. A minimum
of $1 will be charged.
   (C)   A fee of $1 per five pages will be charged for copying services. A
minimum of $1 will be charged.
   (D)   A fee of $100 per day plus tax will be charged for cafeteria/community
center room rentals. A rental agreement must be signed by a responsible adult
prior to its rental. The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the authority to deny
rental to any person or entity that he or she feels would not be in the best
interest of the town.
   (E)   A fee of $50 plus tax will be charged for the rental of the town’s
park pavilion. A rental agreement must be signed by the responsible adult prior
to its rental. The Clerk-Treasurer shall have the authority to deny rental to
any person or entity that he or she feels would not be in the best interest of
the town.
   (F)   A fee of $25 shall be charged for marriage or vow renewal ceremonies
performed on town premises by the Clerk-Treasurer.
   (G)   A fee of $12 shall be charged for each accident/incident report
requested from the Town Marshal’s office.
(Res. 1, 2017, passed 7-10-2017)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Payment of certain claims prior to Town Council approval
   
34.02   Purchasing
   
34.03   Timely submission for reimbursements
Funds
   
34.15   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund
   
34.16   Public Safety Fund
   
34.17   Equipment Replacement Fund
   
34.18   User Fee Fund
   
34.19   Local Law Enforcement Fund
   
34.20   LOIT Fund
   
34.21   Local Road and Bridge Fund
Irregular Variances, Losses, Shortages and Thefts
   
34.35   Purpose
   
34.36   Materiality threshold
   
34.37   Knowledge of misappropriation
   
34.38   Maintenance of documentation
   
34.39   Resolution of incidents
Capital Assets Policy
   
34.50   Title
   
34.51   Administration and maintenance
   
34.52   Capital asset categories
   
34.53   Valuation of capital assets
   
34.54   Assets defined
   
34.55   Asset transfers and depositions
   
34.56   Periodic inventories
   
34.57   Capital asset notification form
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 PAYMENT OF CERTAIN CLAIMS PRIOR TO TOWN COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Authorized payments. To preclude any penalty assessments, the Town
Council authorizes payment of the following types of existing claims only if
the due date of the claim cannot be met through the normal claim procedures:
      (1)   Property or services purchased from the U.S. government;
      (2)   License or permit fees;
      (3)   Insurance premiums;
      (4)   Utility payments or connection charges;
      (5)   General grant programs where advance refunding is not prohibited
and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover amount advanced;
      (6)   Grants of state funds;
      (7)   Maintenance or service agreements;
      (8)   Leases or rental agreements;
      (9)   Bond or coupon payments;
      (10)   Payroll;
      (11)   State, federal or county taxes;
      (12)   Expenses that must be paid due to emergency circumstances; and
      (13)   Expenses described in an ordinance.
   (B)   Review of claim. All existing claims, as authorized in division (A)
above, shall be reviewed and allowed at the Town Council’s next regular or
special meeting following the action.
(Prior Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 1, passed 4-13-2004)
§ 34.02 PURCHASING.
   (A)   Purchasing Agency.
      (1)   The Town Council is designated as the Purchasing Agency for the
town, with the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22.
      (2)   The Purchasing Agency shall designate, in writing, the purchasing
agent(s).
   (B)   Purchasing agent(s).
      (1)   The Town Council hereby designates the following officers as
purchasing agents for the town. All purchases by the purchasing agents must be
in conformance with the State Public Purchasing Law, I.C. 5-22 et seq., and
with this section. The purchasing agents shall be authorized to make purchases
within the limits prescribed below with Town Council approval.
 
Custodian                          Single Purchase Limit Monthly Purchase Limit
Building Commissioner              $75                   $250
Clerk-Treasurer/Street Supervisor  $200                  $500
(town vehicles only)
Clerk-Treasurer                    $300                  $500
Marshal                            $75                   $250
Street and Utility Supervisor      $800                  $3,500
 
      (2)   Prior to any purchase or expenditure of funds, regardless of
amount, the purchasing agent shall contact the Clerk-Treasurer and determine if
sufficient funds are available in the appropriate account to make the purchase.
Contact must be done in some form of writing, such as, text, email or request
form. In the event that the Clerk-Treasurer determines that insufficient funds
exist, the Clerk-Treasurer shall inform the purchase agent the hinds are not
available. Contact shall be made in a form of writing, such as, text or email.
In the case that there are sufficient funds in the account, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall approve the purchase unless the Clerk-Treasurer has notice that the
purchase in question would violate the law or a town ordinance.
      (3)   All purchases or expenditures that exceed the limitations set forth
above shall require prior approval of the Town Council. In such event, the
proper request form shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall
distribute the request form to the Town Council at the next regularly scheduled
meeting. Once approved by the Town Council, the purchasing agent may proceed
with the purchase or expenditure as set forth herein.
      (4)   (a)   Purchases may be made by a purchasing agent without prior
Clerk-Treasure or Town Council approval only in the case of emergency
situations requiring repairs to key systems or facilities that, if not
repaired, would be detrimental to town property, town employees or the public,
and it is not reasonably possible to obtain the approval of the Clerk-Treasurer
or Town Council (as applicable).
         (b)   In the event of such an emergency, the purchasing agent shall
notify the Clerk-Treasurer of the emergency purchase or expenditure at the
earliest possible date and shall provide the Clerk-Treasurer with a written
request form for the purchase/expenditure.
      (5)   The Town Council retains the right to change this designation or to
designate additional purchasing agents as necessary.
      (6)   The rules in divisions (C) through (E) below are the required
purchasing rules for the town.
   (C)   Procurement procedures. Supplies manufactured in the United States
shall be specified for all purchases and shall be purchased unless the agent
determines:
      (1)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;
      (2)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States exceeds
by an unreasonable amount, the price of available and comparable supplies
manufactured elsewhere;
      (3)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States is
substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies
manufactured elsewhere; or
      (4)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not
in the public interest.
   (D)   Limitations on purchasing agent’s authority.
      (1)   The purchasing agent(s) may purchase emergency supplies of
operating expense on behalf of the town at his, her or their discretion without
first submitting a request form to the Clerk-Treasurer; provided, that the
amount of the purchase does not exceed the amount allowed in division (B)
above, over which the purchasing agent is a custodian, and which is established
for the purpose for which the expenditure is being made.
      (2)   The purchasing agent(s) shall obtain a receipt for each
expenditure. The purchasing agent(s) shall provide immediately to the Clerk-
Treasurer a request form and original receipts.
   (E)   Special purchases.
      (1)   A special purchases is a purchase of goods or supplies, where there
exists an emergency condition, where there exists a unique opportunity to
obtain supplies, equipment or services at substantial savings, or as otherwise
allowed by I.C. 5-22-10. (EMERGENCY is defined in the town’s handbook and the
town’s Wage and Salary Ordinance.) Special purchases may be made without
soliciting bids or proposals; provided, that it is made with such competition
as a practical under the circumstances. The purchasing agent shall submit a
written recommendation to the Town Council describing the basis for the
purchase. The Town Council may choose to accept the recommendation and purchase
the items or may reject the recommendation.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall comply fully with I.C. 5-22-10 when
making a special purchase and shall maintain the records for a special purchase
in a separate file which shall include a written determinations of the basis
for the special purchase. Such file shall be maintained for a minimum of five
years.
(Am. Ord. 3, 2005, passed 6-12-2017)
§ 34.03 TIMELY SUBMISSION FOR REIMBURSEMENTS.
   In order to receive a reimbursement payment, all invoices and sales slips
received for purchases made for the town, by town employees or persons
representing the town’s interest, must be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer’s
office within 60 days of the purchase.
(Res. 7, 2009, passed 12-30-2009)
FUNDS
§ 34.15 CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   There is hereby created and established a Cumulative Capital Improvement
Fund for the purposes as set forth in and subject to the provisions and
restrictions of I.C. 36-9-16-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 34.10) (Ord. 5, passed 8-4-1965)
§ 34.16 PUBLIC SAFETY FUND.
   The Town Council establishes a Public Safety Fund.
   (A)   Fund receipts. This fund will be supported by fees collected for the
Local Option Income Tax and disbursed by the County Auditor to the town,
designated as Public Safety Fund.
   (B)   Fund disbursements. The Clerk-Treasurer shall account, by separate
line item for receipt and disbursement of said Fund. Disbursement of such funds
shall be made only upon receipt of claim and approval of said claim by the Town
Council. Claims filed must be items for the public safety of the town.
(Ord. 1, 2009, passed - -2015)
§ 34.17 EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND.
   The Town Council establishes such an Equipment Replacement Fund.
   (A)   Title. This Fund shall be known as the Equipment Replacement Fund of
the town.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this Fund is to ensure that sufficient funds
are available when needed to replace outdated or worn out equipment.
   (C)   Included equipment. All equipment owned by the town with a replacement
value in excess of $1,000 and/or a life expectancy of five years or more as
listed in the Fixed Asset Account Group is included in this section.
   (D)   Funding. Each item of equipment in said Fixed Asset Account Group
shall have a sum appropriated annually of not less than the replacement value
of the item, divided by its life expectancy, until said life expectancy has
expired.
   (E)   Disbursements. Disbursements from this Fund shall be used only for the
purchase of replacement equipment and is subject to the same appropriation
process as any fund receiving tax monies and shall not be used to reduce the
actual or maximum permissible levy of the town and is therefore designated as a
non-reverting fund.
(Ord. 3, 2004, passed 6-8-2004)
§ 34.18 USER FEE FUND.
   The Town Council hereby establishes a User Fee Fund.
   (A)   Fund receipts.
      (1)   This Fund shall be supported by fees collected by the Town Court
under I.C. 33-37-8-3 and transferred to the Clerk-Treasurer as follows:
         (a)   Pretrial diversion program fees;
         (b)   Alcohol and drug services fees;
         (c)   Law enforcement continuing education fees; and/or
         (d)   Deferral program fees.
      (2)   Said fees shall be transferred no later than 30 days after receipt.
   (B)   Fund disbursements. Upon receipt of claims submitted on oath to the
Clerk-Treasurer by the programs listed in division (A)(1) above, the Clerk-
Treasurer shall account, by separate line item in the User Fee Fund, for
receipt and disbursement of each of the above described fees.
(Ord. 7, 2004, passed 8-10-2004)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 33-19-8-3 was repealed by P.L. 98-2004, Sec. 164
§ 34.19 LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT FUND.
   The Town Council hereby establishes a Local Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund.
   (A)   Fund receipts. This Fund shall be supported by fees collected by the
Town Court under I.C. 5-2-8-2 and transferred to the Clerk-Treasurer, and said
fees shall be transferred no later that 30 days after receipt.
   (B)   Fund disbursements. All fees so received shall be deposited in the
town’s User Fee Fund and disbursed in accordance with guidelines set forth in
I.C. 5-2-8-2.
(Ord. 8, 2004, passed 8-10-2004)
§ 34.20 LOIT FUND.
   A Loit Special Distribution Fund is hereby created under the following terms
and conditions.
   (A)   The sources of funding for the newly established fund are a special
distribution of local option income tax pursuant to Senate Enrolled Act 67 and
any other funding source not specifically prohibited by law.
   (B)   Expenditures from this Fund are restricted to allowable purposes per
I.C. 6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A) as follows:
      (1)   Engineering, land acquisition, construction, resurfacing,
maintenance, restoration or rehabilitation of both local and arterial road and
street systems;
      (2)   The payment of principal and interest on bonds sold primarily to
finance road, street or thoroughfare project;
      (3)   Any local cost required to undertake a recreational or reservoir
road project under I.C. 8-23-5;
      (4)   The purchase, rental or repair of highway equipment;
      (5)   Providing a match for a grant from the local road and bridge
matching grant fund under I.C. 8-23-30; or
      (6)   Capital projects for aviation related property or facilities,
including capital projects of a board for aviation commissioners established
under I.C. 8-22-3-2 or an airport authority established under I.C. 8-22-3-1.
   (C)   The Fund shall be subject to the same appropriation process as other
municipal funds.
(Ord. 3, 2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 34.21 LOCAL ROAD AND BRIDGE FUND.
   (A)   A new non-reverting fund to be known as the Local Road and Bridge
Matching Grant Fund (“Fund”), and which is to be given number 257, is now
established.
   (B)   The Fund shall receive monies from the Local Road and Bridge Matching
Grant Fund through INDOT as well as local match funds transferred from the LOIT
Special Distribution Fund, the Rainy Day Fund and any other funds applicable to
the community crossing grants or purposes of the same.
(Ord. 7, 2017, passed 11-13-2017)
IRREGULAR VARIANCES, LOSSES, SHORTAGES AND THEFTS
§ 34.35 PURPOSE.
   The policy codified in this subchapter (“policy”) is intended to comply with
I.C. 5-11-1-27 and State Examiner Directive 2015-16.
(Ord. 2, 2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 34.36 MATERIALITY THRESHOLD.
   (A)   The materiality threshold for the town shall be $100. If the erroneous
or irregular variance, loss, shortage or theft is not cash or a cash-
equivalent, the value of the item at the time of the variance, loss, shortage
or theft shall be used to determine whether the materiality threshold has been
met.
   (B)   All erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages or thefts of
$100 or more shall be reported immediately to the State Board of Accounts. In
addition, all erroneous or irregular variances, losses, shortages or thefts
which occur more than four times in a month and which in the aggregate total
$300 or more shall be reported immediately to the State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. 2, 2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 34.37 KNOWLEDGE OF MISAPPROPRIATION.
   A public officer who has knowledge of or reasonable cause to believe that
there has been a misappropriation of public funds or assets of the public
office shall immediately send written notice of the misappropriation to the
State Board of Accounts and the County Prosecuting Attorney.
(Ord. 2, 2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 34.38 MAINTENANCE OF DOCUMENTATION.
   The town shall maintain records and documentation concerning erroneous or
irregular variances, losses, shortages or thefts in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles and the internal control standards provided by
the State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. 2, 2016, passed 6-13-2016)
§ 34.39 RESOLUTION OF INCIDENTS.
   (A)   The Town Council shall investigate all erroneous or irregular
variances, losses, shortages or thefts, regardless of whether they meet the
materiality threshold established by this policy.
   (B)   Upon conclusion of each such investigation, the Town Council shall:
      (1)   Implement procedures designed to prevent the recurrence of such
incident; and
      (2)   Take appropriate disciplinary action against the employee
responsible for the incident.
(Ord. 2, 2016, passed 6-13-2016)
CAPITAL ASSETS POLICY
§ 34.50 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the Capitol Assets
Policy Ordinance of the town.
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.51 ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Council for the overall
administration of this subchapter. It shall be the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer
and all department heads for maintaining the capitol assets inventory in a
current status.
   (B)   Department heads shall be responsible for conducting year-end
inventories and completing capitol asset notification forms on any changes of
status (see § 34.57).
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.52 CAPITAL ASSET CATEGORIES.
   Capitol assets include land, easements, rights-of-way, land improvements,
buildings, building improvements, construction in progress, machinery and
equipment, vehicles, infrastructure, works of art and monuments.
   (A)   Land, easements, rights-of-way and land improvements will be
capitalized but not depreciated.
   (B)   Capitol assets with a useful life of more than one year and a
threshold of $5,000 shall be capitalized and depreciated. This includes
acquisitions by a lease-purchase agreement and donated items and will be
reported in the government wide financial statements (see § 34.57).
   (C)   For accountability and safeguarding of assets an inventory will be
kept on all computers and on all items costing more than $1,000 and up to, but
not including, $5,000. These will be classified as non-capitalized assets.
Assets that are not capitalized are expensed in the year of acquisition.
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.53 VALUATION OF CAPITAL ASSETS.
   (A)   Capitol assets should be recorded at actual cost. Normally, the cost
recorded is the purchase price or construction costs of the asset, but also
included is any other reasonable and necessary costs incurred to place the
asset in its intended location and intended use, that can be directly related
to the asset.
   (B)   Donated or contributed assets should be recorded at their fair market
value on the date donated or acquired.
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.54 ASSETS DEFINED.
   It is important to the maintenance of accurate records that each asset
category be precisely defined and that all persons responsible for records
maintenance be fully aware of the categorization system. This section further
clarifies the asset definitions by major category.
   (A)   Buildings. All structures designed and erected to house equipment,
services or functions are included. This includes systems, services and
fixtures within the buildings, attachments such as porches, stairs, fire
escapes, canopies, areaways, lighting fixtures, flagpoles and all other such
units that serve the building.
      (1)   Plumbing systems, lighting systems, heating, cooling, ventilating
and air handling systems, sprinkler systems, alarm systems, sound systems and
surveillance systems, passenger and freight elevators, escalators, built-in
casework, walk-in coolers and freezers, fixed shelving and other fixed
equipment are included with the BUILDING, if owned.
      (2)   Communications antennas and/or towers are not included as
BUILDINGS, but as parts of the equipment units that they serve.
   (B)   Equipment.
      (1)   Includes all other types of physical property within the scope of
the Capitol Assets Policy not previously classified.
      (2)   Included within this category are office mechanical equipment,
office furniture, appliances, furnishings, machinery items, maintenance
equipment, communications equipment, Police, Fire, Sanitation and Park
Department equipment, laboratory equipment, dogs, horses, vehicles, road
equipment, aircraft, emergency equipment, earth-moving equipment, text
equipment, civil defense equipment, data processing equipment and zoo wildlife.
      (3)   All supplies are excluded.
   (C)   Improvements other than buildings. Assets in this category are walks,
parking areas and drives, fencing, retaining walls, pools, fountains, planters,
underground sprinkler systems and other similar items. Utility assets in this
category are water supply mains, collection sewers, wells, fences, intake
pipes, manholes and fire hydrants.
   (D)   Infrastructure assets. Long-lived capitol assets that normally can be
preserved for a significant greater number of years than most capitol assets
and are normally stationary in nature. This category includes roads, bridges,
sidewalks, street lights, traffic signals, street signs, drainage and water
systems. Infrastructure assets can include structures directly related to
infrastructure. These would include rest area facilities and road maintenance
structures, such as shops and garages associated with a highway system, and
water pumping buildings associated with water systems.
   (E)   Land, easements and rights-of-way. Specified land, easements, rights-
of-way, lots, parcels or acreage owned by the town or its various departments,
boards or authorities, regardless of the method or date of acquisition.
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.55 ASSET TRANSFERS AND DEPOSITIONS.
   Property shall not be transferred, turned in for action or disposed of
without prior approval of the appropriate department head. A capitol asset
notification form shall be sent to the Clerk-Treasurer in all cases.
   (A)   A capitol asset notification form will be accomplished on each new
purchase item by the department head receiving the purchased item.
   (B)   Deletions for any reason shall be reported by the department head by
means of accomplishing a capitol asset notification form.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, TRANSFERS are defined as any movement
of an asset by virtue of change of location, either by account, department,
building, floor or room, and require a capitol asset notification form by the
receiving department head.
   (D)   Assets that are stolen shall require the department head to ensure a
police report is promptly filed and a copy of the police report attached to the
capitol asset notification form.
   (E)   All capitol assets notification forms shall be sent to the Clerk-
Treasurer’s office within three working days of the transaction.
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.56 PERIODIC INVENTORIES.
   (A)   A physical inventory of capitol assets will be conducted by each
department head as near as practical to year-end. The Clerk-Treasurer will
provide a list of the inventory on file which will be sent to each department
before year-end.
   (B)   (1)   Department heads will compare physical observations of assets to
the listing noting whether the asset exists, the location if not apparent
otherwise and any other relevant factors.
      (2)   If the condition of an asset has deteriorated to the point its
useful life has been impaired, that fact shall be noted.
   (C)   Assets which are observed during the physical inventory which are not
on the inventory list shall be noted. Omission of assets included on the
inventory list provided shall also be noted, and the reasons for such omissions
shall be documented to the extent possible.
   (D)   Department heads will be accountable for the capitol asset inventory
charged to their department. The physical inventory sheet and related
documentation will be forwarded to the Clerk-Treasurer when requested.
   (E)   The Clerk-Treasurer will compare the results of the physical inventory
to the capitol asset records and make necessary adjustments to the capitol
assets.
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
§ 34.57 CAPITAL ASSET NOTIFICATION FORM.
 
   Capital Asset Notification Form
 
Department:                                                                      
 
This notification is for: Addition Update Transfer Disposal
Acquisition is by: Purchase Donation Lease Transfer
   (Attach copy)
Date of transaction:                                                                      
Account No.                                                               P.O. No.                                            
Estimated:   Life expectancy                                     Mileage or hours                                    
CIP number                                          Location:                                                                 
Serial or VIN number:                                                                      
Total/Partial value of asset:                                                                      
(Please attach or forward copy of checks) to document cost if the asset was donated, attach documentation of fair market value of asset. How determined and date board approved.)
Description of asset:                                                                      
(Building description must include square footage building material roof type and if equipped with sprinkler system or boiler)
Brand or make:                                              Model No.                                                   
Year:                                                       License No.                                                          
(Attach copy of registration)
Gross vehicle weight:                                         Type of fuel:                                                
(Trucks only)
Disposal of capital asset:                                                   
Method of disposition:   Sale Trade-in Scrapped End-of-lease
Stolen/wrecked Transferred to:                                                
(Attach police report)
Amount of cash received or trade-in value (if applicable) $  
Date Board approved:                                Date Council approved:                                         
(Attach copy of minutes) (Real property value > $9,999)
Date Mayor approved:                                        Signature:                                                     
(Real property only)
Person responsible:                                                                                                               
Signature                           Printed name
Responsible department head’s signature:                                                                      
If transferred, receiving person’s signature:                                                                      
Printed name:                                                                      
Clerk-Treasurer’s use only
Received:                                                      Entered capital asset:                                        
Insured:                                                                Clerk-Treasurer’s initial:                   
 
(Am. Ord. 2, 2005, passed 12-12-2022)
CHAPTER 35: ORDINANCE VIOLATION BUREAU
Section
   
35.01   Title
   
35.02   Appointment of Violations Clerk
   
35.03   Duties of Violations Clerk
   
35.04   Right to trial
   
35.05   Schedule of civil penalties
   
35.06   Failure to appear or satisfy assessed civil penalty
   
35.07   Ordinances and code provisions in harmony with schedule of civil
penalties
   
35.08   Distribution of funds
   
35.09   Ordinance violation deferral program
§ 35.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Ordinance Violation
Bureau Ordinance.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.02 APPOINTMENT OF VIOLATIONS CLERK.
   The judge of the town shall serve as the Violations Clerk.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.03 DUTIES OF VIOLATIONS CLERK.
   The Violation Clerk may accept:
   (A)   Written appearances;
   (B)   Waivers of trial;
   (C)   Admissions of violations; and
   (D)   Payment of civil penalties not to exceed $250 and subject to the
schedule set forth in I.C. 33-36-3 by the Town Council.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
Editor’s note:
   I.C. 33-36-3 was repealed by P.L. 98-2004, Sec. 164
§ 35.04 RIGHT TO TRIAL.
   Any person charged with an ordinance violation is entitled to a trial before
a court as provided by law. Any person wishing to exercise this right to trial
shall appear before the Violations Clerk and deny the violation or enter a
written denial with the Clerk within 20 days of the alleged violation. Failure
to do so shall result in default judgment against said person.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.05 SCHEDULE OF CIVIL PENALTIES.
   The following schedule of ordinances and town code provisions shall be
subject to the jurisdiction of the Ordinance Violation Bureau and shall be
subject to the civil penalty set forth below. All fines must be paid to
Violations Clerk’s office prior to expiration of time set forth in §
35.04. Failure to do so shall result in default judgment with statutory
interest.
General Violations Code Section Civil Penalty
General Violations                 Code Section   Civil Penalty
Alcoholic beverages on park        §             $75/citation
property                           93.04
Animal abuse on park property      §             $25/citation
                                   93.07
                                   §             $50/first citation
Animals running at large           91.04          $100/second citation
                                                  $250 thereafter
Bicycle/motorcycle and the like on §             $25/citation
park property                      93.02
Bicycle riders ignoring rules of   §             $5/first citation
road                               73.02          $10/second citation
Damage to plants, trees,           §
buildings/or grounds on park       93.12          Repair and cleaning cost
property
Discharge of firearms or fireworks §             $25/citation
on park property                   93.05
Disorderly conduct on park         §             $50/citation
property                           93.06
Driving/parking on sidewalk        §             $25/citation
                                   72.06(A)
                                   §             $25/first citation
Excessive barking                  91.01(A)       $50/second citation
                                                  $100 thereafter
                                                  $25/first citation
Failure to stop at a stop sign     § 74, Sched. I$50/second citation
                                                  $100 thereafter
Grass clippings                    §             $25/citation
                                   94.04
Grass/weeds in excess of 8" in     §             $25/first citation
height                             94.02          $50/second citation
                                                  $100 thereafter
Illegal fires in park              §             $25/citation
                                   93.03
Improper or lack of equipment on   §             $25/citation
bicycle                            73.01
In park after hours                §             $50/first citation
                                   93.08          $100 thereafter
Inspection late fee; golf carts    §             $10/citation
                                   73.23
Junked or abandoned vehicle        §             $50/citation
                                   90.01
Littering in park                  §             $50/citation
                                   93.11
Loud music/excessive noise         §             $25/citation
                                   92.01
                                                  $25/first citation
Minor curfew/parental              §             $50/second citation
responsibility                     130.01         $100/thereafter, plus $100
                                                  parental citation
No vender permit to sell in park   §             $100/citation
                                   93.10
Obstruction of sidewalks and/or    §             $25/citation
streets                            72.06(A)
Overtime parking                   §             $25/citation
                                   72.03
Parking during prohibited hours    §             $50/citation
                                   72.06(M)
Parking in handicap zone           §             $50/citation
                                   72.06(M)
Parking in no parking area         §             $25/citation
                                   72.06(M)
Parking on yellow line             §             $25/citation
                                   72.06(M)
Parking, wrong side of street      §             $25/citation
                                   72.01
Placing of snow in streets or      §             $25/citation
alleys                             71.03
Posting of notices or graffiti in  §             Repair and cleaning cost
park                               93.13
Refusal to show permit to sell in  §             $100/citation
park                               93.10
Semis parked on local streets      §             $50/first citation
                                   72.04          $100/second citation
Unlawful discharge of firearm      §             $25/citation
                                   93.05
Unlawfully issued permit to sell   §             $75/citation
in park                            93.10
Vehicle parked in alley            §             $25/citation
                                   72.05
                                   §             $25/first citation
Violation of unregistered ORV      73.23          $50/second citation
                                                  $100 thereafter
 
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.06 FAILURE TO APPEAR OR SATISFY ASSESSED CIVIL PENALTY.
   Any person who denies an ordinance or code violation; fails to satisfy a
civil penalty assessed by the Violations Clerk after having entered an
admission of violation; or fails to deny or admit the violation, shall require
the Clerk to report same to the Town Attorney to initiate the proceedings in
court for the alleged ordinance or code violation which may result in
additional court costs and penalties.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.07 ORDINANCES AND CODE PROVISIONS IN HARMONY WITH SCHEDULE OF CIVIL
PENALTIES.
   The provisions of this code and any other ordinances of the town referred to
in §
35.05 are hereby amended to provide and declare the civil penalty schedule with
the code provision or ordinance to be the specific civil penalty for the
violation of the code provision or ordinance.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.08 DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
   The proceeds from the Ordinance Violations Bureau shall be placed into the
General Fund of the town.
(Am. Ord. 1-2006, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 35.09 ORDINANCE VIOLATION DEFERRAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide qualified
individuals:
      (1)   An opportunity to voluntarily defer the town’s prosecution of
designated ordinance violations;
      (2)   To deter additional ordinance violations;
      (3)   Expedite court processing of ordinance violations; and
      (4)   Enable the town to obtain certain fees for each ordinance violation
so deferred.
   (B)   Requirements. The town’s deferral program requires that individuals
who have violated a qualifying town ordinance may voluntarily enter the
deferral program by written agreement with the Town Attorney under the
following requirements.
      (1)   The defendant shall voluntarily agree to the terms and conditions
of the deferral agreement offered by the Town Attorney.
      (2)   The terms and conditions of the deferral agreement shall be in
writing and signed by the Town Attorney.
      (3)   The defendant shall agree to pay to the clerk of the court the
deferral fees established by the Town Attorney.
      (4)   The defendant shall agree to pay all other applicable court fees
and costs to the clerk of court.
      (5)   The executed deferral agreement shall be filed in the Town Court.
      (6)   Upon the defendant’s successful compliance with the terms and
conditions of the deferral agreement, the Town Attorney shall file a motion
with the court to dismiss the pending deferred action.
      (7)   The court shall dismiss the pending deferred action against the
defendant, with prejudice, upon receipt of the motion to dismiss from the Town
Attorney.
   (C)   Authority to administer program.
      (1)   The Town Attorney is hereby given full authority to administer the
deferral program, to draft, prepare and execute all documents and forms
necessary and desirable for the implementation of the deferral program. The
Town Attorney is also authorized and directed to establish the amount of the
initial deferral program user’s fee and monthly user’s fee, at a level not to
exceed the amounts authorized by law. The Town Attorney shall also establish
all eligibility and participation criteria for the deferral program, and take
any and all other lawful actions necessary to implement this chapter and
administer the deferral program.
      (2)   All deferral fees from the deferral program shall be transferred by
the clerk of the court to the Clerk-Treasurer and deposited in the town’s User
Fee Fund on a monthly basis. The User Fee Fund shall be administered by the
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall maintain appropriately detailed records of all
deferral fees deposited into and transferred out of the User Fee Fund.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall certify to the Town Council and Town
Attorney an accounting of the amount of deferral fees received and deposited in
the User Fee Fund during the previous month. The Town Attorney shall prepare
and submit to the Clerk-Treasurer claims for presentation to the Town Council
for payment, detailing costs and expenses incurred by the Town Attorney in
administering the deferral program.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, in the event
the deferral program is discontinued by the Town Attorney, and, after all
deferral program costs and expenses have been paid in full, the deferral fees
collected and on deposit in the User Fee Fund shall revert to the Town’s
General Fund.
(Ord. 6, 2004, passed 8-10-2004)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Use of utilities
   
50.02   Unlawful deposit of objectionable waste
Administration
   
50.15   Billing
   
50.16   Accounts and records
   
50.17   Disposition of funds
   
50.18   Returned checks
   
50.19   Liability
   
50.20   Unclaimed deposit fees
   
50.21   Deposit return
   
50.22   Credit to account for overpayment
   
50.23   Disconnection for late payment
   
50.24   Hardships
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 USE OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   All residences, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, business, recreational or other purposes, situated within the
corporate limits and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way shall be
connected to the services of the town’s utilities unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Town Council.
   (B)   Residences, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, business, recreation or other purposes, outside the corporate
limits of the town may be connected to the services of the town’s utilities if
a water main or sanitary sewer line is within 150 feet of said structures.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.02 UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit
or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, on the public or private
property within the town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable wastes.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016) Penalty, see §
50.99
ADMINISTRATION
§ 50.15 BILLING.
   It is hereby made the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town to render
bills for water, sewer and garbage service and all other charges in connection
with the operation of the town utilities and to collect all monies due therein.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.16 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper records, books and accounts in which complete, and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the water, sewage and garbage
service. The Town Council shall cause to be made audits by an independent
auditing firm in the books showing receipts and disbursements at intervals of
its choosing.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.17 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water and
sewer systems shall be paid to and held by the Clerk-Treasurer, separate and
apart from all other funds of the town. Said funds shall be deposited in
separate funds designated the Water Fund Account and the Sewer Fund Account,
and said Clerk-Treasurer shall administer these Funds in the manner set forth
by state statutes and town ordinances.
   (B)   All revenues and monies derived from the garbage, trash and solid
waste fee shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer, and said funds shall be
deposited into to the Town General Account for the administration, operation
and maintenance of the solid waste collection and disposal projects.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.18 RETURNED CHECKS.
   All checks returned for non-sufficient funds shall be charged $25 plus bank
fees.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.19 LIABILITY.
   The owner of the premises and the occupant/user of the water, sewage and
garbage service shall be jointly and severally liable for said service.
Deposits, as outlined in §§
51.42 and
52.23(B), shall be applied to any bill for service, and any balance of such
deposit shall be returned to the applicant without interest. Such deposits
shall be deposited and administered in separate accounts as designated in §
50.17(A).
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.20 UNCLAIMED DEPOSIT FEES.
   Unclaimed deposit fees for water and sewage become the property of the town
upon expiration of the following time limits below and shall be transferred to
the respective cash operating fund:
   (A)   Sewage deposits, seven years; and
   (B)   Water deposits, three years.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.21 DEPOSIT RETURN.
   All deposits shall be held for two years. If the account holder has not
claimed within one year after the two years, the deposit is then forfeit to the
town. Account holder must request the return. It is not the town’s
responsibility to request the return. Deposits will only be returned at the
request of the account holder in writing, and the account holder cannot have
any delinquent bills nor have been delinquent within the past 12 months of the
request.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.22 CREDIT TO ACCOUNT FOR OVERPAYMENT.
   Any account that has an overpayment from an estimated bill, credit from an
overcharge, credit from an adjustment or overpayment shall be given a credit to
the account. No cash refund shall be given. In order to obtain this credit, the
account holder must present a letter in writing to the Town Council. The
account holder must provide documentation to support the credit refund.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.23 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The town’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have
a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person and
by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present orally or
in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the town official in charge
of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the
customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a
final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid along with a turn-on charge in
the sum of $25.
§ 50.24 HARDSHIPS.
   If an established hardship can be determined by the Clerk-Treasurer, from
evidence presented by the petitioner, a payment schedule for delinquent utility
payments may be established.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to furnish all
necessary financial data sufficient for the Clerk-Treasurer to make a
determination of hardship.
   (B)   Hardship must be of a temporary nature.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, corporation who violates any provision of this title for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues to occur,
as authorized by I.C. 36-1-3-8-(a)(10).
(Am. Ord. 1, 2010, passed 1-11-2016)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Delinquency and cut-offs
   
51.03   Hardships
Sewage Disposal Where Public Sewer Is Unavailable
   
51.15   Public sewer unavailable
   
51.16   Building sewers and connections
   
51.17   Prohibited discharges
   
51.18   Construction requirements
   
51.19   Septic tanks
   
51.20   Permit to construct
   
51.21   Taps and connections
Public Sewage Utility
   
51.35   Use of public sewers
   
51.36   Protection from damage
   
51.37   Notice of violation
   
51.38   Liability
   
51.39   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.40   Application for sewer service
   
51.41   Failure to make application for sewer service; delinquency
   
51.42   One-time charges
   
51.43   Monthly charges
   
51.44   Sewer bill adjustments
Billing
   
51.55   Accounts and records
   
51.56   Disposition of funds
   
51.57   Returned checks
   
51.58   Liability
   
51.59   Unclaimed deposit fees
   
51.60   Deposit return
   
51.61   Credit to account for overpayment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quality of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in
five days at 20°C, expressed in parts per million, by weight.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drains to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
   INSPECTOR. Any person(s) duly authorized by the town to inspect and approve
the installation of building sewers and their connection to the public sewer
systems.
   MAY. This term constitutes permissive or discretionary authority.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake or other
body, or surface waters, or groundwaters, and any public or private channel,
watercourse, open or tile ditch or sewer which does not pass through or have a
direct outlet to the town sewage treatment plant, as a part of the town sewage
works.
   OWNER. The record owner of the subject property according to the assessment
or transfer records in the office of the County Auditor; includes any one or
more legal owners of an interest in the subject property where such records are
not current or correct and evidence or such facts are known or ascertainable;
and includes the equitable owner under any contact or agreement to purchase
such property where evidence of such fact is known or ascertainable.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which carries sewage and into which stormwater,
surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
   SANITARY SEWERS. A sewer which carries sewage and into which stormwater,
surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, or any structure or
facility whatsoever.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SHALL. This term constitutes mandatory or required authority.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carried stormwaters and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of the town
or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids or are removable by laboratory
filtering.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.02 DELINQUENCY AND CUT-OFFS.
   Sewage rates as set forth in this chapter will be charged on a monthly
basis, with bills being sent on or about the first of the month shall be
overdue on or about the fifteenth of the month, at which time an overdue charge
will be added. The following procedure will be followed from this point.
   (A)   After 30 days from the due date, a letter will be sent stating the
date service will be cut or disconnected.
   (B)   For service to be re-established, the following actions must be taken
by the customer:
      (1)   Pay in full, a reconnect fee of $25;
      (2)   Pay in full, all service charges; and
      (3)   Pay in full, both the delinquent and current charges.
   (C)   At such time that all of division (B) above is accomplished, a work
order will be initiated for reconnect and will be scheduled within the next two
working days.
   (D)   Any person requesting reconnection that previously had amounts written
off as uncollectible shall also be required to remit the amount of the written
off debt and any collection fees paid before service will be re-established.
   (E)   Any account holder that owes a previous bill from one residence and is
moving to another residence must pay the previous bill in full. If the account
holder is moving into another residence and plans on putting the new residence
in someone else’s name, he or she must still pay the previous bill prior to the
new service being turned on. A new deposit will be required.
   (F)   Upon having sewage disconnected, please provide a forwarding address.
We will then minus your deposit and send you a refund on your final bill.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.03 HARDSHIPS.
   If an established hardship can be determined by the Clerk-Treasurer from
evidence presented by the petitioner, a payment schedule for delinquent utility
payments may be established.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to furnish all
necessary financial data sufficient for the Clerk-Treasurer to make a
determination of hardship.
   (B)   The hardship must be of a temporary nature.
   (C)   The following payment schedule is established for payments of
delinquent utility bills. This payment is in addition to the current monthly
billing of which both must be kept current or service will be disconnected and
the account turned over for debt collection without further notice. Under no
circumstances shall payment be less than $20 plus penalty or require a time
period in excess of 12 months to bring the account up to date.
Delinquent Amount At Start Minimum Monthly Payment
Delinquent Amount At Start Minimum Monthly Payment
Up to $100                 $20 + penalty
$100.01 to $200            $25 + penalty
$200.01 to $300            $30 + penalty
$300.01 to $400            $34 + penalty
$400.01 to $500            $42 + penalty
$500.01 to $600            $50 + penalty
$600.01 to $700            $59 + penalty
$700.01 to $800            $67 + penalty
$800.01 to $900            $75 + penalty
$900.01 to $1,000          $84 + penalty
$l,000.01 to beyond        1/2 of delinquency + penalty
 
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
SEWAGE DISPOSAL WHERE PUBLIC SEWER IS UNAVAILABLE
§ 51.15 PUBLIC SEWER UNAVAILABLE.
   Where a public sewer is not available under §§
51.35 through
51.44, the owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, business, recreation or other purpose, situated within the town,
shall connect all drains thereon to a private sewage disposal system, complying
with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit to be
discharged, in any natural outlet within the town or under the jurisdiction of
the town, any sewage.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for disposal of
sewage, except under the provisions of this section.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hereafter construct, erect or
install any privy, privy vault or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of human or animal excrement or other objectionable waste.
   (D)   No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed or maintained
except in compliance with all requirements and standards as to type,
capacities, locations, layout, construction, operation and care as prescribed
and recommended by the State Department of Environmental Management.
   (E)   No private sewage disposal system, including effluent therefrom, shall
be permitted to discharge into any natural outlet.
   (F)   (1)   No private sewage disposal system shall be constructed by any
owner or person without first obtaining a permit from the town. The application
for such permit shall be in writing; upon a form to be provided by the town;
submitted to the Building Commissioner; and shall include location, description
and specifications of the proposed system, the nature of the improvement to be
served thereby, and such other information deemed necessary by the Building
Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall approve or reject such
application as the proposed system conforms or fails to conform to the
provisions of this section. Approval of such application shall permit
construction and installation in accordance therewith. No permit for such
system shall be issued until construction and installation is completed in
accordance with the terms of this section and to the satisfaction of the
Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall be permitted to inspect
the installation at any stage of construction, at any event the application for
such permit shall notify the Building Commissioner when the work is ready for
final inspection, before any underground portions are covered. The Building
Commissioner upon final inspection shall issue such permit as such system
conforms or fails to conform to the provisions of this section. A refusal to
issue such permit shall be accompanied by written reasons therefor.
      (2)   Any owner feeling aggrieved by such action of the Building
Commissioner may appeal such action to the Town Board of Zoning Appeals. The
Board of Zoning Appeals may confirm, amend or reverse the action of the
Building Commissioner in compliance with the provisions of this section.
   (G)   When a public sewer becomes available as provided in §§
51.35 through
51.44 to a property not previously served, the drains of such property shall be
connected to such sewer and all provisions of §§
51.35 through
51.44 complied with, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so,
and the private sewage disposal system or other facility intended used for
disposal of sewage or human or animal excrement shall be forthwith abandoned
and filled with clean bank-run gravel, dirt or suitable material.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.16 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make a connection with, open or tap
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the town. The application for the permit
shall be in writing upon a form to be provided by the town, submitted to the
Superintendent and shall include location, specifications, nature of the
improvements to be served and such other information deemed necessary by the
Superintendent. A permit fee of $25 shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer upon
application for the permit. The permit shall be issued after the
Superintendent’s final approval of the application and work thereunder in
accordance with the provisions of the chapter.
   (A)   All installation and connection, and costs and expenses thereof, of
the building sewer with the public sewer shall be the responsibility of the
property owner and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one stands at the rear of another building, on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available, or one cannot be constructed to
the rear of the other building may be extended to the rear building, and the
whole be considered as one building sewer. Other exceptions will be granted
only by special permission from the Superintendent.
   (C)   Old building sewers, or portions thereof, may be used in connection
with new buildings only when found upon examination and testing by the
Inspector to meet all requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   The building sewer shall be constructed of either vitrified clay sewer
pipe and fittings meeting the A.S.T.M. Specifications for Standard of Extra
Strength Clay Sewer Pipe, extra heavy iron soil pipe meeting the current
A.S.T.M. specifications or the Department of Commerce commercial standards for
extra heavy cast iron soil pipe and fittings, or concrete sewer pipe findings
meeting the current A.S.T.M. Specifications for Standard or Extra Strength
Sewer Pipe. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall
be of cast iron, soil pipe, except that vitrified clay pipe or concrete pipe
may be accepted if laid on a stable, improved bed or cradle approved by said
Inspector.
   (E)   All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Vitrified clay sewer pipe shall be fitted with factory made resilient,
compression joints meeting the current A.S.T.M. Specifications for Vitrified
Clay Pipe Joints Having Resilient Properties (designation C425). Concrete sewer
pipe joints shall be made of rubber ring, flexible compression type, similar
and equal to the joints specified for vitrified clay pipes.
   (F)   The size and slope of the building sewers shall be subject to the
approval of said inspections but in no event shall the diameter be less than
six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth
inch per foot.
   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid
parallel to, or within three feet of any bear wall, which might thereby by
weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. All
excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the Inspector. Pipe laying and back
fill shall be performed in accordance with current A.S.T.M. specifications
except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by
said Inspector or his or her representative.
   (H)   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity-induced flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drains shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged into the
public sewer.
   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into public sewer shall be made
at the “Y” branch or manhole designated for the property, if such branch is
available at a suitable location. Any connection not made at the designated “Y”
branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by said Inspector.
   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the Inspector when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Inspector or his or
her representative and subject to his or her final approval.
   (K)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of work shall be restored in a condition satisfactory to the Town
Building Commissioner. The owner shall be the executor of such application for
a building construction permit and agree to indemnify and hold harmless the
town from any loss, damage, claims or actions that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by installation of building sewer.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.17 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge on or into any drain,
sewer, ditch, waterway or public place within said town any garbage, raw sewage
or sewage solids.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the discharge of rain or
groundwater to enter the sanitary sewer system. Said discharges include sump
pumps, footer and/or foundation drains and downspouts. These waters must be
routed to storm sewers, drainage swale or other natural drainage area.
Residents shall have 90 days from passage of this chapter to check sump pumps,
down spouts and any suspicious water hookups. At the expiration of said 90-day
grace period, any improper hookups discovered will subject the owner of such
property to penalties stated in §
50.99.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.18 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, occupant or owner, whether in or out of
possession, to build, construct, install or reinstall upon any land, lot or
improvement in the town a sewage disposal system which does not include and
utilize a septic tank disposal system conforming to the requirements of this
subchapter, and which does not also include an effluent disposal system
conforming to the requirements of this subchapter in those instances where
septic tank effluent cannot or is not discharged into public drain, sewer or
ditch.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.19 SEPTIC TANKS.
   (A)   No septic tank or septic tank effluent disposal system shall be built,
constructed, installed or reinstalled upon land or lot within the town by any
person, occupant or owner, whether in or out of possession, that does not
comply with all requirements and standards of the State Department of
Environmental Management.
   (B)   No septic tank shall have a capacity of less than 750 gallons, and all
tiles shall be standard sanitary sealed point tile, and in no instance shall
clay or field tile or concrete joints be used, except in a standard effluent
disposal system.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.20 PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT.
   No sewage disposal system shall be built, constructed, installed or
reinstalled upon any land or lot within the town by any person, occupant or
owner, whether in or out of possession, without first obtaining a permit from
the town that certifies such sewage disposal system conforms to the
requirements of this subchapter. The application for a permit shall be made to
the Clerk-Treasurer and shall include location, description and specifications
of the proposed system and the nature of the improvement which will be served
thereby. Such application shall be referred to the Town Council member in
charge of utilities who, upon examination and inspection, and in consultation
with the Wastewater Superintendent, shall approve or reject such application.
If such application is approved, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a permit. If
such application is rejected, said Council member shall stipulate in writing
his or her reasons for rejection and whereby such proposed system may be made
to conform to this subchapter. Any person feeling aggrieved by an action of the
above parties may appeal such action in person or in writing to the Town
Council at any regular or special meeting thereof. The Town Council may
confirm, amend or reverse the actions of the above parties.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.21 TAPS AND CONNECTIONS.
   No tap shall be made into any public sewer or drain, connection or cut made
for discharge into a public open ditch, for the draining or discharge of sewage
of any nature in the town, by any person, for a sewage disposal system which
does not conform to this subchapter and without first having obtained a permit,
as provided in §
51.20.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
Penalty, see §
50.99
PUBLIC SEWAGE UTILITY
§ 51.35 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   The owners of all homes, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, business, recreation or other purposes, situated within the town
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which is located a public
sewer of the town within 150 feet of the property line, is hereby required, at
their sole expense, to install suitable toilet facilities and drains therein
and to connect such facilities and drains by building sewer directly to such
public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (A)   Therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any sewage
or permit any sewage to be discharged in any natural outlet within the town or
under the jurisdiction of the town.
   (B)   Therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
maintain any septic tank, cesspool, privy vault, privy or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage, human or animal excrement or other
objectionable waste.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any public sewer,
except when said public sewer is classified as combined or storm sewer.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any
public sewer any harmful waters or wastes, whether liquid, solid or gas,
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers; damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewer works; or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works.
   (E)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. When installed, they shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, and continuously operate
efficiently at all times.
   (F)   The admission into public sewers of any waters having harmful or
objectionable characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Superintendent, who may prescribe limits on the strength and character of
these waters or wastes. When necessary, in the opinion of the Superintendent,
the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary treatments as
may be necessary to treat these wastes prior to discharge to the public sewer.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed
treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval by said Superintendent and
the State Department of Environmental Management, and no construction of said
facilities shall commence until said approvals are obtained in writing. Where
preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at said owner’s expense.
   (G)   (1)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
served by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall maintain at his or
her expense a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of waste.
      (2)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control
manhole or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
      (3)   In the event that no special control manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.36 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 51.37 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be violating any provision of this subchapter, shall be
served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall permanently cease all violations within the period of time
stated in such notice.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
§ 51.38 LIABILITY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter shall become liable
to the town for any expense or damage occasioned by the town by reason of such
violations.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
§ 51.39 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   The Superintendents, Inspector and other duly authorized employees of the
town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing and accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
§ 51.40 APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE.
   Application for service shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer upon a form
to be supplied by the town. The application shall state the name of the
applicant and the premises to be served. The application for sewer service
shall be issued and registered in the same name as the person in whom the town
water service for such premises is registered in those instances where such
premises are served by the town waterworks utilities.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
§ 51.41 FAILURE TO MAKE APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE; DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   No town water service shall be transferred or connected until and
unless the water service applicant completes an application for sewer service
as herein provided in those instances where the premises are serviced by both
water and sewer service.
   (B)   The failure of a person to complete an application for sewer service
within 30 days after such sewer service commences shall be considered
delinquent, and a sewer service charge for the amount of such deposit, subject
to the same penalty, conditions and enforcement as provided delinquent sewer
service charges.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.42 ONE-TIME CHARGES.
   (A)   Prior to sewer services being activated to a residence, business or
industrial location, a deposit fee and a connection fee must be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer at least seven days prior to the connection date requested.
      (1)   Deposit fee: $85; and
      (2)   (a)   Connection fee:
 
5/8-inch to 3/4-inch meter $875
1-inch meter               $2,175
1-1/4-inch meter           $3,475
1-1/2-inch meter           $5,025
2-inch meter               $8,675
 
         (b)   Over two-inch will be an equivalency ratio determined by the
Town Council on an individual case basis.
   (B)   Retire of service water/sewer. To cap the water/sewer pits costs $25
per pit. To remove the sewer/water pits costs $250 per pit.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
§ 51.43 MONTHLY CHARGES.
   (A)   Monthly flow rate charges.
 
                    Effective Prior to August 11, Effective August 11, 2025
                    2025
First 2,500 gallons $21.84 per 1,000 gallons      $25.27 per 1,000 gallons
Next 2,500 gallons  $14.93 per 1,000 gallons      $17.27 per 1,000 gallons
Next 5,000 gallons  $13.92 per 1,000 gallons      $16.11 per 1,000 gallons
Next 10,000 gallons $12.35 per 1,000 gallons      $14.29 per 1,000 gallons
Over 20,000 gallons $10.65 per 1,000 gallons      $12.32 per 1,000 gallons
 
   (B)   Minimum monthly charges at 2,500 gallons.
 
                           Effective Prior to August Effective August 11, 2025
                           11, 2025
Water and sewage customers $54.60                    $63.15
Sewage only customers      $84.45                    $97.70
 
   (C)   Monthly flow rate for the Miami County Regional Sewer District.
 
                  Effective Prior to August 11, 2025 Effective August 11, 2025
Per 1,000 gallons $2.85                              $2.85
 
   (D)   Sewage bill adjustments. Any water that would not be processed at the
sewage plant may be adjusted; said unprocessed water could be as a result of
leaks or water that is used to fill a swimming pool. Customer does not have to
be eligible for water adjustment to be eligible for a sewage adjustment.
Adjustments will be made in the same manner as in §
51.44(A)(3) and (A)(4).
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
§ 51.44 SEWER BILL ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Generally speaking, what happens to the water after it leaves the
meter is the responsibility of the customer. At times however, through no one’s
fault, leaks do develop that are not detectable until receipt of the water bill
and, therefore, it is only fair that an adjustment be made. The following
procedure will be used to determine a leak adjustment.
      (1)   Customer will be informed of a dramatic increase of water usage.
      (2)   Within seven working days, the customer shall reply that a leak
does or does not exist and when the repairs are anticipated to be completed.
The Utility Department will then be notified upon completion of said repairs.
Receipts may be required.
      (3)   No adjustments to the sewer bill will be made for a leak that was
of a visible or easily determined problem. Below are some examples of what
circumstances will and will not be eligible for adjustment. The following is by
no means an exhaustive list. The customer is responsible for leaks that are
preventable and adjustments may be made to the others.
Item Sewage
Item                                         Sewage
Filling of pool w/garden hose                Yes
Garden/hose left running                     Yes
Leak in basement/crawl space                 Yes
Leak in buried piping                        Yes
Leak under skirting in mobile home           Yes
Leaking faucet or commode                    Yes
Water left running to prevent pipe freeze-up Yes
 
      (4)   Freezing weather. If a customer runs their water to prevent pipes
from freezing, he or she shall be allowed up to 200 gallons a month in an
adjustment.
      (5)   If an adjustment is in order, the Clerk-Treasurer’s office will
determine a period of previous usage that was reasonably consistent over a
period of four months to determine an average usage. The average usage will be
subtracted from the usage during the month(s) the leak existed, and the
difference will then constitute the number of gallons of the adjustment.
      (6)   No account may be adjusted more than twice in a 12-month period.
      (7)   Any account holder that would like an adjustment over $200, must
fill out a request form. The account holder will bring their request (with all
supporting documents) to the Utility Clerk’s office. Once received, a
determination shall be made within 30 days.
   (B)   (1)   Any account holder requesting his or her pool to be filled by
the town fire hydrants must pay a $25 connect fee and schedule an appointment
with the Town Foreperson.
      (2)   A meter will be placed on the hydrant for a reading.
      (3)   Once the Utility Clerk receives the reading, the amount will be
adjusted to the next month’s utility bill.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019 ; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025 )
BILLING
§ 51.55 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper records, books and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewage service. The Town
Council shall cause to be made audits by an independent auditing firm in the
books showing receipts and disbursements at intervals of their choosing.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.56 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewer system shall
be paid to and held by the Clerk-Treasurer, separate and apart from all other
funds of the town. Said funds shall be deposited separate funds, and said
Clerk-Treasurer shall administer these funds in the manner set forth by state
statutes and ordinances of the town.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.57 RETURNED CHECKS.
   All checks returned for non-sufficient funds shall be charged $25 plus bank
fees.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.58 LIABILITY.
   The owner of the premises and the occupant/user of the sewage service shall
be jointly and severally liable for said service. Deposits, as outlined in §
51.42, shall be applied to any bill for service and any balance of such deposit
shall be returned to the applicant without interest. Such deposits shall be
deposited and administered in separate accounts as designated in §
51.56.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.59 UNCLAIMED DEPOSIT FEES.
   Unclaimed deposit fees for sewage become the property of the town upon
expiration of the following time limits and shall be transferred to the
respective cash operating fund: sewage deposits, seven years.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.60 DEPOSIT RETURN.
   (A)   All deposits shall be held for two years. If the account holder has
not claimed within one year after the two years, the deposit is then forfeited
to the town. The account holder must request the return. It is not the town’s
responsibility to request the return. The deposit will only be returned at the
request of the account holder, in writing.
   (B)   The account holder cannot have any delinquent bills nor have been
delinquent within the past 12 months of the request.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
§ 51.61 CREDIT TO ACCOUNT FOR OVERPAYMENT.
   Any account that has an overpayment from an estimated bill, credit from an
overcharge, credit from an adjustment or overpayment, the account holder shall
be given a credit to their account. No cash refund shall be given. In order to
obtain this credit, the account holder must present a letter in writing to the
Town Council. The account holder must provide documentation to support the
credit refund.
(Am. Ord. 4, 2018, passed 5-21-2019; Am. 2, Ord. 4, 2018, passed 8-11-2025)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Delinquency and cut-offs
   
52.03   Hardships
Water Utility
   
52.15   Jurisdiction
   
52.16   Application for water service
   
52.17   Water taps
   
52.18   Temporary users
   
52.19   Taking water from hydrants
   
52.20   Installation of water meters
   
52.21   Meter readings
   
52.22   Right to inspect
   
52.23   Water turn off and on
   
52.24   One time charges
   
52.25   Monthly rates of metered water consumption
   
52.26   Minimum monthly charges by meter size
   
52.27   Monthly minimum charge at 2,500 gallons
   
52.28   Water bill adjustments
   
52.29   Damage to metered water system components
Billing
   
52.40   Accounts and records
   
52.41   Disposition of funds
   
52.42   Returned checks
   
52.43   Liability
   
52.44   Unclaimed deposit fees
   
52.45   Deposit return
   
52.46   Credit to account for overpayment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   OWNER. The record owner of the subject property, according to the assessment
or transfer records in the office of the County Auditor; and includes any one
or more legal owners of an interest in the subject property where such records
are not current or correct and evidence or such facts are known or
ascertainable; and includes the equitable owner under any contract or agreement
to purchase such property where evidence of such fact is known or
ascertainable.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the municipal waterworks of the town
or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.02 DELINQUENCY AND CUT-OFFS.
   (A)   Water rates, as set forth in this chapter, will be charged on a
monthly basis, with bills being sent on or about the first of the month shall
be overdue on or about the fifteenth of the month, at which time an overdue
charge will be added.
   (B)   The following procedure will be followed from this point.
      (1)   After 30 days from the due date, a letter will be sent stating date
service will be cut or disconnected.
      (2)   Late payment penalty will be 10% of first $3 plus 3% of remainder
of bill.
      (3)   For service to be re-established, the following actions must be
taken by the customer:
         (a)   Pay in full, a reconnect fee of $25;
         (b)   Pay in full, all service charges; and
         (c)   Pay in full, both the delinquent and current charges.
      (4)   At such time that all of division (C) above is accomplished, a work
order will be initiated for reconnect and will be scheduled within the next two
working days.
      (5)   Any person requesting reconnection that previously had amounts
written off as uncollectible shall also be required to remit the amount of the
written-off debt and any collection fees paid before service will be re-
established.
      (6)   Any account holder that owes a previous bill from one residence and
is moving to another residence must pay the previous bill in full. If the
account holder is moving into another residence and plans on putting the new
residence in someone else’s name, he or she must still pay the previous bill
prior to the new service being turned on. A new deposit will be required.
      (7)   Upon having water disconnected, any account holder may provide a
forwarding address for the purpose of either sending a refund or issuing a
credit on the final bill, minus the deposit.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.03 HARDSHIPS.
   If an established hardship can be determined by the Clerk-Treasurer from
evidence presented by the petitioner, a payment schedule for delinquent utility
payments may be established.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to furnish all
necessary financial data sufficient for the Clerk-Treasurer to make a
determination of hardship.
   (B)   The hardship must be of a temporary nature.
   (C)   The following payment schedule is established for payments of
delinquent utility bills. This payment is in addition to the current monthly
billing of which both must be kept current or service will be disconnected and
the account turned over for debt collection without further notice. Under no
circumstances shall payment be less than $20 plus penalty, or require a time
period in excess of 12 months to bring the account up to date.
Delinquent Amount At Start Minimum Monthly Payment
Delinquent Amount At Start Minimum Monthly Payment
Up to $100                 $20 + penalty
$100.01 to $200            $25 + penalty
$200.01 to $300            $30 + penalty
$300.01 to $400            $34 + penalty
$400.01 to $500            $42 + penalty
$500.01 to $600            $50 + penalty
$600.01 to $700            $59 + penalty
$700.01 to $800            $67 + penalty
$800 01 to $900            $75 + penalty
$900.01 to $1,000          $84 + penalty
$1,000.01 to beyond        1/2 of delinquency + penalty
 
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
WATER UTILITY
§ 52.15 JURISDICTION.
   The town’s waterworks is removed from jurisdiction of the State Utility
Regulatory Commission for approval of rates and charges and of the issuance of
stocks, bonds, notes or other evidence of indebtedness, as authorized in I.C.
8-1.5-3-9.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.16 APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE.
   All applications tor new water service shall be made to the Town Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.17 WATER TAPS.
   All taps for water service in the mains or the waterworks system shall be
made under the direct authority and supervision of the Waterworks
Superintendent.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.18 TEMPORARY USERS.
   Temporary users such as contractors, street fairs, carnivals and the like
shall be required to make advance payments in the amount of water estimated to
be required by the Superintendent.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.19 TAKING WATER FROM HYDRANTS.
   No person shall take water from any fire hydrants except for fire purposes,
except upon written authority of the Superintendent.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.20 INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS.
   All water meters shall be installed outside in tiles or inside consumer’s
premises in the location and manner selected by the Superintendent. Any refusal
of a prospective user to agree with the Superintendent as to the meter location
and/or the installation to serve the best interests of the town shall, at the
option of the Town Council, be sufficient reason to refuse water service until
such requirements are met. All multi-family residences, excluding duplexes,
shall be on a single meter.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.21 METER READINGS.
   The reading of water meters shall be done on a monthly basis. Readings shall
be done on the same day of the month unless that day falls on a weekend. If the
reading day falls on a Saturday, the reading shall be done on the immediate
proceeding Friday. If the reading day falls on a Sunday, the readings shall be
done on the Monday immediately following. Estimated readings shall be used only
as a last resort.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.22 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   A waterworks representative shall have the right to inspect, at any
reasonable time, all service piping and water appurtenances inside a consumer’s
premises.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.23 WATER TURN OFF AND ON.
   (A)   Generally. Water shall be turned off or on at the curb cock in front
of the meter only by a waterworks representative.
   (B)   Unauthorized water turn on.
      (1)   If, following a disconnection, a consumer’s water service has been
turned on without authorization, a waterworks representative shall turn off the
water and may take steps to prevent any future unauthorized turn-on.
      (2)   The consumer shall be charged for a service call, together with the
cost of labor and materials required to turn water off and to prevent future
unauthorized turn-on, and any water used while the water service was turned on
without authorization.
      (3)   Unauthorized water turn-on will subject the customer to the general
penalty provision in §
50.99. Further, the consumer may be prosecuted for theft of town utilities and
services.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 52.24 ONE TIME CHARGES.
   (A)   Prior to water service being activated to the residence, business or
industrial location, a deposit fee and a connection fee must be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer at least seven days prior to the connection date requested.
   (B)   Any time water service is disrupted for any reason other than repair
of lines, a reconnect fee is required prior to turn-on.
   (C)   (1)   The deposit fee is $87.50.
      (2)   The reconnect fee is $25.
      (3)   The connection fee for up to three-fourths-inch meter is $750.
      (4)   Over three-fourths-inch meters, the fee will be the cost of
installation, but not less than $750.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.25 MONTHLY RATES OF METERED WATER CONSUMPTION.
 
First 2,500 gallons $17.92 per 1,000 gallons
Next 2,500 gallons  $14.93 per 1,000 gallons
Next 5,000 gallons  $13.74 per 1,000 gallons
Next 10,000 gallons $12.45 per 1,000 gallons
Over 20,000 gallons $9.95 per 1,000 gallons
 
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.26 MINIMUM MONTHLY CHARGES BY METER SIZE.
 
Meter Size       Minimum Gallons Minimum Charge
5/8- to 3/4-inch 2,500           $44.80
1-inch           5,000           $82.15
1-1/2-inch       7,500           $116.50
2-inch           10,000          $150.85
3-inch           20,000          $275.35
 
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.27 MONTHLY MINIMUM CHARGE AT 2,500 GALLONS.
 
Sales tax at 7% $3.14
Water           $44.80
Total           $47.94
 
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.28 WATER BILL ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Generally speaking, what happens to the water after it leaves the
meter is the responsibility of the customer. At times however, through no one’s
fault, leaks do develop that are not detectable until receipt of the water
bill, and therefore it is only fair that an adjustment be made. The following
procedure will be used to determine a leak adjustment.
      (1)   Customer will be informed of a dramatic increase of water usage.
      (2)   Within seven working days, the customer shall reply that a leak
does or does not exist and when the repairs are anticipated to be completed.
The Utility Department will then be notified upon completion of said repairs.
Receipts may be required.
      (3)   No adjustments to the water bill will be made for a leak that was
of a visible or easily determined problem. Below are some examples of what
circumstances will and will not be eligible for adjustment. The following is by
no means an exhaustive list. The customer is responsible for leaks that are
preventable and adjustments may be made to the others.
Item Water
Item                                         Water
Filling of pool w/garden hose                No
Garden/hose left running                     No
Leak in basement/crawl space                 No
Leak in buried piping                        Yes
Leak under skirting of mobile home           Yes
Leaking faucet or commode                    No
Water left running to prevent pipe freeze-up Yes
 
      (4)   If a customer runs his or her water to prevent pipes from freezing,
he or she shall be allowed up to 200 gallons a month in an adjustment.
      (5)   If an adjustment is in order, the Clerk-Treasurer’s office will
determine a period of previous usage that was reasonably consistent over a
period of four months to determine an average usage. The average usage will be
subtracted from the usage during the month(s) the leak existed, and the
difference will then constitute the number of gallons of the adjustment.
      (6)   No account may be adjusted more than twice in a 12-month period.
      (7)   Any account holder that would like an adjustment over $200 must
fill out a request form. The account holder will bring his or her request (with
all supporting documents) to the Utility Clerk’s office. Once received, a
determination shall be made within 30 days.
   (B)   Any account holder requesting his or her pool to be filled by the town
fire hydrants must pay a $25 connect fee and schedule an appointment with the
Town Foreperson. A meter will be placed on the hydrant for a reading. Once the
Utility Clerk receives the reading, the amount will be adjusted to the next
month’s utility bill.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.29 DAMAGE TO METERED WATER SYSTEM COMPONENTS.
   Customers shall be held responsible for damaged and/or destruction to the
metered water system components due to negligence, disregard or accidental
damage. Customers will be billed for any repairs, parts and labor necessary to
put the system back in working order; this does not include normal battery
replacement or the replacement of other components that fail through normal
wear and tear. Failure to pay for damages will be considered a delinquency and
handled in accordance with §
52.02.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
BILLING
§ 52.40 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   It is hereby made the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer of the town to
render bills for water service and all other charges in connection with the
operation of the town’s waterworks and to collect all monies due therein.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper records, books and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water service. The
Town Council shall cause to be made audits by an independent auditing firm in
the books showing receipts and disbursements at intervals of its choosing.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.41 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the waterworks systems
shall be paid to and held by the Clerk-Treasurer, separate and apart from all
other funds of the town. Said funds shall be deposited in separate funds, and
said Clerk-Treasurer shall administer these funds in the manner set forth by
state statutes and ordinances of the town.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.42 RETURNED CHECKS.
   All checks returned for non-sufficient funds shall be charged $25 plus bank
fees.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.43 LIABILITY.
   The owner of the premises and the occupant/user of the water service shall
be jointly and severally liable for said service. Deposits, as outlined in §
52.24, shall be applied to any bill for service and any balance of such deposit
shall be returned to the applicant without interest. Such deposits shall be
deposited and administered in separate accounts as designated in §
52.41.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.44 UNCLAIMED DEPOSIT FEES.
   Unclaimed deposit fees for water become the property of the town upon
expiration of the following time limits and shall be transferred to the
respective cash operating fund: water deposits, three years.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.45 DEPOSIT RETURN.
   All deposits shall be held for two years. If account holder has not claimed
refund within one year after the two years, the deposit is then forfeited to
the town. Account holder must request the return. It is not the town’s
responsibility to request the return. Deposit will only be returned at the
request of the account holder, in writing. Account holder cannot have any
delinquent bills nor have been delinquent within the past 12 months of the
request.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
§ 52.46 CREDIT TO ACCOUNT FOR OVERPAYMENT.
   If any account has an overpayment from an estimated bill, credit from an
overcharge, credit from an adjustment or overpayment, the account holder shall
be given a credit to his or her account. No cash refund shall be given. In
order to obtain this credit, the account holder must present a letter in
writing to the Town Council. The account holder must provide documentation to
support the credit refund.
(Ord. 3, 2018, passed 4-9-2018)
CHAPTER 53: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Restrictions
   
53.03   Garbage, trash and solid waste collection rates
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Includes, but is not limited to, such items as: rejected food
wastes; every waste accumulation of animal, fruit and vegetable matter used or
intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or
storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable.
   RUBBISH. Includes, but is not limited to, such items as: ashes; cans; metal
ware; glass; crockery; appliances; electronics; dirt sweepings; boxes; grass;
leaves; weeds; trees and large limbs; debris from demolition or construction of
buildings; lumber; and wood.
(Ord. 5, 2012, passed - -)
§ 53.02 RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall throw or deposit garbage or rubbish in or on any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the corporate limits of the town except
in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in
official town recycling centers.
(Ord. 5, 2012, passed - -) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 GARBAGE, TRASH AND SOLID WASTE COLLECTION RATES.
   (A)   Terms and conditions of trash pick up are to be in accordance with the
agreement attached hereto and made part of this chapter.
   (B)   Any resident, business or apartment wishing to have an additional
trash tote will pay an additional $6.50 per month.
   (C)   The town shall charge each resident and non-outside contract business
the amount of $12.75 per month for the removal, collection and disposal of
solid waste from each residence, each resident within multi-family dwellings
and each non-contracted business and shall forward a statement of such charges
in its statement for water and sewage services. All fees collected shall be
deposited in the Treasury for the administration, operation and maintenance of
solid waste collection and disposal projects. This revenue will be collected
into the General Fund for the purpose of trash removal cost.
(Am. Ord. 1, 2018, passed 5-8-2023; Am. Ord. 1, 2018, passed 4-22-2024)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
50.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating §§
53.01 or
53.02 shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense, $75 for a second
offense and $100 for every offense thereafter.
      (2)   Each deposit of garbage or rubbish shall be construed as a separate
offense.
(Ord. 5, 2012, passed - -)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   State authority
   
70.02   Disposition of fines
   
70.03   Authority to adopt additional regulations
   
70.04   Non-payment of fines; suspension of driving privileges
   
70.05   Traffic control devices
   
70.06   Warning signs
   
70.07   Declared emergencies
   
70.08   Towing costs
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 STATE AUTHORITY.
   This title is adopted and written under authority of I.C. 9-21-1-2.
(Prior Code, § 70.01) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 70.02 DISPOSITION OF FINES.
   All fines assessed for violations of this title upon adoption by local
authority will be deposited into the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 70.02) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-1-2(c)
§ 70.03 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   The local authority has the power to adopt by ordinance additional traffic
regulations and stipulate additions of state statues with respect to streets
and highways under the authority’s jurisdictions. An ordinance adopted may not
conflict with or duplicate a state statue.
(Prior Code, § 70.03) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 70.04 NONPAYMENT OF FINES; SUSPENSION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES.
   Nonpayment of fines may result in a state suspension of driving privileges
if requested by the local court.
(Prior Code, § 70.04) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 70.05 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The local authority shall place and maintain traffic control devices upon
highways under the authority’s jurisdiction, not including state highways, the
authority considers necessary to indicate and to carry out enforcement of this
title or to regulate, warn or guide traffic. All traffic control devices
erected under this title must conform to the state manual and specifications.
(Prior Code, § 70.05) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
Statutory references:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-21-4-3(b)
§ 70.06 WARNING SIGNS.
   Warning signs (that is, children playing, school bus stop and the like) may
be erected and/or placed in areas that are applicable. However, the signs are
meant as warnings and are not enforceable under this title.
(Prior Code, § 70.06) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 70.07 DECLARED EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   When unforeseen emergencies occur, town employees with consultation
with the local law enforcement agency, may have to detour or re-route traffic.
During these situations, traffic flow interruptions will be kept to a minimum
and barricades and signs will be placed so routes and hazards are well marked.
If flagpersons are utilized, they act the same as traffic control devices or
signals and violators will be cited and are subject to fines and costs incurred
herein.
   (B)   Because snow fall is unpredictable, and the local authority is
responsible for snow removal, the Town Council President may declare a snow
emergency for streets under local authority and jurisdiction. If so declared,
town street crews and the local law enforcement agency will try to contact the
owners of all vehicles impeding snow removal and have them removed. If unable
to contact the owners, or if the owners refuse to remove the vehicle(s) from
the street, the vehicle(s) are subject to removal (towing) and costs incurred
will be assessed.
(Prior Code, § 70.07) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 70.08 TOWING COSTS.
   Towing a vehicle shall have a maximum cost of $100 and a minimum charge of
$50, and $10 per day storage and a $15 inventory and processing fee. All fines
must be paid and a receipt presented prior to release of the owners vehicle or
property.
(Prior Code, § 70.08) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation incurred under this title, unless otherwise provided, will be
considered a Class C infraction and fined not more than $500 nor less than $5.
Court costs will also be assessed for any violation of this title.
(Prior Code, § 70.99) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Speed limits
   
71.02   Weight limitations
   
71.03   Placing of snow in streets and alleys
   
71.04   Snow emergency routes
§ 71.01 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The Town Council, herein known as local authority in the authority’s
jurisdiction, determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation the legal prima facia speed for an urban district and alleys in
accordance with the state code of 30 mph for streets and 15 mph for alleys, is
greater than reasonable and unsafe under the conditions found to exist on the
streets and highways of the town.
   (B)   Because the minimum width of streets and alleys within the city limits
and because of the close proximity of houses and lack of pedestrian walkways
and sidewalks, the local authority deems it necessary to exercise its authority
given in accordance with I.C. 9-21-5-6(a)(1) and 9-21-5-6(a)(4) and alter the
legal prima facia speed limits within the town limits.
      (1)   The legal and safe maximum speed on all streets within the town
limits is herein set at 25 mph.
      (2)   The legal and safe maximum speed on all alleys is herein set at ten
mph.
      (3)   Exception to the legal and safe maximum speed is East and West
Broadway, more commonly known as SR 218, which will remain as posted.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Town’s limited authority of town to alter speed limits, see I.C. 9-21-5-6
§ 71.02 WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   No vehicle shall be operated or moved over the bridge on and by which the
public highway known as North Elm Street, crosses over that formerly known as
the Pennsylvania Railroad Company lessee of and operating the railroad of the
Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railroad Company, the gross
weight of which vehicle, including any load thereon, is in excess of 20,000
pounds (ten tons), which gross weight has been determined to be the maximum
load which can, with safety, be carried by said bridge and sustain without
serious damage.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 PLACING OF SNOW IN STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   The placing of snow in streets or alleys by means of plows, snow blowers,
shovels or any other means is a safety hazard and is prohibited. Violators of
this section will be ticketed and fined in accordance with amounts set forth in
Chapter 35.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) (Ord. 13, passed 12-11-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   East Broadway, between Elm Street and Railroad Street, is designated a snow
emergency route. Parking is prohibited during a snow emergency. A snow
emergency will be declared anytime overnight snow is forecast in amounts of two
inches or more. Vehicles in violation of this section will be towed at the
owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 71.04) (Ord. 13, passed 12-11-2007) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Parallel and angle parking
   
72.02   Double parking
   
72.03   Timed parking
   
72.04   Semi (tractor/trailer) parking
   
72.05   Stopping or parking in alleys
   
72.06   Locations where stopping or parking prohibited
§ 72.01 PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING.
   All parking on streets within the town limits will be in accordance with
I.C. 9-21-16-7, which states: a vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where
there is an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels
of the vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb. Angle
parking or straight-in parking will be permitted under this chapter only in
private or public parking lots located within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 DOUBLE PARKING.
   Double parking of delivery vehicles on East and West Broadway (SR 218)
within the business district will be allowed if:
   (A)   It does not impede local through traffic;
   (B)   It does not present a safety or road hazard; and
   (C)   It does not block any private drive or cross-street intersection.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 TIMED PARKING.
   Two parking spaces on the north side of East Broadway, in front of the U.S.
Post Office, are designated as timed parking. Timed parking spaces will be of
15 minute duration during the hours of 7:30 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. During non-timed parking hours, parking spaces will be of
unlimited duration. Vehicles parked longer than the specified period of time
will be cited and fined under the guidance of this title.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 SEMI (TRACTOR/TRAILER) PARKING.
   Semi (tractor/trailer) parking is not permitted on any local street in the
corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 STOPPING OR PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No vehicle will be stopped or parked in any alley within the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.06 LOCATIONS WHERE STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (G)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control
signal located at the side of a street;
   (H)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (I)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of said entrance, when properly signposted;
   (J)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when to do
so would obstruct traffic;
   (K)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (L)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street; or
   (M)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking; and no
person shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb
or street line such distance as is unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Equipment
   
73.02   Operation
Golf Carts
   
73.15   Definitions
   
73.16   Operation
   
73.17   Operator
   
73.18   Financial responsibility
   
73.19   Equipment
   
73.20   Traffic and parking rules
   
73.21   Occupants
   
73.22   Wrecked or damaged golf cart
   
73.23   Inspection; permitting; liability
Off-Road Vehicles
   
73.35   Definition
   
73.36   Operation
   
73.37   Operator
   
73.38   Financial responsibility and liability insurance
   
73.39   Equipment
   
73.40   Traffic and parking rules
   
73.41   Occupants
   
73.42   Wrecked or damaged off-road vehicle
   
73.43   Inspection and permit
   
73.44   Release of liability and hold harmless agreement
 
   
73.99   Penalty
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Bicycles must be equipped with lamps (lights) if operated on streets
under local authority from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour
before sunrise.
   (B)   Lights (lamps) on the rear must be red and visible for a distance of
500 feet or a red reflector of the same visibility.
   (C)   Lights (lamps) on the front exhibit a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 OPERATION.
   All bicycles must be operated under the “Rules of the Road” and are subject
to the same traffic rules and regulations as motorized vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997) Penalty, see §
73.99
GOLF CARTS
§ 73.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license issued by Indiana or any other state to
operate a motor vehicle.
   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart in an
amount not less than required by applicable state law for motor vehicles
operated on public highways within the state.
   GOLF CART. A vehicle with four wheels originally designed for operation on a
golf course and powered by a battery or internal combustion motor.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 73.16 OPERATION.
   (A)   Generally. The operation of a golf cart within the town is strictly
prohibited unless said golf cart is operated in full compliance with all of the
terms and conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Time and place of operation.
      (1)   Golf carts may be operated between the hours of 5:30 a.m. to 11:30
p.m.
      (2)   A golf cart may be operated on town streets, roadways and alleys
with a posted speed limits of 30 mph or less, or at and through intersections
such as streets, roadways and alleys. A golf cart may not, in any circumstance,
be operated on sidewalks, the Nickel Plate Trail, in the town park or along
national or state highways located within the town; provided, however, that a
golf cart may be operated through intersections with national or state highways
located within the town. This includes State Road 218/East Broadway.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.17 OPERATOR.
   Only persons 16 years of age and over who hold a valid driver’s license may
operate a golf cart upon the streets, roadways, intersections and alleys
located within the town.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 73.18 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   The operator of a golf cart must be able to show financial responsibility
when operating a golf cart. Written proof of financial responsibility must be
available either by placing the same on the golf cart or via carrying by the
operator of said golf cart at all times.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 73.19 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   A golf cart must be equipped with: a horn; two operating headlights;
two operating taillights; two operating brake lights; operating turn signals,
one being located on each side of the front and rear of the golf cart, which
are visible from a distance of 500 feet; a rearview mirror; and a slow moving
vehicle emblem on the rear of said golf cart.
   (B)   Said emblem shall be of the same type and displayed in the same manner
as required under I.C. 9-21-9-3.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.20 TRAFFIC AND PARKING RULES.
   The operator of a golf cart shall comply with all traffic and parking rules
and regulations adopted by the town or the state which govern the operation and
parking of motor vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.21 OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of
persons for whom factory seating is installed. There shall be no more than
three persons per seat. No person under the age of two years of age shall be
permitted to ride in a golf cart. No person under ten years of age shall be
permitted to ride on the rear of seat of a golf cart. The operator of a golf
cart and all occupants of said golf cart shall be seated in said golf cart, and
no part of the body of the operator or any occupant shall extend outside the
perimeter of said golf cart while said golf cart is being operated.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.22 WRECKED OR DAMAGED GOLF CART.
   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged golf cart from a highway/street
must remove all glass and foreign materials that the golf cart may have dropped
upon the highway.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021)
§ 73.23 INSPECTION; PERMITTING; LIABILITY.
   (A)   A golf cart must be inspected on in annual basis by the Town Police
Department once each calendar year. The inspection shall be $30 per golf cart
inspection. The permit issued as a result of the inspection shall be valid from
January 1 to December 31 of the year in which the inspection occurred. The cost
of the inspection shall remain the same regardless as to when the inspection
occurred within the calendar year. The individual requesting the inspection
must set an appointment with the Town Police Department in order to have the
golf cart inspected.
   (B)   The purpose of the annual inspection shall be to determine whether a
golf cart is in compliance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter.
Said inspection shall include a review of the financial responsibility
associated with the golf cart. The Town Police Department shall maintain a
record of the inspection. Upon completion of an adequate inspection, a golf
cart shall be registered by the Town Police Department and shall be issued a
permit for operation from the date of inspection through the end of the
calendar year in which the gold cart was inspected. The owner of a golf cart
must sign for the permit as an acceptance of the rules and regulations of said
ordinance. Said permit shall be posted in plain view on the rear of the golf
cart at all times. The golf cart must be inspected, pass inspection and have a
new permit affixed to the golf cart each calendar year before the golf cart
shall be permitted to be operating under the terms and conditions of this
subchapter.
   (C)   The town and its employees assume no liability by registering golf
carts. Owners and operators, by registering a golf cart, agree to indemnify and
hold the town, as well as the town’s employees, harmless against injuries,
damage or liability that may result from the use or the operation of a golf
cart.
(Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021) Penalty, see §
73.99
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
§ 73.35 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE. A motor vehicle capable of cross-county travel without
benefit of a road on a natural terrain as described in I.C. 14-8-2-185, but
does not include an all-terrain vehicle as described in I.C. 14-8-2-5.7. It
excludes three wheelers and four wheelers.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 73.36 OPERATION.
   (A)   Generally. The operation of an off-road vehicle within the town is
strictly prohibited unless said off-road vehicle is operated in full compliance
with all the terms and conditions set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   Time and place of operation.
      (1)   Off-road vehicles may be operated between 30 minutes after sunrise
and 30 minutes before sunset.
      (2)   Off-road vehicles may be operated on streets, roadways,
intersections and alleys with a posted speed limit of 30 mph or less. An off-
road vehicle may not, in any circumstances, be operated on sidewalks, on the
Nickel Plate Trail, in the town park or along any national or state highway
located within the town; provided, however, that the off-road vehicle may be
operated through intersections with national or state highways located within
the town. This includes State Road 218/East Broadway.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.37 OPERATOR.
   (A)   Only persons 16 years of age and over who hold a valid driver’s
license may operate an off-road vehicle upon the streets, roadways,
intersections and alleys located within the town.
   (B)   Newly licensed drivers must follow the state code regarding
passengers.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.38 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The owner of a registered vehicle that is operated upon the designated
roadways for any duration or distance is required to have liability insurance
or otherwise maintain financial responsibility as provided for by I.C. 9-25-4.
Proof of financial responsibility shall be carried in the regulated vehicle at
all times and shall be presented by the operator of the regulated vehicle to
any law enforcement officer requesting such proof in the course of his or her
duties. The operator of a regulated vehicle shall ensure that such proof of
financial responsibility exists before operating an off-road vehicle upon any
street, roadway, intersection or alley.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 73.39 EQUIPMENT.
   Every off-road vehicle moved, operated or driven upon designated streets,
roadways, intersections or alleys shall be equipped with:
   (A)   Brakes that are in proper working condition;
   (B)   Rearview mirror or side mirrors;
   (C)   Manufacturer’s vehicle identification number; and
   (D)   If brake lights and turn signals are not on the vehicle, the operator
must use customary hand signals for stopping and left- and right-hand turns.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.40 TRAFFIC AND PARKING RULES.
   The operator of the off-road vehicle shall comply with all traffic and
parking rules and regulations adopted by the town or the state which govern the
operation and parking of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 73.41 OCCUPANTS.
   The number of occupants in the off-road vehicle shall be limited to the
number of persons for whom factory seating is installed and shall in no event
exceed four persons. No person under two years of age shall be permitted to
ride in an off-road vehicle. No person under ten years of age shall be
permitted to ride on the rear seat of the off-road vehicle. The operator of the
off-road vehicle and all occupants of said off-road vehicle shall be seated in
the off-road vehicle, and no part of the body of the operator or any occupant
shall extend outside the perimeter of said off-road vehicle while said off-road
vehicle is being operated.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.42 WRECKED OR DAMAGED OFF-ROAD VEHICLE.
   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged off-road vehicle from a street,
roadway, intersection or alley must remove all glass and foreign materials that
the off-road vehicle may have dropped upon the street, roadway, intersection or
alley.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.43 INSPECTION AND PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit decal and registration form must be filled out prior to the
off-road vehicle initial inspection. This can be done at the Town Clerk-
Treasurer’s office at 101 W Broadway. At that time, an inspection will be
scheduled. An off-road vehicle must be inspected on an annual basis by the Town
Marshal during the period of May 1 through May 31 of each year. The initial
inspection shall be $25 per off-road vehicle per inspection. The purpose of the
annual inspection shall be to determine whether the off-road vehicle is safe
and in compliance with the terms and provisions of this subchapter and any
other applicable laws of the state. Said inspection shall include a review of
the financial responsibility associated with the off-road vehicle.
   (B)   The Town Marshal shall maintain a record of inspections. Upon
completion of an adequate inspection, the off-road vehicle shall be registered
by the Town Marshal and shall be issued a permit for operation from the date of
inspection through the following May. Said permit shall be posted in plain view
on the rear of the off-road vehicle at all times. Yearly renewal during the
month of May will be a $10 fee. A $10 late fee shall be accessed for all
inspections after May 31 or occurring 30 days after the initial acquisition of
the off-road vehicle.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.44 RELEASE OF LIABILITY AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   A yearly release of liability and hold harmless agreement must be signed
yearly prior to inspection.
(Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-2017)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
70.99.
   (B)   Any person found violating §§
73.01 or
73.02 is subject to a citation and a $5 fine. Repeat violations may be subject
to confiscation of the bicycle.
   (C)   Upon a violation of any provision of any part of §§
73.35 through
73.44, an owner, lessee or operator of the off-road vehicle shall be fined in a
sum not to exceed $200. Each and every independent violation shall constitute a
new and separate offense. If two or more violations occur in one calendar year
in connection with one off-road vehicle, said off-road vehicle’s permit shall
be suspended for a period of one calendar year, beginning with the date of the
occurrence of the last violation. Said suspension shall not affect the annual
inspection requirements set forth in §
73.43. In addition to the foregoing, an off-road vehicle that is in violation
of any provision of this traffic code or which is operated by a person found to
be in violation of §§
73.35 through
73.44 may be towed at the discretion of the Town Marshal. Said off-road vehicle
shall not be returned to its owner until all penalties have been paid, and, if
applicable, said owner has provided proof that the circumstances giving rise to
the violation of §§
73.35 through
73.44 have been corrected.
   (D)   Upon violation of any provision of any part of §§
73.15 through
73.23, an owner, lessee or operator of a golf cart shall be fined in a sum not
to exceed $50 for the first offense and $100 for the second and reoccurring
offenses. Each and every independent violation shall constitute a new and
separate offense. If two or more violations occur in one calendar year in
connection with one golf cart, said golf cart permit shall be suspended for a
period of one calendar year beginning with the date of the occurrence of the
last violation. Said suspension shall not affect the annual inspection
requirements set forth in §
73.23. In addition to the foregoing, a golf cart that is in violation of any
provision of this traffic code or which is operated by a person found to be in
violation of §§
73.15 through
73.23 may be towed at the discretion of the Town Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 73.99) (Ord. 16, passed 11-18-1997; Ord. 3, 2017, passed 7-10-
2017; Am. Ord. 8, 2012, passed 7-12-2021)
Statutory reference:
   Violations as Class C infractions, see I.C. 9-21-11-14
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedules
   
I.   Stop intersections
   
II.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
Intersection Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                              Ord. No. Date Passed
3rd St. and North Main                    13       - -1997
4th St. and North Elm                     13       - -1997
5th St. and North Elm                     13       - -1997
Bennoville and John St.                   13       - -1997
Broadway and Gaboya                       13       12-11-2007
Center St. and Cleveland                  13       - -1997
Center St. and Garfield                   13       - -1997
Center St. and Washington St.             13       - -1997
Cleveland and Railroad                    13       - -1997
Cleveland and South Elm St.               13       - -1997
Clinton Blvd. and Meek Dr.                13       12-11-2007
Clinton Blvd. and 800 South               13       - -1997
Dale Dr. and Clinton Blvd.                13       - -1997
Dale Dr. and South Elm St.                13       - -1997
East Walnut and North Main                13       - -1997
East 3rd St., West 3rd St., North Elm St. 16       11-18-1997
East 4th St. and North Main               13       - -1997
Elm St. and Broadway                      13       - -1997
Gaboya and 218 West                       13       - -1997
Garfield and South Elm St.                13       - -1997
John St. and East Main                    13       - -1997
John St. and Market St. (218S)            13       - -1997
Lincoln St. and Broadway                  13       - -1997
Lutz Dr. and South Elm St.                13       - -1997
Main Court and N. Elm St.                 13       - -1997
Market St. and South Elm St.              13       - -1997
Market St. and Railroad St.               13       - -1997
McKinley and Center St.                   13       - -1997
McKinley and Railroad St.                 13       - -1997
McKinley and South Elm St.                13       - -1997
North Elm St. and 3rd St.                 13       12-11-2007
North Elm St. and 7th St.                 13       12-11-2007
North Elm St. and east/west alley         13       12-11-2007
North Elm St. and East Main               13       12-11-2007
North Main and 5th St.                    13       12-11-2007
North Main and East Main                  13       12-11-2007
North Main and Main Court                 13       - -1997
North Main and Walnut                     13       12-11-2007
Park Dr. and East Main                    13       - -1997
Paul St. and 800 South                    13       - -1997
Pearl St. and North Elm St.               13       - -1997
Railroad and Market St.                   13       - -1997
Roosevelt and South Elm St.               13       - -1997
Roosevelt and Center St.                  13       - -1997
Roosevelt and Railroad St.                13       - -1997
S. West St. and W. Broadway               13       12-11-2007
S. West St. and Washington (alley)        13       - -1997
S. West St. and Pearl St.                 13       - -1997
South Elm St. and Meek Dr.                13       12-11-2007
South Elm St. and east/west alley         13       12-11-2007
South Elm St. and 800 South               13       - -1997
Town garage and Park Dr.                  13       - -1997
Vine St. and 218 South (railroad)         13       - -1997
Vine and Railroad                         13       12-11-2007
Vine and Water                            13       12-11-2007
Vine St. and John St.                     13       - -1997
Vine Dr. and Clinton Blvd.                13       - -1997
Vine Dr. and South Elm St.                13       - -1997
Walnut and West St.                       13       12-11-2007
Walnut and North Elm St.                  13       - -1997
Washington and South Elm St.              13       - -1997
Washington St. and Railroad St.           13       - -1997
Washington and John St. (218)             13       - -1997
Washington St. and South Elm St.          13       12-11-2007
Washington St. and Railroad St.           13       - -1997
Washington St. and Lincoln St.            13       12-11-2007
Water St. and Washington St.              13       - -1997
Water St. and Market St. (218S)           13       - -1997
Water St. and Vine Dr.                    13       - -1997
West 7th and North Elm St.                13       - -1997
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 74, Schd. I)
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Twenty-five mph, generally. Speed limits on all streets shall be 25
mph except Bennoville Street and Park Drive.
   (B)   Limited to ten mph.
      (1)   Speed limits on Bennoville Street and Park Drive shall be ten mph.
      (2)   Speed limits in all alleys will be ten mph.
(Prior Code, Ch. 74, Schd. II) (Ord. 13, passed 12-11-2007)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   No parking zones
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.
Street Location Side Ord. No. Date Passed
Street        Location               Side                Ord. No. Date Passed
East Broadway Mail drop                                 13       - -1997
Market St.    Between South Elm St.  South               16       11-18-1997
              and Railroad St.
Market St.    First block            South               13       - -1997
North Elm St. Broadway to 3rd St.    Both                13       - -1997
              From the intersection
              of N. Elm St. and      Both, except on
North Elm St. Broadway to the        private property or 16       11-18-1997
              intersection of N. Elm private drives
              St. and Third St.
              From the intersection
              of S. Elm St. and      Both, except on
South Elm St. Broadway to the        private property or 16       11-18-1997
              intersection of S. Elm private drives
              St. and County Road
              800 South
South Elm St. Broadway to 800 South  Both                13       - -1997
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 75, Schd. I)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   NUISANCES
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION
      
95.   FIRE REGULATIONS
      
96.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Exceptions
   
90.03   Designation as junk vehicle; owner’s responsibility
   
90.04   Notification
   
90.05   Disposition of junk or abandoned vehicles
   
90.06   Liability
   
90.07   Disposition of funds
   
90.08   Administration and enforcement
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A mechanically inoperable vehicle that is left on private
property for 20 days is considered an ABANDONED VEHICLE if the vehicle is at
least three years old. Included in this are automobiles, trailers, semi-
trailers, recreational vehicles or parts thereto.
   JUNK VEHICLE. Junked or wrecked automobiles, trailers, semi-trailers,
recreational vehicles or parts thereto that are worn, deteriorated or obsolete
as to make them unusable in their existing condition.
(Prior Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
§ 90.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed
for operation on privately owned raceways;
   (B)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the Armed Forces of
the United States who is on active duty assignment;
   (C)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sales lot or at a commercial vehicle
servicing facility;
   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile
scrapyard; or
   (E)   A vehicle licensed as an antique under state law.
(Prior Code, § 90.02) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions under state law, see I.C. 9-22-1-1
§ 90.03 DESIGNATION AS JUNK VEHICLE; OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   A mechanically inoperable vehicle that meets the qualifications
outlined in §
90.01 that is left on private property continuously in a location visible from
public property for 20 days is considered a junk or abandoned vehicle and
subject to this chapter.
   (B)   A person who owns a junk or abandoned vehicle or parts thereto is:
      (1)   Responsible for the vehicle; and
      (2)   Liable for all costs incidental to the removal, storage and
disposal.
(Prior Code, § 90.03) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Responsibility and liability of owner of abandoned vehicle or parts;
limitation of costs for storage, see I.C. 9-22-1-4
§ 90.04 NOTIFICATION.
   The Town Marshal shall notify the Bureau of Motor Vehicles within 72 hours
of all action taken incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle. If
the person who owns the vehicle cannot be determined by a search by the Bureau
of Motor Vehicles, it shall be declared an abandoned vehicle and disposed of in
accordance with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.04) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Inability to determine ownership; declaring vehicle abandoned, see I.C. 9-
22-1-7
§ 90.05 DISPOSITION OF JUNK OR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   When the Town Marshal discovers a vehicle in the possession of a
person other than the person who owns the vehicle, and the person cannot
establish the right to possession of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be taken to
and stored in a suitable place. The Bureau of Motor Vehicles shall be notified
within 72 hours of the location and description of the vehicle. Upon receipt of
notification, the Bureau shall cause a search to be made to determine and
notify the person who owns the vehicle. If the person who owns a vehicle cannot
be determined by a search, the Bureau shall declare the vehicle abandoned and
provide for disposal. If the properly identified person who owns or holds a
lien on a vehicle appears at the site or storage before disposal of the vehicle
or parts and pays all costs incurred against the vehicle or parts at that time,
the vehicle or parts shall be released. The release must state the name,
signature and address of the person who owns or holds a lien on the vehicle, a
description of the vehicle or parts, costs and date of release. A towing
operator shall notify the Bureau of all releases. If the person who owns or
holds a lien does not appear and pay all costs, the Bureau shall declare the
vehicle abandoned and provide for disposal.
   (B)   (1)   When the Town Marshal finds or is notified of a vehicle or parts
believed to be abandoned, he or she shall attach in a prominent place a notice
tag containing the following information:
         (a)   The date, time, officer’s name, public agency and address and
telephone number to contact for information;
         (b)   That the vehicle or parts are considered abandoned;
         (c)   That the vehicle or parts will be removed after 72 hours;
         (d)   That the person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible
for all costs incidental to the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle;
and
         (e)   That the person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by removal
of the vehicle or parts within 72 hours.
      (2)   If a vehicle or a part tagged is not removed within the 72-hour
period, the officer shall prepare a written abandoned vehicle report or the
vehicle or parts, including information on the condition, missing parts and
other facts that might substantiate the estimated market value of the vehicle
or parts. Photographs shall be taken to describe the condition of the vehicle
or parts. If, in the opinion of the Town Marshal, the market value of an
abandoned vehicle or parts are less than $100, the Town Marshal shall
immediately dispose of the vehicle to an automobile scrapyard. A copy of the
abandoned vehicle shall be forwarded to the Bureau. The Town Marshal disposing
of the vehicle shall retain the original records and photographs for at least
two years. If, in the opinion of the Town Marshal, the market value of the
abandoned vehicle or parts is at least $100, the Town Marshal, before placing a
notice tag on the vehicle or parts, shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain
the person who owns the vehicle or parts or who may be in control of the
vehicle or parts. After 72 hours, the Town Marshal shall require the vehicle or
parts to be towed to a storage area.
   (C)   (1)   A person who finds a vehicle believed to be abandoned on the
person’s rental property shall attach in a prominent place a notice tag
containing the following information:
         (a)   The date, time, name and address of the person who owns the
rental property and a telephone number to contact for information;
         (b)   That the vehicle is considered abandoned;
         (c)   That the vehicle will be removed after 72 hours;
         (d)   That the person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible
for all costs incidental to the removal, storage and disposal of the vehicle;
and
         (e)   That the person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by removal
of the vehicle or parts within 72 hours.
      (2)   If, after 72 hours, the person who owns a vehicle believed to be
abandoned on rental property has not removed the vehicle from the rental
property, the person who owns the rental property may have the vehicle towed
from the rental property. The towing operator shall do the following:
         (a)   Contact the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to obtain the name and
address of the person who owns the vehicle; and
         (b)   Deliver, by certified mail, a copy of the information contained
in the notice required to the person who owns the vehicle. The notice required
by this division (C)(2)(b) must be given not later than five business days
after the vehicle is removed.
      (3)   In an emergency situation, a vehicle may be removed immediately. As
used in this division (C)(3), EMERGENCY SITUATION means that the presence of
the abandoned vehicle interferes physically with the conduct of normal business
operations of the owner of the rental property or poses a threat to the safety
or security of persons or property, or both.
   (D)   Upon complaint of a person who owns or controls private property that
a vehicle has been left on the property for at least 48 hours without the
consent of the person who owns or controls the property, the Town Marshal shall
follow the procedures set forth in division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 90.05) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions under state law, see I.C. 9-22-1
§ 90.06 LIABILITY.
   The following are not liable for loss or damage to a vehicle or parts
occurring during the removal, storage or disposition of a vehicle or parts
under this chapter:
   (A)   A person who owns, leases or occupies property from which an abandoned
vehicle or parts are removed;
   (B)   A public agency;
   (C)   A towing service; and
   (D)   An automobile scrapyard.
(Prior Code, § 90.06) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see I.C. 9-22-1-32
§ 90.07 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Town Council has established the following procedures to carry out
this chapter, including the following:
      (1)   The charges allowed for towing and storage of abandoned vehicles,
which shall be filed with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles; and
      (2)   The means of disposition of vehicles.
   (B)   The Town Council hereby establishes an Abandoned Vehicle Fund for the
purposes of this chapter.
   (C)   This chapter applies to sales of abandoned vehicles or parts. The
proceeds from the sale of abandoned vehicles or parts, including charges for
bills of sales and money received from persons who own or hold liens on
vehicles for the cost of removal or storage of vehicles, shall be deposited
with the Town Clerk-Treasurer and placed by the Town Clerk-Treasurer in the
Abandoned Vehicle Fund.
   (D)   The costs incurred by the town in administering this chapter shall be
paid from the Abandoned Vehicle Fund.
   (E)   The fiscal body shall annually appropriate sufficient money to the
Fund to carry out this chapter. Money remaining in the Fund at the end of a
year remains in the Fund and does not revert to the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 90.07) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Liability for loss or damage to vehicle or vehicle parts, see I.C. 9-22-1-30
   Sale by town; deposit of proceeds; payment of costs, see I.C. 9-22-1-27
§ 90.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council for the administration of
this chapter while the enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Town
Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 90.08) (Ord. 9, passed 10-21-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Public agency given responsibility for administration defined, see I.C. 9-
22-1-3
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
Dogs
   
91.01   Harboring loud or offensive dogs
   
91.02   Limit to number of dogs
   
91.03   Registration and immunization
   
91.04   Maintaining control
   
91.05   Curbing your pet
   
91.06   Abandonment
   
91.07   Defense to prosecution
   
91.08   Disposition of funds
   
91.09   Administration and enforcement
Vicious and Dangerous Dogs
   
91.20   Definitions
   
91.21   Registration of dangerous and vicious dogs
   
91.22   Transfer of dog; notice of dangerous propensities
   
91.23   Confinement of vicious dog
   
91.24   Destruction of dangerous and vicious dogs
   
91.25   Insurance requirements
   
91.26   Due process requirements
   
91.27   Disposition of funds
   
91.28   Court ordered dog obedience training and supervision
   
91.29   Humane destruction
   
91.30   Owner to reimburse for expenses
   
91.31   Payment of reasonable attorneys’ fees
   
91.32   Enforcement
Livestock and Other Animals
   
91.45   Animals prohibited in town limits
 
   
91.99   Penalty
DOGS
§ 91.01 HARBORING LOUD OR OFFENSIVE DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be an unlawful nuisance for any person to keep, maintain or
harbor any dog, cat or other vertebrate animal within the limits of the town,
which by offensive barking, exhalations or other sounds, or which by offensive
or obnoxious smells or substances, is harmful to the health of the body or
mind, or is offensive to the senses so as to essentially interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property of individuals or the public.
   (B)   Any person who shall have or permit any dog to frequent or to remain
on or within his or her house, building, enclosure or premises, or shall feed,
lodge or otherwise retain a dog, shall be considered as harboring the dog.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 LIMIT TO NUMBER OF DOGS.
   No person shall keep, raise or maintain more than two dogs that are more
than 12 weeks old within the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 REGISTRATION AND IMMUNIZATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to own or maintain any dog more than six months
old that does not at all times wear a collar with a metal tag attached
identifying the owner by name and address.
   (B)   The pet or animal must be registered with the Township Trustee and
vaccination certificates must be up to date and presented upon demand by proper
authority.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Town Marshal to take up any and all
unlicensed dogs found running at large in the town after March 1 of each year
and to humanely destroy all dogs as above impounded.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Harboring a nonimmunized dog prohibited, see I.C. 35-46-3-1
§ 91.04 MAINTAINING CONTROL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow his or her pet or animal to
stray beyond his or her property, unless leashed and under the control of that
person. Voice command, for the purpose of this section, does not constitute
control. When a pet or animal is outside unattended, it must be on a staked
chain or in a fenced yard. If on a staked chain, the animal must not present a
threat to pedestrians traveling on sidewalks or public thoroughfares within the
limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 CURBING YOUR PET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow his or her pet or animal to
deposit its feces on the property of another. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the pet or animal to clean-up the feces and remove them from the
affected property. This practice is commonly known as “curbing your pet.”
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 ABANDONMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any domesticated pet or
animal in any public place, including the right-of-way of any public
thoroughfare or upon the property of another.
(Prior Code, § 91.06) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.
   It is a defense that the accused person reasonably believes the conduct was
necessary to:
   (A)   Prevent injury to the accused person or another person;
   (B)   Protect the property of the accused person from destruction or
substantial damage; or
   (C)   Prevent a seriously injured vertebrate animal from prolonged
suffering.
(Prior Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.08 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The money collected from administration and abatement costs due to violation
of this chapter shall be disbursed to the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 91.08) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.09 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council for the administration of
this chapter while the enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Town
Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 91.09) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997)
VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS
§ 91.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that, while off the premises of the owner, keeper or
harborer, has attempted to bite, attack or otherwise endanger any person, cat,
other dog, livestock, poultry, other domestic animal or any other animal that
is the property of another or while not physically restrained or confined in a
locked pen, yard or other enclosures.
   VICIOUS DOG. A dog that:
      (1)   Without provocation, bites or inflicts injury or otherwise attacks
or endangers the safety of any person, cat, other dog, livestock, poultry or
other domestic animal;
      (2)   Without provocation, approaches in a threatening or terrorizing
manner, any person in apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks
or any public grounds or places; or
      (3)   Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting.
   WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog that was not teased, tormented or abused by a
person, or attacked by a cat, another dog or any other animal.
(Prior Code, § 91.20) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.21 REGISTRATION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   Every owner of a dangerous dog or vicious dog, as defined by this
subchapter, shall register said dog with the Clerk-Treasurer and provide the
same information as required. Copies of such registration shall be furnished to
the Town Marshal. The owner shall pay a fee of $5 to the Clerk-Treasurer for
such registration.
(Prior Code, § 91.21) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 TRANSFER OF DOG; NOTICE OF DANGEROUS PROPENSITIES.
   (A)   No person shall transfer ownership or possession of any dog before
giving written notice of the dog’s behavior, propensities or quarantine
obligations to the transferee.
   (B)   (1)   Within ten days after transferring ownership or possession of a
dog that to the transferor’s knowledge is a dangerous or vicious dog, the
transferor shall give copies of the written notice described in division (A)
above to:
         (a)   The transferee;
         (b)   The County Board of Health;
         (c)   The dog catcher of the City of Peru;
         (d)   The Town Marshal; and
         (e)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer.
      (2)   The notice shall include the name and address of the new owner or
person taking possession of the dog, and age, sex, color and breed of the dog
and its registration number. It shall describe in reasonable detail the
incidents that caused the dog to fit the definition of a dangerous or vicious
dog as defined in §
91.20.
(Prior Code, § 91.22) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.23 CONFINEMENT OF VICIOUS DOG.
   (A)   The owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog shall keep
the dog securely confined at all times in a locked pen, locked fenced yard or
other locked enclosure while on the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer.
The owner shall display in a conspicuous manner a sign on his or her premises
warning that there is a vicious dog on the premises. This sign shall be visible
and legible from the highway.
   (B)   Off such premises, the owner, keeper or harborer shall:
      (1)   Keep the dog on a leash or tether not more than six feet long and
muzzle the dog;
      (2)   Station a person of suitable age and discretion with the dog in
close proximity to prevent it from causing injury; and
      (3)   Keep the dog in a locked pen or other locked enclosure (i.e., car
or truck) and muzzle the dog.
(Prior Code, § 91.23) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.24 DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   A dog harbored that attacks, bites or otherwise endangers or that injures or
kills a person, cat, another dog or other domestic animal, or any other animal
that is the property of another may be killed at the time of commission of the
act. The owner or keeper shall be liable for any damage or injuries caused by a
dog as defined above, unless such damage or injury was to the body or property
of a person who, at the time such damage or injuries were sustained, was
committing a trespass on the property of the owner, or was teasing, tormenting
or abusing such dog on the owner’s property.
(Prior Code, § 91.24) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.25 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person who owns or harbors a dog as a vicious dog shall purchase and
maintain liability insurance in the amount of $250,000 per incident and
occurrence. Such person shall file a copy of said insurance coverage with the
Clerk-Treasurer within 15 days after notification that a dog has been
determined by the Town Council to be a vicious dog.
(Prior Code, § 91.25) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.26 DUE PROCESS REQUIREMENTS.
   If a police officer, firefighter, dog catcher, county or state health
official determines a dog to be vicious, he or she shall notify the person
residing at the place the dog was being harbored in writing of such
determination by certified mail. The owner or person in charge may request a
review of said determination by the Town Council within five days of the date
of the notice. Said request shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer. Failure to
file the request timely will forfeit all rights of review. The decision by the
Town Council may be appealed. The county circuit or superior court shall have
exclusive jurisdiction over any review or appeal. The appeal or review of the
decision of the Town Council shall be filed within five days of the decision by
filing a petition with the county circuit or superior court. Failure to file an
appeal within the time permitted shall forfeit all rights of appeal. The issue
shall be decided upon the preponderance of the evidence.
(Prior Code, § 91.26) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.27 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The moneys collected from administrative and abatement costs due to the
violation of this subchapter shall be disbursed to the General Fund of the
department specified to enforce this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.27) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.28 COURT ORDERED DOG OBEDIENCE TRAINING AND SUPERVISION.
   In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the court may order
the offender to personally supervise the dog any time the dog leaves the
premises of the offender, to complete dog obedience training or to do both. All
costs of dog obedience training shall be paid by the owner. If the owner cannot
be found within three days, the dog may be destroyed.
(Prior Code, § 91.28) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.29 HUMANE DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   The court may order a vicious dog involved in the violation of this
subchapter to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the dog
catcher, the Humane Society or the Town Marshal.
   (B)   If a dog is subject of a second or subsequent violation of any
provision of this subchapter, the court may order the dog involved in the
violation to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the dog catcher,
the Humane Society or the Town Marshal.
(Prior Code, § 91.29) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.30 OWNER TO REIMBURSE FOR EXPENSES.
   The offender may be required to reimburse the town for the cost of
impounding a dog, including, but not limited to, food, medicine, drugs, costs
of humane destruction, burial, plus a fee of $25 for day one, $15 a day for up
to 15 days and then the dog shall be placed up for adoption.
(Prior Code, § 91.30) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.31 PAYMENT OF REASONABLE ATTORNEYS’ FEES.
   Upon finding a violation of this subchapter, the court shall order the
defendant to pay reasonable attorneys’ fees in the enforcement of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.31) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
§ 91.32 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced pursuant to the state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 91.32) (Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
LIVESTOCK AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 91.45 ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN TOWN LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain cows, swine, chickens,
horses, sheep, goats or ducks within the limits of the town in any area
consisting of less than three acres, except in an agricultural district. This
section shall not apply to the maintenance of no more than three female
chickens in the backyard of any lot located within a non-agricultural area of
the town. This exception shall not apply to roosters, which may only be kept
within the town’s corporate limits in an agricultural AG-1 primary zoning
district.
(Ord. 4, 2015, passed 7-8-2015) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person(s) guilty of violating §§
91.01,
91.02 and
91.05 shall be assessed: first violation: $25 fine; second violation: $50 fine;
third violation: $250 fine and a written notice that in the event of a fourth
violation, a $500 fine will be imposed and the pet or animals will be
permanently removed from the town limits. These violations will be concurrent
for a 12-month period beginning with the date of the first violation.
Furthermore, be it known that if any animal is picked up or caught running at
large, the owner will be responsible for reimbursing the town for all costs
incurred for transporting and maintaining the animal and also any fines that
may be assessed.
      (2)   Any person(s) guilty of violating §
91.03 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C infraction, unless the dog
causes bodily injury by biting a person, which becomes a Class B misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person(s) guilty of violating §
91.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C infraction.
      (4)   Any person(s) guilty of violating §
91.06 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
91.20 through
91.31 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A infraction. A Class A
infraction is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500.
(Prior Code, § 91.99) (Ord. 7, passed 9-16-1997; Ord. 8, passed 9-16-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for abandonment or neglect under state law, see I.C. 35-46-3-1 and
35-46-3-7
CHAPTER 92: NUISANCES
Section
   
92.01   Administration
   
92.02   “Nuisance” defined
   
92.03   Applicability
   
92.04   Violation
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council for the administration of
this chapter while the enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Town
Attorney, Town Marshal or the Town Building Commissioner, acting as agent for
the Town Attorney.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) (Ord. 5, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 5, passed 8-10-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions under state law, see I.C. 32-30-6-7
§ 92.02 “NUISANCE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. As set forth in I.C. 32-30-6-6 and as follows:
      (1)   Whatever is injurious to health;
      (2)   Whatever is indecent;
      (3)   Whatever is offensive to the senses; or
      (4)   An obstruction to the free use of property; so as essentially to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
(Prior Code, § 92.02) (Ord. 5, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 5, passed 8-10-2010)
§ 92.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   If any person, corporation, limited liability company or any other
entity maintains, uses, creates, causes, places, deposits or permits a nuisance
to exist or remain on any property, that person or entity violates this
section.
   (B)   The following list includes, but is not limited to, the conditions
constituting a nuisance under this section:
      (1)   Accumulations of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned
materials, metal or lumber;
      (2)   Any condition which provides harborage of rats, mice, snakes or
other vermin;
      (3)   Disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the
conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of offensive odors or stenches;
      (4)   Carcasses of animals or fowls, not disposed of within a reasonable
time after death;
      (5)   Buildings, structures, swimming pools or other places and locations
where any violation of federal, state, local law or town ordinances occurs;
      (6)   Accumulations and/or pooling of stagnant water;
      (7)   Any building or other structure which is unfit for human
habitation, kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the
health of the people residing in the vicinity or presents a dangerous fire
hazard in the vicinity where it is located;
      (8)   The unauthorized obstruction of any public street, road or
sidewalk; or
      (9)   The pollution of any public well, cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by any sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial waste or other
substances.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) (Ord. 5, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 5, passed 8-10-2010)
Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Enjoinment of nuisances authorized, see I.C. 32-30-6-8
§ 92.04 VIOLATION.
   (A)   A written notice to abate the nuisance by United States certified
mail, or by another method designated by the Town Attorney, or its agent(s),
the Town Marshal or the Town Building Commissioner, to the owner, occupant and
all persons holding a substantial interest in the property where the nuisance
is located, or to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance.
   (B)   The written notice shall be mailed at least ten days before legal
action is commenced against the person to whom notice was sent, unless the Town
Attorney, or its agent(s), the Town Marshal or the Town Building Commissioner,
determines that an emergency exists and requires that an action proceed without
this notice.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) (Ord. 5, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 5, passed 8-10-2010)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
to have committed an ordinance violation, and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not less than $25 and not more than $2,500. Each day a violation continues
after an action has been commenced to abate that nuisance shall constitute a
separate ordinance violation. No additional notice under this chapter shall be
required to initiate these separate actions once an action has commenced
against the person violating this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Attorney, or its agent(s), the Town Marshal or the Town
Building Commissioner, may file suit in the name of the town against any person
violating any provision of this chapter to obtain injunctive relief to abate
that nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 92.99) (Ord. 5, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 5, passed 8-10-2010)
Statutory reference:
   Remedies under state law, see I.C. 32-30-6-8
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Park hours
   
93.02   Bicycles, roller skates and the like, prohibited within park
   
93.03   Open fires/flames
   
93.04   Alcohol
   
93.05   Discharge of firearms, fireworks or explosives in park
   
93.06   Disorderly conduct
   
93.07   Annoying animals or birds
   
93.08   Being in park after hours prohibited
   
93.09   Granting or selling rights prohibited
   
93.10   Permit required to sell; permit to be exhibited
   
93.11   Littering prohibited
   
93.12   Injuring or disturbing foliage or construction
   
93.13   Posting prohibited
Park Board
   
93.25   Composition
   
93.26   Appointment and removal of members
   
93.27   Meetings
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 PARK HOURS.
   Park hours are established to be 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily unless
extended by the Park Board for a scheduled activity.
(Prior Code, § 93.01) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997)
§ 93.02 BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE, PROHIBITED WITHIN PARK.
   It shall be unlawful for bicycles, motorized bicycles, scooters, motorized
scooters, roller skates, roller blades, skateboards, motorcycles, off-road and
all-terrain vehicles to be operated in the park. Vehicles used by handicapped
persons and park maintenance personnel carrying out their official duties are
hereby exempted from this prohibition.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 OPEN FIRES/FLAMES.
   All fires and open flames shall be maintained in approved containers only.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 ALCOHOL.
   No alcoholic beverages are allowed within the confines of the park property.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS, FIREWORKS OR EXPLOSIVES IN PARK.
   No person shall carry, fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other
firearm; explosive or volatile device; or any rocket, torpedo or other
fireworks of any description within the confines of park property or into park
property or on any of the approaches or surroundings thereof.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any reason to make loud, unusual or unnecessary
noise; use boisterous, profane, obscene or indecent language; engage in any
wrangle, quarrel or fight; challenge or attempt to provoke others to fight,
quarrel or wrangle; make any indecent exposure of his or her person; throw any
stone, club or other missile; or do or commit any lewd or other disorderly act
or nuisance within the public park of the town calculated to disturb or annoy
any person visiting the park.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 ANNOYING ANIMALS OR BIRDS.
   No persons shall annoy, injure or attempt to annoy or injure any animal or
bird within the confines of the park.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 BEING IN PARK AFTER HOURS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The public park of the town shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00
a.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate or loiter in and
about the public park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except by
permit from the Park Board.
(Prior Code, § 93.09) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 GRANTING OR SELLING RIGHTS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall grant or sell any right or privilege within the public park
of the town to any person for the purpose of gain or profit, except the Town
Council or an officer lawfully authorized by Council.
(Prior Code, § 93.10) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.10 PERMIT REQUIRED TO SELL; PERMIT TO BE EXHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale anything
within the public park of the town, or to keep any restaurant, fruit,
confection, lunch, soda or mineral water stand, or other stand
for the purpose of profit or gain therein, without a written permit duly issued
by the Clerk-Treasurer and payment of the required fee therefor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to refuse to exhibit the license
to any member of the Park Board or to any regular police officer or other
officer employed in or about the park.
(Prior Code, § 93.11) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.11 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or otherwise deposit any
papers, sticks, cans, foods or remnants thereof, brushes, bottles, debris or
rubbish of any kind on any portion of the park.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.12 INJURING OR DISTURBING FOLIAGE OR CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb any tree; pluck any flower or
fruit, wild or cultivated; or break, cut down, trample, dismantle or in any
manner injure or deface any tree, plant, shrub, flower bed, turf, ornament,
building, fence, fountain or other construction within the park.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.13 POSTING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to write or mark on any building,
structure, statue, fence, bench, rock or stone, or post any bill, notice or
advertisement of any kind of the same within the park or the parkway thereof.
(Prior Code, § 93.14) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997; Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-
13-2010) Penalty, see §
93.99
PARK BOARD
§ 93.25 COMPOSITION.
   I.C. 36-10-3-4 requires a Park Board consist of four members, appointed by
the Town Council under the following requirements.
   (A)   Members are appointed on the basis of their interest and knowledge in
parks and recreation.
   (B)   No more than two members may be of the same political party.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010)
§ 93.26 APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Initial appointments to the Park Board are set forth by I.C. 36-10-3-
5 as follows:
      (1)   One member for a term of one year;
      (2)   One member for a term of two years;
      (3)   One member for a term of three years; and
      (4)   One member for a term of four years.
   (B)   As a term expires, each new appointment is for a four-year term. All
terms expire on the first Monday in January, but a member continues in office
until his or her successor is appointed.
   (C)   If a vacancy on the Board occurs, the appointing authority shall
appoint a person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (D)   A Board member may be removed only for cause as set forth in I.C. 36-
10-3-6.
(Prior Code, § 93.26) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997; Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-
13-2010)
§ 93.27 MEETINGS.
   (A)   All meetings of the Board are open to the public. The Board shall fix
the time and place of its regular meetings.
   (B)   Special meetings of the Board may be called by the President or by any
two members by written request to the secretary. The secretary shall send to
each member, at least two days before a special meeting, a written notice
fixing the time, place and purpose of the meeting. Written notice of a special
meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting is fixed at a
regular meeting or if all members are present at the special meeting.
   (C)   At its first regular meeting each year the Board shall elect a
President and Vice President. The Vice President may act as President during
the absence or disability of the President. The Board may select a secretary
either from within or outside its membership.
   (D)   A majority of the members constitutes a quorum. Action of the Board is
not official unless it is authorized by at least three members present and
acting.
(Prior Code, § 93.28) (Ord. 10, passed 11-5-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions under state law, see I.C. 36-10-3-8
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Penalties for violations of this chapter are set forth in Chapter 35 of this
code.
(Am. Ord. 10, 2004, passed 4-13-2010)
CHAPTER 94: WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Length of lawn grass, weeds and rank vegetation
   
94.03   Notice of violation
   
94.04   Duty to remove or cut
   
94.05   Administrative and abatement costs
   
94.06   Failure to pay costs
   
94.07   Disposition of funds
   
94.08   Procedure for appealing violation notice or bill
   
94.09   Administration and enforcement
   
94.10   Tree limb and brush pick-up
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS and RANK VEGETATION. Vegetation that is strong and vigorous and
usually coarse in growth. This will be uncultivated vegetation and will be
growing without control or restriction.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Definitions by ordinance required, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(b)(2)
§ 94.02 LENGTH OF LAWN GRASS, WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant or any person entitled to
possession of any real estate within the town to suffer or permit any grass,
weeds or rank vegetation to grow to a length (height) that exceeds eight
inches.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Height to be specified by ordinance, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(b)(3)
§ 94.03 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any occupant and/or owner of real estate in the town who is observed
violating §
94.02 shall be issued a written notice by certified mail directing such owner
and/or occupant to cut and/or to remove, within the period of ten days from the
date of the notice, said grass, weeds and/or other rank vegetation.
   (B)   The notice of violation of this chapter shall be sent by certified
mail to the landowner and will
be addressed to his or her last known address, or to the landowner’s address
that appears on the tax records of the County Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Notice provisions to be specified by ordinance, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(b)(4)
§ 94.04 DUTY TO REMOVE OR CUT.
   (A)   If the landowner fails to cut and/or remove such grass, weeds and/or
rank vegetation within the prescribed ten-day period, the Town Council may
order and cause such vegetation to be cut and removed from the property.
   (B)   It shall be a violation to rake or deposit leaves, grass clippings,
debris and snow into swales that were designed by stormwater control. This is a
violation due to the fact that these items cause drains to plug up and create
damage to property due to diversion. If property owners wish to bag leaves/
grass clippings in biodegradable bags, the Town Foreperson will pick them up on
the first and third Tuesday of each month (weather permitting).
(Prior Code, § 94.04) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997; Am. Ord. 3, passed 7-10-2017)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Procedure to enter property to abate to be specified by ordinance, see I.C.
36-7-10.1-3(b)(5)
§ 94.05 ADMINISTRATIVE AND ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   Any person who violates §
94.02 and who receives a certified written notification of said violation,
shall forfeit the sum of $50 to the town for the administrative costs incurred
by the town.
   (B)   If abatement procedures by the town are required, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall issue to the landowner a certified statement of the administrative and
removal costs incurred by the town during the abatement procedures.
(Prior Code, § 94.05) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Procedure for issuing bill for costs of abatement to be specified by
ordinance, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(b)(6)
§ 94.06 FAILURE TO PAY COSTS.
   If the landowner fails to pay the administrative and abatement costs within
a period of ten days from the date on the cost statement, a certified copy of
the statement of the costs shall be filed in the County Auditor’s office to be
placed upon the tax duplicate against such affected lands for collection as
taxes are collected.
(Prior Code, § 94.06) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
§ 94.07 DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.
   The moneys collected from administrative and abatement costs due to the
violation of this chapter shall be disbursed to the General Fund of the
department specified to enforce this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 94.07) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Disbursement of bill collections to General Fund of department enforcing
ordinance, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-5
§ 94.08 PROCEDURE FOR APPEALING VIOLATION NOTICE OR BILL.
   Decisions made by the town to issue violation notices and to carry out
abatement procedures may be appealed to the circuit or the superior courts of
the county within 30 days of the date appearing on the violation notice or the
cost statement.
(Prior Code, § 94.08) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Procedure for appeal to be specified by ordinance, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(b)
(7)
§ 94.09 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council for the administration of
this chapter while the enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Building
Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 94.09) (Ord. 3, passed 9-3-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Responsible department to be specified by ordinance, see I.C. 36-7-10.1-3(b)
(1)
§ 94.10 TREE LIMB AND BRUSH PICK-UP.
   (A)   Residents. Tree and brush trimmings that are generated by individual
residents, on their own property, by their own hand, within the corporate
limits of the town and placed along the street or alley adjoining their
property shall be picked up and disposed of by the town workers at a time and
date set forth by the Council President and subject to change to meet the
requirements of keeping the town looking clean and kept.
   (B)   Contracted services. Residents who contract to have their trees and/or
brush cut or trimmed by another individual company or professional tree service
shall have all trimmings removed and disposed of by the contracted party.
Neither the pickup, removal or disposal of said trimmings shall be the
responsibility of the town, nor shall the use of the town’s disposal facilities
or equipment be made available to said contractors.
(Res. 1, 2009, passed 7-1-2009)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE REGULATIONS
Section
   
95.01   Pipe Creek Township Volunteer Fire Department contract
§ 95.01 PIPE CREEK TOWNSHIP VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT CONTRACT.
   The town no longer charges a fire protection user fee due to the contract
fee paid to the Pipe Creek Volunteer Fire Department.
(Ord. 4-2017, passed 6-22-2017)
CHAPTER 96: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
96.01   Policy statement
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Unlawful practice
   
96.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
96.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
96.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service
   
96.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
96.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
96.09   Exemptions
   
96.10   Administrative enforcement
§ 96.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   COMMISSION. The State Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-9-
1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
92.04 through 92.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of
such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The
protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of FAMILIAL STATUS
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined in the definition for FAMILIAL STATUS.
Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. § 574.3, the definition of FAMILY
includes families regardless of the actual or perceived sexual orientation,
gender identity or marital status of its members.
   HANDICAP.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; and
         (e)   Any other impairment defined in the state statutes.
      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or
addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802; nor does
the term HANDICAP include an individual solely because that individual is a
transvestite.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019)
§ 96.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, §
96.09 and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
96.04 shall apply to all dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and
I.C. 22-9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
96.04 shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided, that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or any person in
the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of
any such broker, agent or salesperson or person; and
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
96.04(C), but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, persons shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   They have, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent,
other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in providing sales
or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions involving the sale
or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   They are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   (A)   As made applicable by §
96.03 and except as exempted by §§
96.03(B) and
96.09, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (3)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on
the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
      (2)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
      (3)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
         (a)   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
         (b)   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
         (c)   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
            1.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
            2.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations; and
            3.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (C)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for Buildings
and Facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped
people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1) suffices to satisfy the requirements of
division (B)(3)(c) above.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health of
safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-
RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
96.03 through
96.06.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according
to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined
not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if
death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for
life.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.09 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. For the purpose of this section, HOUSING
FOR OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the State Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly person (as defined in the state or federal program);
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019)
§ 96.10 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) below shall be vested in the Chief Elected Official of the
town.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this chapter, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of this chapter by
complainants to the State Civil Rights Commission for administrative
enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the Chief Elected Official of
the town, shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for
under division (A) above to said Commission for purposes of investigation,
resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the Chief Elected Official and the Commission to
further such purposes.
   (D)   The Chief Elected Official of the town, or the Chief Elected
Official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.
(Ord. 1, 2019, passed 1-14-2019)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   AMUSEMENTS
      
111.   SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Application; license fees
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, partnership or
corporation to conduct, run or operate, or keep for the purpose of conducting,
running or operating in any public place in said town, any pool, billiard or
Jenny Lind table, roulette, shuffle board, faro, keno bank, nine pin or ten pin
alley, wheel of fortune card table, bowling alley or any other table or machine
for gaming or playing games without first having procured from the Clerk-
Treasurer of the town a license therefor, as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 110, passed 3-6-1940) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 APPLICATION; LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Any person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation desiring a
license as specified in §
110.01 shall make application to the Clerk-Treasurer designating the true and
correct name of the applicant and the particular game or games which such
applicant desires to operate and conduct and where the same is to be operated
and shall pay to such Clerk-Treasurer a license fee as follows:
      (1)   For pool, billiard or other similar games, the sum of $15 for the
first table so operated, $10 for the second such table and $5 for each
additional table; and
      (2)   For card tables and similar games, the sum of $10 for the first
table so conducted or operated and $5 for each additional table.
   (B)   Said Clerk-Treasurer shall thereupon present such application to the
Board of Trustees for its acceptance and approval. Upon approval of such
application by the Board of Trustees and the payment of the proper license fee,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license to said applicant. Said license shall
be granted for one year, and no license shall be granted to an applicant for a
period less than one year.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 110, passed 3-6-1940)
CHAPTER 111: SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Section
   
111.01   General prohibitions
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   License required
   
111.04   Application
   
111.05   Approval of scales
   
111.06   Review and recommendation
   
111.07   Peddlers and canvassers license fees
   
111.08   Exemptions
   
111.09   Solicitor’s application
§ 111.01 GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser, as defined in
this chapter, to engage in such business within the town without first
obtaining a license or securing an exemption, under the terms and conditions
established in this chapter.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSERS or SOLICITORS. One who takes orders for future deliveries of
goods or services in public or private places, or from house to house, and not
from an established place or private premises.
   PEDDLER. One who sells or offers for sale tangible commodities directly to a
consumer from house to house, store to store or on the streets. PEDDLER shall
include persons selling from any type of motor vehicle and persons going on
foot as BACK PEDDLERS.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every peddler and canvasser shall, before engaging in such business, obtain
a license from the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a peddler’s or canvasser’s license shall be made
to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and shall set forth:
      (1)   The name under which the business is to be conducted;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   The driver’s license number and the license plate number of the
vehicle to be used, if any;
      (4)   The locations where the applicant intends to do business;
      (5)   The type of goods, wares or merchandise the applicant intends to
sell;
      (6)   The length of time for which the applicant intend to do business;
      (7)   Proof that the business entity that is sponsoring the applicant
exists, including the name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring
agency or business and, in the case of out of state businesses or
organizations, the name, address and phone number of the state’s registered
agent; and
      (8)   The result of a limited adult criminal history check by the state.
   (B)   Applications shall be provided by the Town Clerk-Treasurer and shall
be on the form prescribed by the State Board of Accounts.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.05 APPROVAL OF SCALES.
   All applicants for licenses to sell goods, merchandise, fruits, vegetables
or produce sold by weight, shall file a valid certificate, signed by the sealer
of weights and measures, that all scales and measures to be used by the
applicant in his or her business has been tested and approved, at the time of
making application.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.06 REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION.
   (A)   The application shall be referred to the Town Marshal’s office for
review and recommendation.
   (B)   The Town Marshal shall conduct a local investigation of each applicant
and make a recommendation to the Clerk-Treasurer as to whether the application
should be granted.
      (1)   In making its recommendation, the Marshal shall consider the
criminal history of the applicant, if any, and the likelihood that granting the
application will endanger the health, safety or welfare of the public.
      (2)   A report of the investigation, a copy of the traffic and police
record of the applicant, if any, and the recommendation of the Marshal’s office
shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the Clerk-
Treasurer.
   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall consider the recommendation of the Marshal’s
Department and all information provided with or in support of the application
in determining whether the application should be granted. No person with a
felony conviction shall be granted a license, and no person with misdemeanor
conviction for a crime involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.07 PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The license fee for peddlers or canvassers using a pushcart, wagon,
motor vehicle or any type of vehicle shall be $10 per year.
   (B)   The license fee for a pack peddlers or canvassers shall be $10 a year.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   An organization may apply to the Clerk-Treasurer for an exemption if
the organization meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The solicitation is performed only by citizens of the county;
      (2)   The solicitation benefits a county school, county athletic team,
county church, county tax-exempt organization or a county political party or
political organization; and
      (3)   The solicitation is held between dawn and dusk and for a specified
period of time.
   (B)   If the above stated conditions are met, the organization and each
representative of it shall be permitted to solicit during the times and dates
specified in its request to the Clerk-Treasurer, as approved by the Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 111.09 SOLICITOR’S APPLICATION.
 
   Solicitor’s Application
 
Name                                                             address                                                             
 
Date of birth                     weight           sex        eyes              hair                     
 
Nature of business and goods to be sold                                                             
 
Employer                                                             
 
Length of time will be doing business                                                             
 
Are orders taken & delivery made later?                     Method of delivery                                   
 
Have you ever been arrested for or convicted of a crime that has not been expunged by a court?
 
If answer is yes, state nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor
                                                            
 
Photograph of applicant, taken within 60 days prior to filing application. Head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishing manner size 2"
x 2"
 
Contact number: ( )  
 
Vehicle(s) make                    model                       year              color                  
 
Plate number                   State of issue                        
 
(Ord. 1, 2016, passed 4-11-2016)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
132.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
   
130.01   Minor curfew; imposing parental responsibility for repeat offenders
   
130.02   Congregating in public places
   
130.03   Disorderly conduct
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 MINOR CURFEW; IMPOSING PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPEAT OFFENDERS.
   (A)   It is a curfew violation for a child 17 years of age and under to be
in any public place, street, alley, grounds or thoroughfares of the town
between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
   (B)   It is a curfew violation for a child under 15 years or age to be in a
public place after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.
   (C)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.   
(Prior Code, § 130.01) (Ord. 6, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 2, passed 9-8-2009;
Am. Ord. 6, 1997, passed - -2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   State curfew provisions, see I.C. 31-37-3
§ 130.02 CONGREGATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to congregate or cause to congregate a
crowd of five or more persons upon any public street, alley, sidewalk parking
lot, community center building or grounds or on any other public place within
the town limits, so as to obstruct the same or as to hinder or annoy passers-by
or occupants of adjacent premises, or to interfere with the activities normally
conducted on the premises.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY is an assembly of
five or more persons whose common objective is to commit an unlawful act, or a
lawful act by unlawful means. Prior concert is not necessary to form an
UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   (C)   Furthermore, be it known that any person who, being a member of an
unlawful assembly, recklessly, knowingly or intentionally engages in tumultuous
conduct commits rioting.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) (Ord. 2, passed 9-8-2009; Am. Ord. 6, 1997, passed - -
2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory references:
   Rioting, see I.C. 35-45-1-2
§ 130.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quiet of the town or
its inhabitants by loud talking or by the making of unusual noises or by the
playing of loud music. It is also unlawful for a person to recklessly,
knowingly or intentionally:
   (A)   Engage in fighting or TUMULTUOUS CONDUCT which, for the purpose of
this section, is defined as conduct that results in or is likely to result in
serious bodily injury to a person or substantial damage to property; or
   (B)   Disrupts a lawful assembly of persons.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) (Ord. 2, passed 9-8-2009; Am. Ord. 6, 1997, passed - -
2015) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for engaging in fighting or tumultuous conduct, see I.C. 35-45-1-3
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The first time a child is found in violation of this chapter, the town
is authorized to assess and collect a $10 fine from the child.
   (C)   The second time a child is found to be in violation of this chapter,
the town is authorized to assess and collect a $25 fine from the child.
   (D)   The third time a child is found to be in violation of this chapter,
the Police Department shall issue a citation to one of the child’s custodial
parents, custodial guardians or custodians. The town is authorized to assess
and collect a fine of $50 from the cited parent, guardian or custodian of a
child found in violation of this chapter for the third time. In addition, the
Police Department shall refer the child and the case to the appropriate
juvenile authorities of the county.
   (E)   Each offense beyond the third offense shall be subject to a fine to
the custodial parent, custodial guardian or custodian of $100.
Statutory reference:
   State penalties for rioting and disorderly conduct, see I.C. 35-50
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Administration
   
131.02   Definitions
Obscene Matter
   
131.15   Exhibition of obscene matter
   
131.16   Distribution of obscene matter
Indecent Acts
   
131.30   Public indecency
   
131.31   Indecent exposure
   
131.32   Public nudity
   
131.33   Prostitution
   
131.34   Voyeurism
 
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Council for the administration of
this chapter, while the enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Building
Commissioner and/or the Town Marshal.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -)
§ 131.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully, opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or
the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   PEEP. Any looking of a clandestine, surreptitious, prying or secretive
nature.
   PUBLIC NUDITY. The showing, in public, of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully, opaque covering of any part of the
nipple; or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -)
OBSCENE MATTER
§ 131.15 EXHIBITION OF OBSCENE MATTER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      KNOWINGLY. Knowing or having good reason to know the character of the
matter.
      OBSCENE MATTER. Any matter is obscene if:
         (a)   The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
finds that the dominant theme of the matter, taken as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest in sex;
         (b)   The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way
sexual conduct; and
         (c)   The matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
      OBSCENE MATTER OR PERFORMANCE. Any matter or performance is obscene if:
         (a)   The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
finds that the matter or performance taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest in sex;
         (b)   The matter or performance depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, sexual conduct; and
         (c)   The matter or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an
act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT.
         (a)   Sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct;
         (b)   Exhibition of the uncovered genitals in the context of
masturbation or other sexual activity;
         (c)   Exhibition of the uncovered genitals of a person under 16 years
of age;
         (d)   Sadomasochistic abuse; or
         (e)   Sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with an animal.
   (B)   Every person who knowingly exhibits in any public place, or in a place
readily accessible to the public, any obscene matter is guilty of an
infraction.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section
for the person to show:
      (1)   The matter was exhibited for legitimate scientific or educational
purposes; or
      (2)   The matter was exhibited by a person acting within the scope of
employment, provided such person has no financial interest in the place so
employed.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.16 DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE MATTER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of matter, for a consideration.
      KNOWINGLY. Knowing or having good reason to know the character of the
matter or performance.
      MATTER. Any book, magazine, newspaper or printed or written material; or
any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other pictorial
representation; or any state or other figure, or any recording, transcription
or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction; or any other articles,
equipment, machines or materials.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      OBSCENE MATTER OR PERFORMANCE. Any matter or performance is obscene if:
         (a)   The average person, applying contemporary community standards,
finds that the matter or performance taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest in sex;
         (b)   The matter or performance depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way sexual conduct; or
         (c)   The matter or performance, taken as a whole, lacks serious
literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
      OWNER. Any person who owns or has a legal right to possession of any
matter.
      PERFORMANCE. Any play, motion picture, dance or other exhibition or
presentation, whether pictured, animated or live, performed before an audience
of one or more persons.
      SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person as an
act of sexual stimulation or gratification.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT.
         (a)   Sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct;
         (b)   Exhibition of the uncovered genitals in the context of
masturbation or other sexual activity;
         (c)   Exhibition of the uncovered genitals of a person under 16 years
of age;
         (d)   Sadomasochistic abuse; or
         (e)   Sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct with an animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to:
      (1)   Distribute obscene matter to minors;
      (2)   Display obscene matter in an area to which minors have access; or
      (3)   Misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of obtaining admission
to an area where minors are being restricted.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this section
for the defendant to show:
      (1)   The dissemination was made to the recipient by a bona fide school,
museum, public institution or by an employee of such organization, or of a
retail outlet, affiliated with and serving the educational purpose of such
organization, so long as said employee is acting in the course of his or her
employment;
      (2)   The defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt, to ascertain the
true age of the minor;
      (3)   The act was done for legitimate scientific or educational purposes;
or
      (4)   The act was done by a salesclerk, motion picture projectionist,
usher or ticket taker acting within the scope of his or her employment;
provided, that such salesclerk, motion picture projectionist, usher or ticket
taker has no financial interest in the place where he or she is employed.
   (D)   Where the subject matter is offered for distribution to the public as
stock in trade of a lawful business or activity or, as in the case of films, is
exhibited at a commercial theater showing regularly scheduled performances to
the general public, no person shall be arrested for a violation of any of the
provisions of this section unless the arresting officer shall have first
obtained an arrest warrant, and no property shall be seized as evidence unless
a search warrant shall have first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of
this section; provided, that the quantity of matter seized shall encompass no
more than is reasonable and necessary for the purpose of obtaining evidence
and, provided further, that no warrant for arrest shall issue upon probable
cause for any salesclerk, motion picture projectionist, usher or ticket taker,
unless it shall be shown that the salesclerk, projectionist, usher or ticket
taker has a financial interest in the act complained of other than that
interest normally within the scope of his or her employment.
   (E)   At any time after seizure or the obtaining of evidence by purchase,
prior to arrest, the town, defendant, owner or other party in interest of any
matter seized or purchased may apply for and obtain a prompt adversary hearing
for the purpose of obtaining a preliminary determination of obscenity. If
evidence has been obtained by purchase, the court shall direct the clerk of the
court to issue notice to the defendant informing the person of the availability
of a prompt adversary hearing prior to the issuance of a warrant of arrest. At
any time after seizure, the town, owner or other party in interest of the
matter seized, may apply for and obtain a prompt adversary hearing for the
purpose of obtaining a determination of obscenity. If the court determines at
the hearing that the matter is obscene, the matter shall be held as evidence
and a warrant of arrest may be issued for the arrest of the defendant;
provided, that if the defendant, owner or other party in interest of any matter
seized or purchased shall not apply for a prompt adversary hearing within five
days after the seizure occurs or within seven days after notice is issued by
the court, an arrest warrant may be issued for the arrest of the defendant. In
the case of films or motion pictures, at any time after arrest and prior to a
trial or any adversary hearing for the purpose of obtaining a preliminary
determination of obscenity, the defendant or owner of any matter seized, upon
showing that other copies of the film or motion picture are not available to be
exhibited, may apply to the court, and, upon such application, the court shall
order that the applicant be permitted to copy the film or motion picture, at
his or her own expense without violating any copyright or other intellectual
property law, so that the showing can be continued pending a judicial
determination of obscenity in an adversary hearing.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
INDECENT ACTS
§ 131.30 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place, engages in
sexual intercourse; engages in deviate sexual conduct; appears in a state of
nudity with the intent to arouse the sexual desires of the person or another
person; or fondles the person’s genitals or the genitals of another person
commits public indecency, a Class A misdemeanor.
   (B)   A person at least 18 years of age who knowingly or intentionally, in a
public place, appears in a state of nudity with the intent to be seen by a
child less than 16 years of age commits public indecency, a Class A
misdemeanor. However, the offense under this division (B) is a Class D felony
if the person who commits the offense has a prior unrelated conviction under
this division (B) or division (A) above or, in another jurisdiction, including
a military court, that is substantially equivalent to an offense described in
this division (B) or division (A) above.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.31 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   A person who, in a place other than a public place, with the intent to be
seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of that place: engages in
sexual intercourse; engages in deviate sexual conduct; fondles the person’s
genitals or the genitals of another person; or appears in a state of nudity;
where the person can be seen by persons other than invitees and occupants of
that place commits indecent exposure, a Class C misdemeanor.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.32 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   A person who knowingly or intentionally appears in a public place in a
state of nudity commits public nudity, a Class C misdemeanor.
   (B)   A person who knowingly or intentionally appears in a public place in a
state of nudity with the intent to be seen by another person commits a Class B
misdemeanor. However, the offense is a Class D felony if the person has a prior
unrelated conviction under this division (B) or division (C) below.
   (C)   A person who knowingly or intentionally appears in a state of nudity
in or on school grounds; in a public park; or with the intent to arouse the
sexual desires of the person or another person, in a department of natural
resources owned or managed property; commits a Class A misdemeanor. However,
the offense is a Class D felony if the person has a prior unrelated conviction
under this division (C) or under division (B) above.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.33 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   A person who knowingly or intentionally performs, or offers or agrees
to perform, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct; or fondles, or offers
or agrees to fondle, the genitals of another person for money or other property
commits prostitution, a Class A misdemeanor. However, the offense is a Class D
felony if the person has two prior convictions under this division (A).
   (B)   A person who knowingly or intentionally pays, or offers or agrees to
pay, money or other property to another person for having engaged in, or on the
understanding that the other person will engage in, sexual intercourse or
deviate conduct with the person or with any other person; or for having
fondled, or on the understanding that the other person will fondle, the
genitals of the person or any other person; commits patronizing a prostitute, a
Class A misdemeanor. However, the offense is a Class D felony if the person has
two prior convictions under this division (B).
   (C)   A person who knowingly or intentionally entices or compels another
person to become a prostitute; knowingly or intentionally procures, or offers
or agrees to procure, a person for another person for the purpose of
prostitution; having control over the use of a place and knowingly of
intentionally permits another person to use the place for prostitution;
receives money or other property from a prostitute, without lawful
consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from prostitution; or
knowingly or intentionally conducts or directs another person to a place for
the purpose of prostitution; commits promoting prostitution, a Class C felony.
However, the offense is a Class B felony if the person enticed or compelled to
become a prostitute is under 18 years of age.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.34 VOYEURISM.
   A person who peeps, goes upon the land of another with the intent to peep,
or into an occupied dwelling of another person, or who peeps into an area where
an occupant of the area reasonably can be expected to disrobe, including
restrooms, baths, showers and dressing rooms, without the consent of the other
person, commits voyeurism, a Class B misdemeanor. However, the offense is a
Class D felony if: it is knowingly or intentionally committed by means of a
camera, a video camera or any other type of video recording device; or the
person who commits the offense has a prior unrelated conviction under this
section or in another jurisdiction, including a military court, for an offense
that is substantially similar to an offense described in this section.
(Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violated any of the provisions of §
130.01 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall, upon the first conviction,
be fined in any amount not less than $100, nor more than $500 per violation.
Upon a second conviction under §
130.01, a person shall be fined in any amount not less than $500, nor more than
$1,000 per violation. Upon a third conviction, or any number thereafter, under
§
130.01, a person shall be fined in any amount not less than $1,000 nor more
than $2,500 per violation.
   (C)   Any person who violated any of the provisions of §
130.02 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall, upon the first conviction,
be fined in any amount not less than $100, nor more than $500 per violation.
Upon a second conviction under §
130.02, a person shall be fined in any amount not less than $500, nor more than
$1,000 per violation. Upon a third conviction, or any number thereafter, under
§
130.02, a person shall be fined in any amount not less than $1,000 nor more
than $2,500 per violation.
(Prior Code, § 131.99) (Ord. 3, passed 2-4-1998; Am. Ord. 3, 1998, passed - -)
CHAPTER 132: WEAPONS
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Restrictions
   
132.03   Exemptions
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRGUN. Any weapon or instrument discharging a pellet or other projectile by
which the propelling force is a spring, air, gasses or vapors compressed by
mechanical power, including, without limitation, air rifles, air pistols,
pellet guns and BB guns.
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any other instrument or device that could be used in an
attack upon a person capable of causing death or serious injury.
   FIREARM. Any weapon capable of, or designed to, or that may be readily
converted to, expel a projectile by means of an explosion.
(Ord. 1, 2003, passed - -)
§ 132.02 RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall carry or have in his or her possession or have within his or
her conveyance, whether licensed or not, any weapon as defined in this chapter,
in or on property owned by the town. Town property by its common name is
defined as follows:
   (A)   Community Center;
   (B)   Town Barn;
   (C)   Town Sewage Plant; and
   (D)   Town park.
(Ord. 1, 2003, passed - -) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to law enforcement officers.
(Ord. 1, 2003, passed - -)
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating this chapter shall be guilty of committing a Class C
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1, 2003, passed - -)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING CODE
      
151.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
      
152.   PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT
         
APPENDIX A: PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
         
APPENDIX A: SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
      
154.   ZONING
         
APPENDIX A: ZONING ORDINANCE
      
155.   GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Authority
   
150.04   Scope
   
150.05   Adoption of regulations by reference
   
150.06   Application for building permits
   
150.07   Improvement location permit required
   
150.08   Other ordinances
   
150.09   Building permit and inspection fees
   
150.10   Review of application
   
150.11   Inspections
   
150.12   Right of entry
   
150.13   Stop order
   
150.14   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.15   Standards
   
150.16   Violation
   
150.17   Right of appeal
   
150.18   Remedies
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto shall be
known as the “Building Code of the Town of Bunker Hill,” may be cited as such
and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
(Prior Code, § 150.01) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the protection
of life, limb, health, environment, public safety and welfare, and for the
conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures.
(Prior Code, § 150.02) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.03 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce all of the provisions of this code. Whenever in the building
regulations it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner or any other officer of
the town, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of
determining whether the rules and standards established by ordinance has been
complied with, and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what such regulation, code or standards shall be, or
power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or to enforce ordinance
provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
(Prior Code, § 150.03) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.04 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alterations, repair,
use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to all buildings and structures,
other than industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under
I.C. 22-15-4, in the town.
(Prior Code, § 150.04) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.05 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Building rules of the State Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission as set out in the following articles of 675 I.A.C. are hereby
incorporated by reference in this code and shall include later amendments to
those articles as the same are published in the State Register or the State
Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein:
      (1)   Article 13: Building Codes:
         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;
         (b)   State Building Code; and
         (c)   State Building Code Standards.
      (2)   Article 14: One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code: State One- and Two-
Family Dwelling Code.
      (3)   Article 16: Plumbing Code: State Plumbing Code
      (4)   Article 17: Electrical Codes:
         (a)   State Electrical Code; and
         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.
      (5)   Article 18: Mechanical Code: State Mechanical Code.
      (6)   Article 19: Energy Conservation Code:
         (a)   State Energy Conservation Code; and
         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code.
      (7)   Article 20: Swimming Pool Code: State Swimming Pool Code.
   (B)   Copies of this code and rules, regulations and codes adopted herein by
reference are on file as required by law in the office of the Town Building
Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 150.05) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.06 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMITS.
   No permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes unless the application
for such permit is accomplished by a plat or sketch of the proposed location
showing lot boundaries and by plans and specifications showing the work to be
done. All plans for building construction under the authority of the State
Administrative Building Council must also be filed with said Council. No local
permits shall be issued thereunder until a copy of the release for construction
from the State Building Commissioner is received by the Building Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 150.06) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.07 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure containing 80 square feet or the cost of
which exceeds $1,000, using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. All
fees provided for herein shall be paid to the Town Building Commissioner and
deposited to the Town General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 150.07) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.08 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   All work done under any permit issued thereunder shall be in full compliance
with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and, in addition to the fees for
permits herein after provided for, there shall be the fees prescribed in such
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 150.08) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.09 BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.
   The fees to be charged by and paid to the Town Department of Building and
Safety for various permits, inspections, licenses, registrations and
examinations required by law, and pursuant to all other ordinances, shall be as
follows.
   (A)   Residential; one- and two-family dwellings. The fee calculation shall
be as follows: the minimum dollar or square foot cost, whichever is the
greater. No permit fee in this division (A) shall exceed $500 for any one
project.
Accessory structure
   Non-permanent < 120 sq. ft.                   $35
   Permanent > 200 sq. ft.                       $0.07 per sq. ft./$35 min.
Addition                                            $0.10 per sq. ft./$100 min.
Addition of covered decks, covered porches, decks   $0.07 per sq. ft./$25 min.
or balconies in excess of 30 inches above grade
Alteration/repair/roofing and re-roofing            $40
Demolition
   Detached accessory structure                  $40
   Residential structure                         $60
Manufactured home placement                         $0.10 per sq. ft./$100 min.
Modular home placement                              $0.10 per sq. ft./$100 min.
Miscellaneous items:
   Certificate of occupancy                      $125
   Extension of an expired permit                $40 per inspection
   Permit renewal                                50% of original fee
   Re-inspection                                 $40
Miscellaneous structures (fences > 6 ft. in height, $40
ramps, stairs and the like)
New construction (conventional)                     $0.10 per sq. ft./$100 min.
Relocation (structure)                              $0.10 per sq. ft./$100 min.
Remodeling                                          $0.10 per sq. ft./$50 min.
Swimming pool/spa/whirlpool (residential)
   Above-ground installation                     $50
   In-ground installation                        $100
Total replacement of the following listed systems:
   Electrical service only (new installation,    $40
upgrade)
   Electrical service and rewire installation    $75
   Mechanical (HVAC) installation                $75
   Plumbing installation                         $75
   Sewer connection/alteration                   $40
   Structural installation                       $75
 
   (B)   Agricultural/commercial/industrial. The fee calculation shall be as
follows: the minimum dollar or square foot cost, whichever is greater. No
permit fee in this division (B) shall exceed $5,000 for any one project.
Multi-Family Dwellings
Accessory structure
   Non-permanent: 120 sq. ft.                                              $75
                                                                              $0.07 per
   Permanent: 200 sq. ft.                                                  sq. ft./
                                                                              $100 min.
                                                                              $0.06 per
Addition of covered decks, covered porches, non-covered decks or balconies    sq. ft./
                                                                              $40 min.
                                                                              $0.13 per
Addition to accessory structure                                               sq. ft./
                                                                              $100 min.
Alteration/repair/roofing/re-roofing                                          $50 per
                                                                              unit
Demolition                                                                    $100 per
                                                                              structure
                                                                              $15 per
New construction apartments/condominiums                                      unit plus
                                                                              $0.13 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
                                                                              $100 plus
Relocation                                                                    $0.13 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
                                                                              $0.13 per
Remodeling                                                                    sq. ft./
                                                                              $100 min.
Agricultural/Travel Rooms/Office/Warehouse/Manufacturing/Retail
                                                                              $100 plus
Accessory structure                                                           $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
                                                                              $0.10 per
Addition of covered decks, covered porches, non-covered decks or balconies    sq. ft./
                                                                              $40 min.
                                                                              $200 plus
Addition                                                                      $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
Agricultural structure                                                        $60
                                                                              $100 plus
Alteration/repair/roofing/re-roofing                                          $0.07 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
Demolition                                                                    $100 per
                                                                              structure
                                                                              $300 per
Hotel/motel                                                                   unit plus
                                                                              $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
Miscellaneous items:
   Change of use                                                           $75
   Re-inspection                                                           $40
   Partial filing                                                          $100/
                                                                              submission
   Foundation release                                                      $100
                                                                              50% of
   Permit renewal                                                          original
                                                                              fee
Miscellaneous structures (fences > 6 ft. in height, ramps, stairs and the     $100
like)
                                                                              $300 per
New construction                                                              unit plus
                                                                              $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
                                                                              $100 plus
Remodeling                                                                    $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
                                                                              $300 plus
Shell only                                                                    $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
Swimming pool/spa/whirlpool                                                   $150
Total replacement of the following listed systems:
   Commercial range hood installation
      Class one hood                                                    $100
      Class two hood                                                    $75
   Electrical service (new installation, upgrade)
      Service; 400 amp                                                  $40
      Service; 400 amp & 3 phase                                        $75
                                                                              $75 plus
                                                                              applicable
   Electrical service and rewire installation                              service
                                                                              (see
                                                                              above)
   Mechanical (HVAC) installation                                          $75
   Plumbing installation                                                   $75
   Sewer connection/alteration                                             $75
   Sprinkler system installation                                           $100
   Storage tank
      Liquid storage of flammable/combustible material in excess of 500
gallons                                                                       $150 per
      Compressed gas storage in fixed containers exceeding:             unit
         200 cu. ft.: flammable gas
         500 cu. ft.: oxidizing gas (including oxygen)
         600 cu. ft.: inert gas
   Structural alterations                                                  $75
   Towers and/or similar structures (including, but not limited to,        $150 per
communication towers, observation facilities, training facilities and the     unit
like)
                                                                              $300 plus
Warehouse                                                                     $0.132 per
                                                                              sq. ft.
 
   (C)   Registration and licenses.
      (1)   The town will require that all contractors doing work in the
jurisdiction are to be registered with the town annually. Any contractor who is
registered with the County Building Commission/Plan Commission or the City of
Peru Building Commissioner will be accepted by the town. The contractor shall
provide all applicable documents to the Building Commissioner within 24 hours
of request.
      (2)   Annual or new contractor registration shall be accompanied by a
certificate of liability insurance for a minimum of $100,000 coverage and
workers’ compensation insurance coverage issued by an insurance company
registered to sell insurance in the state.
      (3)   Contractor registration shall be valid for a term of one year,
beginning January 1 and expiring December 31 of the same year and shall be
renewed annually at a fee of $25. From July 1, fees will be pro-rated by month.
(Prior Code, § 150.09) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997;
Am. Ord. 4, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 150.10 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   Prior to issuance of any building permit thereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall:
   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full compliance
with the provisions of this code;
   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building site will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within the
floodplain area having special flood hazards to determine that the proposed
repair uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage, and uses construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage; and
   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvement within the floodplain area having special flood hazards
to assure that the propose construction (including prefabricated and mobile
homes) is protected against flood damage, is designed (or modified) and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(Prior Code, § 150.10) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.11 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   After the issuance of any building permit thereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to make, such inspections of the work
being done under such permit as are necessary to ensure full compliance with
the provision of this chapter and the terms of the permit.
   (B)   Re-inspection of work found to be incomplete or not ready for
inspection are subject to assessment of re-inspection fees as prescribed in
this code.
(Prior Code, § 150.11) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or his or
her duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure or premises in the town and its jurisdiction, to perform any duty
imposed upon him or her by this code.
(Prior Code, § 150.12) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.13 STOP ORDER.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provision of this code, the
Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on
any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such
persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building
Commissioner to proceed with the work.
(Prior Code, § 150.13) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.14 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered
or repaired after adoption of this chapter shall be issued unless such building
or structure was erected, altered or repaired in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.14) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.15 STANDARDS.
   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade.
(Prior Code, § 150.15) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.16 VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sub-lessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building
or structure, other than fences, in the town or cause or permit the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 150.16) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.17 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   All persons shall have a right to appeal the Building Commissioner’s
decision first through the Board of Building Appeals for the town and then to
the appropriate State Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
   (A)   Board created. There is hereby created a Board of Building Appeals.
The Town Council shall provide for the organization and maintenance of a Board
of Building Appeals. The Board of Building Appeals shall consist of five
members to be appointed by the Town Council.
   (B)   Terms of office. The members shall be appointed for a period of three
years, except that, of the five members, the first two members appointed shall
be appointed for a term of one year; the next two members shall be appointed
for a term of two years; and the last appointment for a term of three years. Of
the appointed members, one member shall be knowledgeable in real estate
affairs, one member shall be knowledgeable in the construction business and
three members of the public-at-large.
   (C)   Vacancy on Board. In the event of a vacancy, the Town Council shall
appoint a new member within 30 days, with the same or like qualification, and
who shall serve the balance of the unexpired term of the term vacated.
   (D)   Rules and regulations. Voting shall be with a majority of the total
members assigned. If a member has more than three unexcused absences, he or she
may be removed from the Board and replaced. The Board may provide for rules and
regulations to control its operation. The Board will only meet as needed, which
will be determined by the Building Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 150.17) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997;
Am. Ord. 4, passed 1-11-2011)
§ 150.18 REMEDIES.
   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the town bring actions in the
county circuit or superior court for mandatory and injunctive relief in the
enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or orders made by the
Building Commissioner, and such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may
be joined with an action to recover the penalties provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.18) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation that violates any of the provisions of
this chapter, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to perform
any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the Building
Commissioner, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given
by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of this chapter,
for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation
shall be fined in any sum not less than $25, or more than $300.
   (B)   Each day (each 24 hours) of such unlawful activity as is prohibited by
division (A) above shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 150.99) (Ord. 4, passed 9-10-1997; Am. Ord. passed 11-18-1997)
CHAPTER 151: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Adoption of state statute
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Declaration of public nuisance
   
151.05   Power of enforcement authority
   
151.06   Unsafe building
   
151.07   Sealing of unsafe building
   
151.08   Renovation standard
   
151.09   Unsafe Building Fund
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Unsafe Building Ordinance” of the town.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.02 ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTE.
   The provisions of I.C. 36-7-9 are hereby adopted in their entirety, and as
they may be subsequently amended, and are made a part hereof by reference the
same as if fully set out herein.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Building Commissioner for the town.
   EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT. The Town Council, which is authorized by this chapter
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The Town Council or whomever it may designate under the
authority of I.C. 36-7-9-2. The HEARING AUTHORITY shall perform those functions
specified by state statute.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. As defined in I.C. 36-7-9-2.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.04 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All buildings or portions thereof within the zoning jurisdiction of the town
which are determined, after inspection by the enforcement authority, to be
unsafe as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances
and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.05 POWER OF ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Building Commissioner, as the enforcement authority for the town, shall
be authorized to administer and to proceed under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-
5 in ordering the repair or removal of any buildings found to be unsafe as
specified therein or hereafter.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.06 UNSAFE BUILDING.
   The description of an unsafe building contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is hereby
supplemented to provide minimum standards for building condition or maintenance
in the zoning jurisdiction of the town by adding the following definition.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an unsafe
building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that
life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:
      (1)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise is determined by the enforcement authority
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is
likely to cause sickness or disease;
      (2)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the enforcement
authority to be a fire hazard; or
      (3)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so
as to constitute such buildings or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.07 SEALING OF UNSAFE BUILDING.
   Upon a finding by the enforcement authority that, a building or structure is
unsafe and defined by I.C. 36-7-9-4, or §
151.06, then, in addition to all other powers provided by law, pursuant to I.C.
36-7-9-5(a)(2), proceed to seal the unsafe building against intrusion by
unauthorized persons according to the administrative procedures set forth in
I.C. 36-7-9.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.08 RENOVATION STANDARD.
   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in accordance with the town’s
Building Code and shall be considered the standard and acceptable practice for
all matters covered by this chapter by the town’s enforcement authority.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.09 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   In accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-14, an Unsafe Building Fund is hereby
established.
   (A)   Funding for the Unsafe Building Fund shall be:
      (1)   Appropriated annually at a rate of not less than 2% of the budget
of the General Fund;
      (2)   Disbursements from the Rainy Day Fund;
      (3)   Appropriations from state or federal governments; and
      (4)   Donations.
   (B)   Expenditures from this fund shall be used only for expenses associated
with the compliance with I.C. 36-7-9 and this chapter.
   (C)   This Fund is non-reverting and shall remain in effect for the life of
this chapter. Funds remaining upon termination shall then revert to the General
Fund.
   (D)   Any monies derived as a result of expenditures from this fund shall,
upon receipt, be deposited in the Unsafe Building Fund.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sub-lessee or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or any order issued by the enforcement authority.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or I.C. 36-7-9-28 shall
commit a Class C infraction. Each day such violation continues constitutes a
separate offense.
(Ord. 1, 2000, passed 5-11-2004)
CHAPTER 152: PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
152.01   Plan Unit Development Ordinance adopted by reference
   
Appendix A: Plan Unit Development Ordinance
§ 152.01 PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Plan Unit Development Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference as set
forth in Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. passed 10-21-1997)
APPENDIX A: PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
   
1-1      Plan Unit Development
   
1-2      General
   
1-3      Conformance of Plan Unit Development
   
1-4       Procedures for filing a Plan Unit Development
   
1-5      Approval of Plan Unit Development
   
1-6      Final approval
   
1-7      Adoption
   
1-8      Amendment
   
1-9      Repealer
   
1-10      Effective date
Editor’s note:
   This appendix derives from an ordinance passed 10-21-1997
   TOWN OF BUNKER HILL PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
   This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Town of Bunker Hill Plan
Unit Development Ordinance.”
   This ordinance shall not be deemed to restrict in any way the authority
given by the laws of the State of Indiana to similar boards formed for similar
purpose.
1-1 PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for regulations regarding uses
of land. A Plan Unit Development shall be considered a Zoning District. This
ordinance shall be in conformance with I.C. 36-7-4-1500 series effective
January 1, 1996.
1-2 GENERAL.
   It shall be the policy of the town to promote progressive development of
land and construction thereon by encouraging Plan Unit Developments: A PUD
shall meet the same requirement as subdivision with the exception that the PUD
is a mixture of resident and business within the same area. Building within the
PUD shall be constructed in accordance with the One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code, the Uniform Building Code and the State Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Code.
   This ordinance shall:
   (1)   Designate a parcel of real property as a Plan Unit Development
District;
   (2)   Specifies uses of a range of uses permitted in the Plan Unit
Development District;
   (3)   Specifies development requirements in the Plan Unit Development
District;
   (4)   Specifies the plan documentation and supporting information that may
be required;
   (5)   Specifies any limitation applicable to the Plan Unit Development
District; and
   (6)   Must meet the requirements in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-1500 series
(Pub. Law No. 320-1995, § 30).
1-3 CONFORMANCE OF PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   A Plan Unit Development shall conform to the following.
   (1)   A minimum parcel area of five acres is required for a Plan Unit
Development.
   (2)   There shall be at least 10% of the land area in the development
provided for open space which is not covered by buildings, parking spaces,
driveways or streets. No more than 50% of this open space shall be covered by
water.
   (3)   All utilities, including communication and electric systems, shall be
placed underground within the limits of the development.
   (4)   The design and designation of private street shall be subject to the
approval of the Plan Commission. All street(s) dedicated for public uses shall
be constructed in accordance with specification as outlined in the Town of
Bunker Hill Subdivision Control Ordinance and shall meet the minimum
requirement for county specs.
   (5)   There shall be established a Home Owner’s Association and its bylaws
and other similar deed restriction, which provide for the control and
maintenance of all common areas, recreation facilities or open space and shall
meet with the approval of the Plan Commission.
   (6)   The Plan Unit Development shall include a sanitary sewer system
connected to a public sewer system, if available within a reasonable distance
of 500 feet from the project. If public facilities are not available, a private
facility may be authorized if approved by the County Board of Health.
   (7)   The Plan Unit Development may provide for a mixture of residential and
commercial uses or commercial and industrial uses; however, the Development
shall not have a mixture of residential and industrial uses.
   (8)   Whenever possible the Development shall utilize landscaping and
existing woodlands as buffers to screen lighting, parking areas, loading and
unloading areas and other features within the Development and adjoining
districts.
   (9)   The Plan Unit Development shall include a common water supply and
distribution system, either public or private, which shall meet the approval of
both the Plan Commission and the Local Board of Health and shall be built at no
expense to the local government.
   (10)   All building designs and locations shall be subject to approval by
the Plan Commission. No building may be located within 20 feet of another
building unless approved by the Commission.
   (11)   If any open space or recreational facility is to be used solely by
the residents of the project, adequate provisions shall be made for assessments
against the property within the project so that such facilities can be properly
maintained and operated.
   (12)   The Plan Commission may waive certain conditions of the Plan Unit
Development, such as setbacks, underground electricity, height, lighting, sign
and other requirements that would not interfere with health, safety or
convenience of the development of surrounding area.
1-4 PROCEDURES FOR FILING A PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (1)   The applicant shall submit three copies of preliminary site plans to
the Plan Commission, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      (a)   Name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of all owners;
      (b)   Legal description of the property;
      (c)   Zoning classification of all property surrounding the Development.
Each primary use of building within the Development shall be classified as
Commercial, Industrial or Residential; and
      (d)   Adjoining property owners, including name(s) and address(es).
   (2)   The site plan shall show the following information:
      (a)   Contours at vertical intervals of two feet;
      (b)   Street, rights-of-way and easements, location, widths and proposes;
      (c)   Setback lines: all front setbacks shall be no less than 30 feet
from street right-of-way. Rear setback shall be no less than ten feet from the
rear property line;
      (d)   Building lines;
      (e)   Building coverage;
      (f)   Tract boundary lines showing dimension, bearings, angles, monuments
and references survey markers. All markers and monuments shall be set the same
as subdivision points;
      (g)   Buildings, recreation areas, landscaping and parking areas;
      (h)   Outdoor lighting;
      (i)   Height, scale, material and style of improvement;
      (j)   Signs;
      (k)   Name and address of developer, engineer or surveyor who prepared
the plan;
      (l)   North point, date and scale;
      (m)   Signature block for the Plan Commission, developer and engineer;
      (n)   Location map; in upper left corner;
      (o)   All drainage and utilities;
      (p)   Other requirements considered appropriate by the Plan Commission;
and
      (q)   Other features or conditions which affect the PUD favorable or
adversely.
1-5 APPROVAL OF PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (1)   Upon compliance with §
1-6(1)(a) through (1)(e), the Administrator shall note, in writing, on the
preliminary plans, his or her unofficial agreement or disagreement. The
Administrator may make recommendations to relocate buildings, streets or
entrances.
   (2)   Upon compliance with §
1-6(1)(a) through (1)(e), the Administrator shall submit the plan to the Plan
Commission for preliminary approval.
   (3)   The applicant shall file with the Plan Commission no later than 15
days prior to the Plan Commission Meeting.
   (4)   The applicant shall give notice to the local newspaper as outlined in
I.C. 5-3-1-2 and 5-3-1-4 at least ten days before the meeting. The cost shall
be incurred by the applicant.
   (5)   The applicant shall submit three copies of the development plan along
with any other supporting documents to the Commission. The Commission shall
carefully consider the plans and recommendations of the Administrator. The Plan
Commission may approve or disapprove or amend the development plan.
   (6)   If the Plan Commission approves the plan, the President and secretary
shall sign the plan and no changes shall be made unless approved by the
Commission.
   (7)   If the Commission disapproves the PUD, the applicant may not re-submit
the plan for a period of three months unless the Commission votes unanimously
to rehear the case.
   (8)   If the Commission make recommended changes, the plans may not be
signed until all changes have been made.
1-6 FINAL APPROVAL.
   (1)   Once preliminary approval has been granted by the Plan Commission,
final approval may be granted by a hearing committee consisting of the
following members, provided no changes have been made that were not approved by
the Commission:
      (a)   President of Plan Commission;
      (b)   Building Commissioner;
      (c)   Town Engineer;
      (d)   Two members of the Plan Commission other than the President; and
      (e)   One member of the Town Council.
   (2)   Preliminary approval by the Commission expires upon the expiration of
a three-year period immediately following that approval, unless all parts of
the phase have been platted and recorded.
   (3)   Three copies of final approval plans shall be submitted to the
Committee on 20-inch by 30-inch, five millimeters, single-mat Mylar print.
   (4)   The PUD may be submitted in phases, however each phase must be
approved by the Commission.
   (5)   An appeal of the decision of the Hearing Committee shall be to the
Plan Commission.
   (6)   Should changes be made from preliminary approval to the final
approval, a public hearing shall be required for secondary approval.
   (7)   After final approval has been granted, all plans shall be recorded in
the County Recorder’s office and no changes may be made without the approval of
the Plan Commission.
1-7 ADOPTION.
   Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County,
Indiana, that an ordinance be established for a Plan Unit Development.
   That said ordinance be made part of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana and that the Town of Bunker Hill Plan
Commission shall have the authority of approval of all Plan Unit Development.
   The Town Council for the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana, has
given public notice of hearing relating to a Plan Unit Development in
accordance with I.C. 5-3-1-2.
1-8 AMENDMENT.
   All changes or amendments to this ordinance shall be in accordance with I.C.
5-3-1-2 and approved by the Town Council of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami
County, Indiana.
1-9 REPEALER.
   Upon adoption of this ordinance according to law, § 3-6 of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana, adopted           
is hereby repealed in its entirety.
1-10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect in the manner provided by
law in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-1500 series and any amendments thereof.
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
153.01   Subdivision Ordinance adopted by reference
   
Appendix A: Subdivisions Ordinance
§ 153.01 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Subdivision Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference as set forth in
Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 152.01) (Ord. passed 10-21-1997)
APPENDIX A: SUBDIVISIONS ORDINANCE
Section I
   
1-1      Title
   
1-2      Policy
   
1-3      Purposes of these regulations
   
1-4      Authority and jurisdiction
   
1-5      Enactment
   
1-6      Interpretation, conflict and separability
   
1-7      Saving provision
   
1-8      Repealer
   
1-9      Amendments
   
1-10   Conditions
   
1-11   Resubdivision of land
   
1-12   Vacation of plats
   
1-13   Variances
   
1-14   Enforcement, violation and penalties
Section II
   
2-1      Usage
   
2-2      Definitions
Section III
   
3-1      General procedures
   
3-2      Major and minor subdivision: sketch plan application procedure for
primary approval
   
3-3      Major subdivisions
   
3-4      Minor subdivisions
   
3-5      Exempt divisions
Section IV
   
4-1      General improvements
   
4-2      Lot improvements
   
4-3      Streets
   
4-4      Drainage and storm sewers
   
4-5      Water facilities
   
4-6      Sewage facilities
   
4-7      Sidewalks
   
4-8      Utilities
   
4-9      Public uses
   
4-10   Preservation of natural features and amenities
   
4-11   Nonresidential subdivisions
Section V
   
5-1      Improvements and performance bond
   
5-2      Inspection of public improvements
   
5-3      Maintenance of public improvements
   
5-4      Issuance of building permits
Section VI
   
6-1      Sketch plan
   
6-2      Preliminary plat
   
6-3      Construction plans
   
6-4      Final subdivision plat
   
6-5      Exempt I Divisions
   
6-6      Exempt II Divisions
   Application for Sketch Plan Form
   Primary Approval Form
   Certification of Approval Form
   Secondary Approval Form
   Notice Public Hearing Form
   Figure 6-1 Sketch Plan
   Figure 6-2 Subdivision Plat
Editor’s note:
   This appendix derives from an ordinance passed 10-21-1997
Section I
1-1 TITLE.
   These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the “Subdivision
Regulation of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana.”
1-2 POLICY.
   (1)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the official Comprehensive Plan and related policies for the orderly
and efficient development of the town.
   (2)   Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that it can be
developed without peril to health from flood, fire or other menace and land
shall not be subdivided until having access to available existing public
facilities and until improvements and proper provision have been made for
drainage, water, sewerage, other necessary new public improvements such as
schools, parks, recreation facilities and transportation facilities adequate
for serving the subdivision. Private wells and septic systems in lieu of public
water and sewer facilities are allowable where permitted under the Town of
Bunker Hill Zoning Ordinance and approved by the County Health Department.
   (3)   Both existing and proposed public facilities serving the subdivision
shall be properly related and conform to the official Town Comprehensive Land
Use Plan, related policies and implementation programs including the Capital
Budget, Official Map, Thoroughfare Plan, Zoning Ordinance and Housing and
Building Codes.
1-3 PURPOSES OF THESE REGULATIONS.
   (1)   To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the town;
   (2)   To guide the future development and renewal of the town in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan and related policies;
   (3)   To provide for the safety, comfort and soundness of the built
environment and related open spaces;
   (4)   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability and
orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards; and
   (5)   To guide public and private policy and action to provide adequate and
efficient public and private facilities, the most aesthetically pleasing and
beneficial interrelationship between land uses, conserve natural resources such
as natural beauty, woodlands, open spaces and energy both during and after
development.
1-4 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (1)   This ordinance, which was enacted pursuant to state home rule and
planning enabling legislation (I.C. 36-1-3-4 and 36-7-4-700 series, as amended)
authorizes the Town Plan Commission to review and approve or disapprove plats
for subdivision throughout the town and its jurisdictions area listed in Zoning
Ordinance which show lots, blocks or sites with or without new streets or
highways. This authority extends to the development or resubdivision of
undeveloped portions of already recorded plats.
   (2)   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in conformity with the provisions of these subdivision
regulations, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with the
regulations contained herein and in conformity with construction standards
adopted by the town.
1-5 ENACTMENT.
   In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and
policies, these subdivision regulations are hereby adopted.
1-6 INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY.
   (1)   Interpretation and application. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   (2)   Conflict with public and private provisions.
      (a)   Public provisions. The regulations are not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or
other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall
control.
      (b)   Private provisions. These regulations are not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided
that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or
restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive or higher standards
than the requirements of these regulations or the determinations of the
Commission in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and
such private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder. (Note:
private provisions can only be enforced privately unless a public agency has
been made party to such agreements.)
   (3)   Separability. If any part or provision of these regulations or
application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in all
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not
affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The town hereby declares
that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any
such part, provision or application.
1-7 SAVING PROVISION.
   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending
under or by virtue of prior existing subdivision regulations or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation or as
waiving any right of the town under any section or provision existing at the
time of adoption of these regulations or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm or corporation by lawful action of the town except
as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
1-8 REPEALER.
   Upon the adoption of the Town of Bunker Hill Subdivision Ordinance according
to law, all subdivision ordinances as amended are hereby repealed, except for
such sections expressly retained herein.
1-9 AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety and general
welfare, the town, on recommendation of the Commission, may from time to time
amend the provisions imposed by these subdivision regulations. Public hearings
on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Commission and/or the town in
the manner prescribed by law.
1-10 CONDITIONS.
   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the state to the town. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the Commission for design, dedication,
improvement and restrictive use of the land in order to conform to the physical
and economical development of the town and to the safety and general welfare of
the future plot owners in the subdivision and of the town at large.
1-11 RESUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   (1)   Procedure for resubdivision. For any change in a map of an approved or
recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on
such map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line, or if it
affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be approved by the
Commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision.
   (2)   Procedure for subdivisions where future resubdivision is indicated.
Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or
more lots containing more than one acre of land and there are indications that
such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building sites, the
Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of
streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for
the future opening and extension of such streets may be made a requirement of
the plat.
1-12 VACATION OF PLATS.
   Any recorded plat or part of any recorded plat may be vacated only in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-3-10 or 36-7-4-711.
1-13 VARIANCES.
   (1)   General. Where the Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations
and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by
an alternative proposal, it may approve a variance to these subdivision
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided that such variances shall not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of these regulations; and, further provided, the
Commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon
the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      (a)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health or welfare or injurious to other nearby property;
      (b)   The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are
unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (c)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result as distinguished from a mere inconvenience,
if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out; and
      (d)   The variance will not in any manner contravene the provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan or Official Map as interpreted by the
Commission.
   (2)   Conditions. In approving variances the Commission may require such
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements of these regulations.
   (3)   Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for
the consideration of the Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds
for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
1-14 ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
   (1)   General.
      (a)   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce these
regulations and to bring any violations or lack of compliance to the attention
of the Commission Attorney.
      (b)   No owner or agent of the owner of any parcel of land located in a
proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel before a plat of
such subdivision has been approved by the Commission, in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations and filed with the County Recorder.
      (c)   A plat of a subdivision may not be filed with the Auditor and the
Recorder may not record it unless it has been granted secondary approval and
signed and certified by the designated in the subdivision control ordinance
governing the area. The filing and recording of the plat is without legal
effect unless approved by the Commission.
      (d)   The division of any lot or any parcel of land into a subdivision as
defined in this ordinance by the use of metes and bounds description for the
purpose of sale or transfer or lease resulting in the creation of one or more
new building sites shall not be permitted. All such described divisions shall
be subject to all of the appropriate requirements of this ordinance.
      (e)   No improvement location permit or building permit required under
the Uniform Building Code, the Zoning Ordinance or this ordinance shall be
issued on any property subject to this ordinance until the provisions of this
ordinance have been complied with.
   (2)   Violations and penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this
ordinance or any regulations herein contained shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $10 and not more than $300 for
each day’s violation in accordance with I.C. 36-1-3-8.
   (3)   Restraining provisions.
      (a)   Any land within the participating jurisdictions subdivided in
violation of the terms of this ordinance after the effective date hereof is
hereby declared to be a common nuisance which may be restrained, enjoined or
abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.
      (b)   The Commission may institute an injunction suit requesting an
individual or governmental unit be directed to remove a structure erected in
violation of this ordinance or to make the same comply with its terms. If the
Commission is successful in its suit the respondent shall bear the costs of the
action.
      (c)   The Commission may institute a suit for mandatory injunction
requesting an individual or governmental unit be directed, where such
individual or governmental unit has violated any provisions of this ordinance
to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. If the Commission is
successful in its suit, the respondent shall pay the Commission’s reasonable
attorneys’ fees and all costs related to the enforcement of this ordinance.
      (d)   The Administrator may enter upon any property during reasonable
hours to inspect or abate the appropriate action of any violation which has
occurred or may occur that is not in according with this ordinance.
      (e)   The Administrator may impose a stay of work on any property that is
found to be in violation of the subdivision ordinance. Proceedings and work on
the premises affected shall be stayed unless the official certifies to the
Board of Zoning Appeals that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In that case proceedings or work may not be stayed except by a
restraining order.
Section II
2-1 USAGE.
   (1)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations,
terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth
in this section.
   (2)   Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in
the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number
include the singular; the word “herein” means “in these regulations,” the word
“regulations” means “these regulations.”
   (3)   A “person” includes a corporation, a partnership and an incorporated
association of persons such as a club; “shall” is always mandatory; “used” or
“occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the
words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”
2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the dominant use of the principal building or land.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The officer appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility
for the administration of these regulations by the Town Council. This term
shall be construed to include those planning staff members working under the
direction of the Administrator in the exercise of his or her responsibilities
in regard to the processing of these subdivision regulations.
   ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION. A plan commission serving a single local
government jurisdiction established as defined under the I.C. 36-7-1-2 as
amended and who has exclusive control over the approval of all plats or replats
involving land covered by the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   AGENCY. See PUBLIC AGENCY.
   ALLEY. A public or private vehicular right-of-way primarily designed to
serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.
   APPLICANT. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her agent
or his or her legal representative.
   ARTERIAL. Either a PRIMARY ARTERIAL or a SECONDARY ARTERIAL as defined in
this section.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or
boundary lines of municipalities.
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. Referred to herein as “the county” so as not
to be confused with the Plan Commission, referred to herein as “the
Commission.”
   BOND. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory
to the Plan Commission. All BONDS shall be approved by the Commission wherever
a BOND is required by these regulations.
   BUFFER LANDSCAPING. Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms or related
landscaping features required under this ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance on
private lots and privately maintained for buffering lots from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing sound and/or
visual privacy (see SCREENING also).
   BUILDING. Any roofed structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
   BUILDING CODE. The town ordinance or group of ordinances establishing and
controlling the standards for constructing buildings, utilities, mechanical
equipment and all forms of structures and permanent installations and related
matters, within the town. Also referred to herein as the Town Building Code.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The person appointed to enforce this ordinance.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A certificate issued by the Building Permit Official of a
governing body permitting a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building
or structure within its jurisdiction or cause the same to be done.
   BUILDING PERMIT OFFICIAL. The official of local government authorized to
issue building permits.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. A proposed schedule of all future projects
listed in order of construction priority, together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the
expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government’s
operating expenses for the purchase, construction or replacement of the more
durable, longer lived physical assets for the community are included.
   CENTRAL SEWAGE SYSTEM. A community sewer system including collection and
treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or
an existing public sewer system.
   CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM. A community water supply system including existing and
new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes, treatment facilities and
distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities established by the
developer to serve a new subdivision.
   CERTIFICATE. The signed and attested document which indicates that a
subdivision has been granted secondary approval by the Commission subsequent to
proper public notice of its hearing.
   CHECKPOINT AGENCY. A public agency or organization called upon by the
Commission to provide expert counsel with regard to a specific aspect of
community development or required by law to give its assent before subdivision
may take place.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street intended to move traffic from local streets to
secondary arterials. A COLLECTOR STREET serves a neighborhood or large
subdivision and should be designed so that no residential properties face onto
it and no driveway access to it is permitted unless the property is to be in
multifamily use for four or more dwelling units.
   COMMISSION. The Town Advisory Plan Commission as referred to herein; not any
other commission unless so specified.
   COMMISSION ATTORNEY. The licensed attorney designated by the Commission to
furnish legal assistance for the administration of this ordinance or as
provided by statute.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Inclusive physical, social and economic plans and
policies in graphic and verbal statement forms for the development of the town,
prepared and adopted by the Commission, pursuant to the state acts and
including any part of such plan and/or policies or parts thereof.
   CONSTRUCTION PLAN(S). The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat
and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed
for the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance as a
condition of the approval of the plat.
   COUNTY AUDITOR. The County Official empowered to examine and settle all
accounts and demands that are chargeable against the county and not otherwise
provided for by statute.
   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER. See HEALTH OFFICER.
   COUNTY RECORDER. The county official empowered to record and file land
description plats.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement including
public safety vehicles.
   DEAD-END STREET. A street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular
traffic outlet and no turnaround at the terminal end.
   DESIGNATED OFFICIALS. The officials of the Commission designated in the
subdivision ordinance as required signatories for the execution of secondary
approval.
   DEVELOPER. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his or her
representative. Consent for making applications for development approval shall
be required from the legal owner of the premises.
   DRIVES, PRIVATE. Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved, which
are wholly within private property except where they intersect with other
streets within public rights-of-way.
   EASEMENT. An authorization grant by a property owner for the use by another
of any designated part of his or her property for a clearly specified purpose
(s).
   ESCROW. A deposit of cash with the Commission in lieu of an amount required
and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such ESCROW funds
shall be held by the County Auditor.
   EXEMPT DIVISIONS. See SUBDIVISION.
   FINAL PLAT. The map, drawing or plan described in this ordinance of a
subdivision and any accompanying material submitted to the Commission for
secondary approval and which, if approved and signed by the designated
officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for recording.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS. Those floodplains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding by the regulatory flood by means of dikes, levees or
reservoirs and are shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Commission from the State
Natural Resources Commission.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by floodwater from the regulatory flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest point around the
perimeter of a building at which floodwaters may enter the interior of the
building.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The portions of the flood hazard areas lying outside the
floodway shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration.
   FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
   FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot. Lots shall not be considered to front on stub
ends of streets and in the case of corner lots will be considered to front on
both intersecting streets. No access for any one lot is permitted to more than
one street and that street generally will be the one calculated to have lower
traffic volumes and less frequent intersections.
   FRONTAGE STREET. Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street in which development shall take place on both sides.
   FRONT YARD. A yard as defined herein encompassing the horizontal space
between the nearest foundation of a building to the right-of-way line and that
right-of-way line, extending to the side lines of the lot and measured as the
shortest distance from that foundation to the right-of-way line. The FRONT YARD
of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street upon which the lot has
its least frontage.
   GOVERNING BODY. The body of the relevant local government having the power
to adopt ordinances.
   GRADE. The slope of a street or other public way specified in percentage (%)
terms.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT AND (COUNTY) HEALTH OFFICER. The agency and person
designated by the county to administer the health regulations within the
county’s jurisdiction.
   HIGH DENSITY. The residential zoning districts in which the density is equal
to or greater than one dwelling unit per 10,000 square feet.
   HIGHWAY, LIMITED ACCESS. A freeway or expressway providing for through
traffic in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands
and other persons have no legal right to access to or from the same, except at
such points and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority
having jurisdiction over such a highway.
   HOUSING CODE. The town ordinance controlling the continuing safety and
healthfulness of buildings for human occupation within the town’s jurisdiction.
Also referred to herein as the Town Building Code.
   IMPROVEMENTS. See LOT IMPROVEMENTS or PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   INDIANA CODE. The Burns Indiana Statutes Code Edition, which codifies all
state statutes for reference purposes. The latest edition with any amending
supplements must be referred to for the laws “now” in force and applicable
(abbreviated as I.C. herein).
   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system or any other approved sewage treatment device approved by the
Health Department.
   INTERESTED PARTIES. The parties who are the owners of properties adjoining
or adjacent to the proposed subdivision as shown on the sketch plan.
   JOINT OWNERSHIP. Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as the
same owner; “constructive ownership” for the purpose of imposing subdivision
regulations.
   LAND DIVIDER. The owner of a parcel of land to be further divided through
making an exempt division.
   LANDSCAPING. See BUFFER LANDSCAPING, SCREENING and SHADE TREES.
   LOCAL STREET. A street intended to provide access to other streets from
individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water
and storm drainage pipes.
   LOT. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or of building development.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior
angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
   LOT IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, work of art or other object, or
improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical
betterment of real property or any part of such betterment. Certain LOT
IMPROVEMENTS shall be properly bonded as provided in these regulations.
   LOW DENSITY. The residential zoning districts in which the density is equal
or less than one dwelling unit per 43,560 square feet.
   MAJOR STREET. A collector or arterial street.
   MAJOR STREET PLAN. See OFFICIAL MAP.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision,
including, but not limited to, subdivisions of four or more lots or any size
subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local governmental
facilities or the creation of any public improvements.
   MAP. A representation of a part or the whole of the earth’s surface in signs
and symbols on a plane surface at an established scale with a method of
orientation indicated.
   MARKER. A stake, pipe, rod, nail or any other object which is not intended
to be a permanent point for record purposes.
   MASTER PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   MEDIUM DENSITY. The residential zoning districts in which the density is
between 10,000 and 43,560 square feet per dwelling unit.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. Any subdivision containing not more than three lots
fronting on an existing street which is an improved right-of-way maintained by
the town (or local government) not involving any new street or the extension of
municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements, and not
adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not
in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, Official
Map, Zoning Ordinance or this ordinance.
   MODEL HOME. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the kind of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. Such
dwelling units may be erected at the discretion of the Commission by permitting
a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to be created
according to the procedures for minor subdivisions, as set out in these
regulations.
   MONUMENT. A physical structure which marks the location of a corner or other
survey point.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other than
residential such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply
with the applicable provisions of these regulations.
   OFFICIAL MAP. The map or maps established by the town pursuant to law
showing the existing and proposed streets, highways, parks, drainage systems
and setback lines theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any
amendments or additions thereto adopted by the town or additions thereto
resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Commission and the
subsequent filing of such approved plats.
   OFFICIAL MASTER PLAN. See COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   OFF-SITE. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision approval.
   ORDINANCE. Any legislative action, however denominated, or a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendment or repeal of any
ordinance.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these
regulations.
   PARCEL. A part or portion of land having a legal description formally set
forth in a conveyance together with the boundaries thereof, in order to make
possible its easy identification.
   PERIMETER STREET. Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be
subdivided abuts on only one side.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The town’s advisory plan body, as established in accordance
with state law, often referred to herein simply as the Commission.
   PLAT. A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land filed or
intended to be filed for record with the County Recorder.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be
submitted to the Commission for approval.
   PRIMARY APPROVAL. An approval (or approval with conditions imposed) granted
to a subdivision by the Commission after having determined in a public hearing
that the subdivision complies with the standards prescribed in this ordinance
(I.C. 36-7-4-700 series: Subdivision Control).
   PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A street intended to move through-traffic to and from such
major attractors as Central Business Districts, regional shopping centers,
colleges and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas
and similar traffic generators within the town; and/or as a route for traffic
between communities; a major thoroughfare.
   PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot or
parcel is conducted. Standards recognized by the State Administrative Building
Council shall be used to determine whether a given structure constitutes one or
more buildings in cases where ambiguities exist.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. An agency or government department acting under the aegis of
and representing an elected or appointed council, commission or other policy-
making or advisory body of federal, state or local government to whom it is
responsible.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage ditch, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other
facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement
for which local government responsibility is established. All such IMPROVEMENTS
shall be properly bonded.
   REAR YARD. A yard as defined herein encompassing the horizontal space
between the nearest foundation of a building to a rear lot line and that rear
lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot and measured as the shortest
distance from that foundation to the rear lot line. The REAR YARD of a corner
lot shall be that yard at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor properly licensed and registered
or through reciprocity permitted to practiced in the state.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer properly licensed and
registered in the state or permitted to practice in the state through
reciprocity.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a peak discharge which can be equaled or
exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as calculated by a method
and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the State Natural
Resources Commission; this flood is equivalent to a flood having a probability
of occurrence of 1% in any given year.
   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION. The maximum elevation, as established by the
State Department of Natural Resources, reached by the regulatory flood at the
locations in question relevant to approval of a given subdivision under
consideration.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any
river or stream shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. Only one dwelling on any lot, with the exception outlined
in §
1, paragraph
1.13 of this ordinance.
   RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS. Limitations of various kinds on the usage of lots or
parcels of land within a subdivision which are proposed by the subdivider and
in the case of public health, safety and welfare by the Commission that are
recorded with the plat and run with the land.
   RESUBDIVISION. A change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat
if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon
for public use or any lot line or setback; or if it affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, pedestrian-way, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, special landscaping or
for another special use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting
purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on
a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots
or parcels. RIGHTS-OF-WAY intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm drains, screening or special landscaping or any other
use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use
by the subdivider on whose plat such right-of-way is established.
   ROAD(S). See STREET(S).
   SALE or LEASE. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession or transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise,
intestate succession or other written instrument.
   SAME OWNERSHIP. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities or unincorporated associations in
which a stockholder, partner or associate, or a member of his or her family
owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity or
unincorporated association.
   SCREENING. Either (a) a strip of at least ten feet wide, densely planted (or
having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four feet high
at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at
least six feet high; or (b) an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted
fence at least six feet high. Either (a) or (b) shall be maintained in good
condition at all times and may have no signs affixed to or hung in relation to
the outside thereof except as permitted or required under the Zoning Ordinance.
Where required by the Zoning Ordinance a screen shall be installed along or
within the lines of a plot as a protection for adjoining or nearby properties.
Earth berms may be incorporated as part of such SCREENING measures where
appropriate.
   SECONDARY APPROVAL. The stage of application for formal Plan Commission
approval of a final plat of a subdivision the construction of which has been
completed or substantially completed which, if approved and signed by the
designated officials may be submitted to the County Recorder for filing.
   SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A street intended to collect and distribute traffic in a
manner similar to primary arterials, except that these streets service minor
traffic generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and
secondary educational plants, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches,
offices and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the system
of primary arterials.
   SETBACK. A line parallel to and equidistant from the relevant lot line
(front, back side) between which no buildings or structures may be erected as
prescribed in the Town Zoning Ordinance.
   SHADE TREE. A tree in a public place, special easement or right-of-way
adjoining a street as provided in these regulations.
   SIDE LOT LINES. Any lines separating two lots other than front or rear lot
lines.
   SKETCH PLAN. The initially submitted graphic representation of a proposed
major subdivision, drawn to approximate scale, either superimposed upon a print
of a topographic survey or presented in any other suitable graphic medium or
form acceptable to the Commission; and, in the case of a minor subdivision, the
drawing or drawings indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision
meeting the conditions of the subdivision ordinance to be submitted to the
Commission for primary approval.
   SPECIAL LANDSCAPING. Areas of tree planting, shrubs or other landscape
features serving a public purpose and maintained by the county or town (see
also BUFFER LANDSCAPING and SCREENING).
   STATE ACTS. Such legislative acts of the state as they affect these
regulations.
   STATE PLANE COORDINATES SYSTEM. A system of plane coordinates, based on the
Transverse Mercator Projection for the Western Zone of Indiana, established by
the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey for the State of Indiana.
   STOP WORK ORDER or WORK STAY ORDER. An order given by the Administrator,
Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals to cease all work on any land or
structure that is or may be in violation of this ordinance.
   STREET, DEAD-END. A street or a portion of a street with only one vehicular-
traffic outlet.
   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The distance between property lines measured at
right angles to the centerline of the street.
   STREETS, CLASSIFICATION. For the purpose of providing for the development of
the streets, highways and rights-of-way in the governmental unit and for their
future improvements, reconstruction, realignment and necessary widening,
including provision for curbs and sidewalks, each existing street, highway and
right-of-way and those located on approved and filed plats, have been
designated on the Official Map of the town or Thoroughfare Plan and classified
therein. The classification of each street, highway and right-of-way is based
upon its location in the respective zoning districts of the town and its
present and estimated future traffic volume and its relative importance and
function as specified in the Town Comprehensive Plan and/or its Thoroughfare
Plan component. The required improvements shall be measured as set forth for
each street classification on the Official Map.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or in
the ground or is attached to something having a location on or in the ground.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person who (1) having a proprietary interest in land, causes
it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or who (2)
directly or indirectly sells, leases or develops or offers to sell, lease
develop or advertised for sale, lease development, any interest, lot, parcel
site, unit or plat in a subdivision; or who (3) engages directly or through an
agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale,
lease or development a subdivision of any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or
plat in a subdivision; and who (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by or
under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots,
parcels, sites, units, plats or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease
or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions, including resubdivision. SUBDIVISION includes the
division of development of land zoned for residential and nonresidential uses,
whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map,
plat or other recorded instrument. The following kinds of divisions of existing
parcels of land are herein called “exempt divisions” and are classified into
two categories: Exempt I and Exempt II. These divisions are exempt from most
provisions of this ordinance. Exempt I Divisions must be one of the following
types of division:
      (a)   A division of land into two or more tracts of which all are at
least ten acres in size;
      (b)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts to correct
errors in an existing legal description, provided that no additional building
sites other than for accessory buildings are created by the division;
      (c)   A division of land pursuant to an allocation of land in the
settlement of a decedent’s estate or a court decree for the distribution of
property;
      (d)   A division of land for federal, state or local government to
acquire street right-of-way;
      (e)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts between
adjoining lots, provided that no additional principal use building sites are
created by the division. The lots so created hereunder shall have only one
principal use building site each (see PRINCIPAL USE BUILDING); and
      (f)   A division of land into cemetery plots for the purpose of burial of
corpses.
Exempt I Divisions are subject only to the provisions of §§
3.5 and
6.5 of this ordinance, but shall be exempt from other provisions of this
ordinance not specified or referred to in those sections.
Exempt II Divisions are divisions of land into not more than four parcels of
one acre or more in size but less than ten acres. Such divisions shall conform
to §§
3.5 and
6.6 of this ordinance but shall be exempt from other provisions of this
ordinance not specified or referred to in those sections.
   SUBDIVISION AGENT. Any person who represents or acts for or on behalf or a
subdivider or developer, in selling, leasing, developing or offering to sell,
lease, develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a subdivision,
except an attorney-at-law whose representation of another person consists
solely of rendering legal services and is not involved in developing, marketing
or selling real property in the subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION, EXEMPT. See SUBDIVISION.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. See MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. See MINOR SUBDIVISION.
   TEMPORARY IMPROVEMENT. Improvements built and maintained by a subdivider
during construction of the subdivision and intended to be replaced by a
permanent improvement prior to release of the performance bond or turnaround
improvements at the ends of stub streets intended to be replaced when the
adjoining area is developed and the through street connection made.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. See OFFICIAL MAP.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The legislative body of the town who has the authority to
adopt, amend or repeal the Subdivision Ordinance in accordance with I.C. 36-7-
4-701 and amendments thereof.
   TOWN GOVERNMENT. The governmental body of the town empowered to adopt
planning and public policy ordinances: the Town Council, herein referred to
only as the Council.
   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, such space being
open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky
except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The town ordinance setting forth the regulations
controlling the use of land in the unincorporated areas and in those
jurisdictions within the town. Also referred to as the Town Zoning Ordinance.
Section III
3-1 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (1)   Discussion of requirements redesign conference. Prior to submitting
any of the materials required by this ordinance, the applicant or his or her
representative should discuss with the Administrator the nature of the land
division being proposed so that the applicant may be instructed concerning the
classification of his or her subdivision and what regulatory procedures apply
to it and must be followed under this ordinance in order to secure primary and
secondary approval. Where applicable, requirements concerning the general
layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage,
sewerage, fire protection and similar matters, as well as the availability of
existing services should be discussed. The Administrator shall also advise the
applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed land division with those
other officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision
plat coming within their jurisdiction. The distinction between major and minor
subdivisions and exempt divisions as defined in this ordinance, shall be made
by the Administrator when the applicant submits an application for sketch plan
approval in the case of major and minor subdivisions or, in the case of exempt
division, provides the Administrator at a redesign conference with adequate
information to enable him or her to determine that the proposed division is an
exempt division.
   (2)   Classification of land divisions. All land to be divided shall be
categorized into one of three main classes of land division indicated in this
ordinance’s definition of subdivision. These classes are:
      (a)   Major subdivisions;
      (b)   Minor subdivisions; and
      (c)   Exempt divisions.
Exempt divisions are not subject to the requirements of this ordinance beyond
the determination by the Administrator that they meet all the requirements for
exempt divisions set forth in §
3.5 herein. However, lots created by Exempt I Divisions (except Exemption F)
shall be ten or more acres in size to be eligible as principal use building
sites (Exemption A in the definition of subdivision), unless such lots have
been created by order of a court (Exemption C). No building site for principle
use created through Exemption A shall be reduced below ten acres unless through
subdivision or by order of a court (Exemption C). For purposes of this
paragraph, a lot is “created” on the date of its recording (see § 2 for the
definition of a principal use building). Before any permit shall be granted for
a structure to be erected on land to be subdivided into a major or minor
subdivision, the subdividing owner or his or her subdivision agent shall apply
for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with §
3.2 and either §§
3.3 or
3.4 of this ordinance as appropriate. Before any permit shall be granted for a
structure to be erected on a parcel of land to be created or altered by an
exempt division, the land divider or his or her agent shall certify to the
satisfaction of the Administrator that all requirements for exemption have been
met, as detailed in §
3.5 of this ordinance, in order to exempt the land division from all other
requirements of this ordinance.
3-2 MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISION: SKETCH PLAN APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR PRIMARY
APPROVAL.
   (1)   Application requirements. In order to begin the subdivision process
the applicant shall file an application for review of sketch plan and
certificate with the Administrator and be entitled to a signed receipt for
same. This application shall:
      (a)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
signed by the owner;
      (b)   Include indication of all contiguous holdings of the owner
including land in the same ownership with an indication of the portion which is
proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership which shall
include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with
the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the
County Recorder’s office. The affidavit shall advise as to the legal owner of
the property, the contract of sale was executed. If any corporations are
involved, the Administrator may request a complete list of all directors,
officers and a listing of stockholders if less than ten in number;
      (c)   Be presented to the Administrator in duplicate;
      (d)   Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the sketch plan;
      (e)   Be accompanied by a fee of $25 plus $0.50 per lot; and
      (f)   Include an address and telephone number of an agent located within
the territory of the commission who shall be authorized to receive all notices
by this ordinance.
   (2)   Submission checkpoint. The Administrator shall contact the checkpoint
agencies so that comments may be made for the location in a written report
within 15 days of the hearing. No response from an agency shall be interpreted
as meaning “no objection.”
   (3)   Classification of subdivision. After an application for sketch plan
approval has been submitted, and at the time of sketch plan review, the
Administrator shall classify the proposed subdivision as either major or minor
as defined in this ordinance. The required procedures and approvals for major
subdivisions are described in §
3.3; corresponding information concerning the minor subdivision approval
process is provided in §
3.4.
3-3 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (1)   General procedures for primary and secondary approval. Should the
Administrator, during sketch plan review, classify the proposed land division
as a major subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and be
subject to the processes outlined in § 6-6 and detailed in this section. In
addition to a sketch plan which is reviewed by the Administrator and checkpoint
agencies, the applicant seeking approval of a major subdivision shall submit a
preliminary subdivision plat to be approved, conditionally approved or rejected
by the Commission at a public meeting and a final subdivision plat which must
be found in compliance with the preliminary plat as approved by the Commission
or otherwise approved in order to be signed and recorded.
   (2)   Official submission dates. The deadline for submittal of a sketch plan
and application for certificate of approval shall be 45 calendar days prior to
the date of the public meeting at which the subdivider intends to have his or
her preliminary plat submission heard.
   (3)   Plan review process. Within 20 calendar days of the subdivider’s
sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have studied the
proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received and met with the subdivider to
discuss pertinent aspects of the possible modification and/or changes that may
be suggested or required by this ordinance. The Administrator shall request
that a representative of each checkpoint agency wishing to be involved in a
sketch plan review be present to participate in the sketch plan review meeting.
In taking into consideration the requirements of this ordinance, particular
attention shall be given to the arrangement, location and width of streets,
their relation to the topography of the land, sewage disposal, drainage, lot
size and arrangement, the further development of adjoining lands as yet
unsubdivided and the requirements of the Official Map or Thoroughfare Plan and
Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the participating jurisdictions. Subsequent to
this meeting, the Administrator shall provide the participants with a written
record of the proceedings of that meeting.
   (4)   Preliminary plat procedures for primary approval. Following the
submission, review and report on the sketch plan application, the subdivider
may file for primary approval of a preliminary plat. This submission shall:
         (i)   Be made on forms available at the office of the Commission and
be submitted with fee of $25 per lot for each lot which was not included in the
sketch plan;
         (ii)   Include indication of all land which the applicant proposes to
subdivide all land immediately adjacent and across any street or railroad
right-of-way, extending 600 feet therefrom, but not more than two property
owners deep from the proposed subdivision, with the name and addresses of the
title owners as shown in the Auditor’s files. This information may be shown on
a separate current plat map reproduction from the Auditor’s office showing the
boundaries of the subdivision superimposed thereon;
         (iii)   Be presented in duplicate to the Administrator no later than
15 calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Commission at which it is
intended to be heard;
         (iv)   Be accompanied by three copies of the preliminary plat as
described in this ordinance; and
         (v)   Generally comply with the sketch plan as reviewed.
      (b)   Placement on the Commission agenda. Subsequent to the submission
for primary approval, the Commission shall place the matter on its next regular
meeting agenda for formal action.
      (c)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda and
prior to the date of public hearing, the Administrator shall review the
proposal and prepare a written report to the Commission and applicant
indicating a recommendation with regard to the subdivision being proposed.
      (d)   Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary plat and notice of
such hearing shall be in the local newspapers of general circulation ten days
prior to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1) at the applicant’s expense. At the time
of the public hearing, the applicant shall submit statements that the applicant
has placed posters provided by the Administrator (advising interested parties
of the hearing) at the locations designated by the Administrator on the
proposed subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public hearing and
show proofs of publication that the notices of public hearing were published at
least ten days prior to the public hearing. Interested parties shall also be
notified by the Administrators of the date, time, place and purpose of the
public hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in advance of the hearing
by mail.
      (e)   Primary approval of the preliminary plat. After the Commission has
held a hearing upon the preliminary plat, the Administrator’s report,
checkpoint recommendations, testimony and exhibits submitted at the public
hearing, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or
additions. The Commission shall at a public hearing, grant primary approval or
disapprove the preliminary plat. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be
returned to the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval or
disapproval and the reasons therefore accompanying the plat within five days of
the public hearing. Before the Commission approves a preliminary plat showing
park reservation(s) or land for another local governmental unit, the Commission
shall obtain approval of the park or land reservation from the participating
jurisdiction. Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by
certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until a minimum of
ten days has elapsed since the granting of primary approval, per I.C. 36-7-4-
708.
      (f)   Field trip. The Commission, at its discretion, upon hearing the
request for primary approval, may elect to continue the matter until its next
regularly scheduled public meeting and may schedule a field trip to the site of
the proposed subdivision, accompanied by the applicant or his or her
representative or any other person or persons at the discretion of the
Commission. Field trip shall be accordance to I.C. 5-14-1.5-3.
      (g)   Effective period of primary approval. Unless extended, the primary
approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of five years
after the date of primary approval, at the end of which time secondary approval
of the subdivision must have been obtained and certified by the designated
officials. Any plat not receiving secondary approval within the period of time
set forth herein shall be null and void and the developer shall be required to
resubmit a new application for sketch plan review and certificate subject to
all zoning restrictions and subdivision regulations in effect at the time of
resubmission. Upon request of the applicant the Commission may extend the
primary approval of a preliminary plat in increments of two years beyond an
expiration date without further notice and public hearing.
   (5)   Approval of construction plans.
      (a)   Submission procedure and requirements. Following the review of the
sketch plan and prior to submission of the final plat for secondary approval,
the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file
with the Administrator before starting work on any improvements three sets of
the detailed plans and specifications thereof for approval.
      (b)   Review process. The Administrator shall immediately refer these
plans to the appropriate agencies of the affected participating jurisdictions
for review. Once these agencies indicate their approval of the construction
plans or 14 working days have elapsed since their distribution without a
written response, the Administrator shall stamp the plans approved and return
one set to the applicant. In no event shall secondary approval (of the final
plat) be given prior to approval of the construction plans.
      (c)   Installation of improvements. The installation of improvements
shall be inspected by the appropriate participating jurisdiction. Such
inspections are required in all instances regardless of whether the work is
performed before or after secondary approval. Failure to request or to procure
inspection of work performed after the date of this ordinance and before
secondary approval may be cause for denial of secondary approval.
   (6)   Final plat procedure (secondary approval).
      (a)   Submission requirements. Following primary approval or conditional
primary approval of the preliminary plat and approval of the construction
plans, the applicant, if he or she wishes to proceed with the subdivision,
shall file with the Administrator a request for secondary approval of a final
plat. The application shall:
         (i)   Be submitted on forms available at the office of the Commission;
         (ii)   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof which
derives access from an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
         (iii)   Be accompanied by three copies of the final plat as described
in this ordinance;
         (iv)   Totally comply with the ordinance and the terms and conditions
of primary approval;
         (v)   Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Commission Attorney and in an amount established by the
Commission upon recommendation of the participating jurisdiction and shall
guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and off-site public
improvements; and
         (vi)   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants in a form approved
by the Commission, where they have been proposed by the subdivider or required
by the Commission.
      (b)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In order to be
recorded, a final plat shall either be found to be in conformance with the
primary approval by the Administrator or by the Commission at a public hearing.
If the final subdivision plat deviates from the preliminary plat that received
primary approval, the subdivision shall be resubmitted to the Commission at a
public meeting for a new primary approval. The subdivider submitting a final
plat conforming to the primary approval shall choose as to whether this review
is to be performed by the Administrator, or by the Commission at a public
meeting.
         (i)   Should the subdivider not choose Commission review, the
Administrator shall within ten working days, review the items submitted as per
§
3.3(6)(a) in order to ascertain the sufficiency as to conformance with the
primary approval. If the submission is found to be in conformance and complete,
the Administrator shall recommend the signing of the certificate granting
secondary approval.
         (ii)   Should the subdivider choose Commission review, the
Administrator shall determine conformance with the primary approval at a public
hearing. The subdivider shall request Commission review in writing no less than
30 calendar days prior to the date of the public meeting at which he or she
intends to have his or her final plat reviewed. The Commission shall place the
matter on its next regular meeting agenda. The Administrator shall review the
proposal and submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and
the applicant; and at the public hearing, the Commission shall approve or
disapprove the final plat. If granted secondary approval it shall be signed by
the designated officials. If not granted secondary approval, then the
subdivider shall be informed as to the insufficiency of his or her submittal.
      (c)   Sectionalizing plats. Prior to granting secondary approval of a
major subdivision plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided into
two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the
sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the
plat. The Commission may require that the performance bond be in such amount as
will be commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and
may defer the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the
remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing. Such sections must
contain at least 20 lots or 10% of the total number of lots contained in the
approved plat, whichever is less. The approval of all remaining sections not
filed with the Administrator shall automatically expire after five years from
the date of primary approval of the preliminary plat, unless the expiration
date has been extended.
   (7)   Signing and recording a plat.
      (a)   Signing of plat.
         (i)   When the filing of a performance bond is required, the
designated officials of the Commission shall endorse approval on the plat by
signing the certificate only after the bond and the construction plans have
been approved and all the conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied.
         (ii)   When installation of improvements is required, the designated
officials of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval of the plat by
signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and accepted for public
maintenance (when required), “as built” construction plans submitted (as
required by §
5.1(2)(e)) and a maintenance bond provided (as required by §
5.3(2)). There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities
have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the appropriate Board of Works,
County Commissioners, Town Council and/or the County Drainage Board that the
necessary improvements have been accomplished.
      (b)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to install all
improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and it is shown
that the conditions of the ordinance have been met, and if the final plat
completely conforms to the primary approval, the Commission shall have no other
recourse than to grant secondary approval.
      (c)   Recording of final plat.
         (i)   The designated officials shall sign the certificate which shall
be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar of the subdivision plat,
plus two Mylar prints of the subdivision plat. The Mylar prints shall be
returned within 30 days of the date of signature. Failure of the subdivider to
file the plat as herein provided within 30 days shall constitute a violation of
this ordinance.
3-4 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (1)   General procedures for primary approval. Should the Administrator,
upon examination of the sketch plan application, classify the proposed land
division as a minor subdivision, the subdivider shall follow the procedures and
be subject to the process outlined in §
6-6 and detailed in this section. In addition to a sketch plan which is
reviewed by the Administrator and checkpoint agencies for primary approval by
the Commission, the applicant seeking approval of a minor subdivision shall
submit for secondary approval a final subdivision plat which must be found in
compliance with the sketch plan or otherwise approved by the Commission in
order to be signed and recorded.
   (2)   Official submission date and placement on the agenda. An application
for sketch plan approval shall be submitted no less than 30 calendar days prior
to either a regularly scheduled public meeting of the Commission at which the
proposal is intended to be acted upon. The Administrator shall place such
application on the agenda of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the
Commission to occur within 30 days after the date on which a complete
application is submitted.
   (3)   Sketch plan review process. Within 15 calendar days of the
subdivider’s sketch plan application submittal, the Administrator shall have
studied the proposal, reviewed checkpoint reports received and met with the
subdivider to discuss pertinent aspects of the proposed subdivision and
possible modifications and/or changes that may be suggested or required by this
ordinance. The Administrator shall request that a representative of each
checkpoint agency that wishes to be involved in a sketch plan review be present
to participate in the sketch plan review meeting. In taking into consideration
the requirements of this ordinance, particular attention shall be given to
sewage disposal, drainage, lot size and arrangement, the further development of
adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided and the requirements of the Official Map or
Thoroughfare Plan and Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the participating
jurisdictions.
   (4)   Administrative review. Subsequent to placement on the agenda and prior
to the date of public hearing, the Administrator and other appropriate members
of the Commission’s staff shall review the proposal and prepare a written
report to the Commission and applicant indicating a recommendation with regard
to the subdivision being proposed.
   (5)   Public hearing notification and sign posting requirements. The
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the sketch plan and notice of such
hearing shall be in the local newspaper of general circulation ten days prior
to the hearing (per I.C. 5-3-1) at the applicant’s expense. At the time of the
public hearing, the applicant shall submit an affidavit stating that the
applicant has placed posters provided by the Administrator (advising interested
parties of the hearing) at the locations designated by him or her on the
proposed subdivision property at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
Interested parties shall be notified by the Commission of the date, time, place
and purpose of the public hearing on the subdivision at least ten days in
advance of the hearing by mail.
   (6)   Primary approval of the sketch plan. After the Commission has, at a
regularly scheduled hearing, examined the sketch plan, Administrator’s report,
checkpoint recommendations, testimony and exhibits submitted, the Commission
shall, at a regularly scheduled hearing, approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the sketch plan. One copy of the sketch plan shall be returned to
the applicant with the date of approval, conditional approval or disapproval
and the reasons therefore accompanying the sketch plan within five days after
the public hearing. Primary approval by the Commission is subject to review by
certiorari. Secondary approval of a subdivision cannot occur until the minimum
of ten days has elapsed since the granting of primary approval or conditional
approval or conditional primary approval.
   (7)   Final subdivision plat procedure for secondary approval.
      (a)   Application requirements. Following approval or conditional
approval of the sketch plan, the applicant, if his or her wishes to proceed
with the subdivision, shall file with the Administrator an application for
secondary approval of a subdivision plat. The Application shall:
         (i)   Be submitted on forms available at the office of the Commission;
         (ii)   Include the entire subdivision or section thereof;
         (iii)   Be accompanied by three copies of the final subdivision plat
as described in this ordinance;
         (iv)   Totally comply with the ordinance and the terms and conditions
of approval;
         (v)   Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Commission Attorney and in an amount established by the
Commission upon recommendation of the participating jurisdiction and shall
guarantee the completion of all required subdivision and off-site public
improvements; and
         (vi)   Be accompanied by restrictive covenants in a form approved by
the Commission, where proposed by the subdivider or required by the Commission.
      (b)   Determination of conformance (secondary approval). In order to be
recorded, a final subdivision plat shall either be found to be in conformance
with the approved sketch plan be the Administrator or by the Commission at a
public hearing. If the final subdivision plat deviates from the sketch plan
that received primary approval, the subdivision shall be resubmitted to the
Commission at a public hearing for a new primary approval. The subdivider
submitting a final plat conforming to the primary approval shall choose as to
whether this review is performed by the Administrator or by the Commission at a
public hearing.
         (i)    Should the subdivider not choose Commission review, the
Administrator shall within ten working days review the items submitted as per §
3.4(7)(a) in order to ascertain conformance with the primary approval. If the
submission is found to be in conformance and complete, the Administrator shall
recommend the signing of the certificate granting secondary approval.
         (ii)   Should the subdivider choose Commission review, the Commission
shall determine conformance with primary approval at a public hearing. The
subdivider shall request in writing Commission review no less than 30 calendar
days prior to the date of the public hearing at which he or she intends to have
his or her final plat reviewed. The Commission shall place the matter on its
next regular hearing agenda. The Administrator shall review the proposal and
submit a written report and recommendations to the Commission and the
applicant; and at public hearing, the Commission shall give secondary approval
or disapproval of the final plat. If approved, it shall be signed by the
designated officers of the Commission. If not approved, the subdivider shall be
informed as to the insufficiency of his or her submittal.
      (c)   Sectionalizing plats. Prior to granting secondary approval of a
minor subdivision plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided into
two or more sections and may impose such conditions upon the filing of the
sections as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the
plat. The Commission may require that the performance bond be in such amount as
is commensurate with the section or sections of the plat to be filed and may
defer the remaining required performance bond principal amount until the
remaining sections of the plat are offered for filing.
   (9)   Signing and recording a plat.
      (a)   Signing a plat.
         (i)   When the filing of a performance bond is required, the
designated officials of the Commission shall endorse approval on the plat by
signing the certificate after the bond and the construction plans have been
approved and all the conditions of the primary approval have been satisfied.
         (ii)   When installation of improvements is required, the designated
officials of the Commission shall endorse secondary approval on the plat by
signing the certificate after all conditions of the primary approval have been
satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and accepted for public
maintenance (when required), “as built” construction plans submitted (as
required by §
5.1(2)(e)) and a maintenance bond provided (as required by §
5.3(2)). There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities
have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the participating jurisdiction,
as shown by a certificate signed by the Administrator, and that the necessary
improvements have been accomplished.
      (b)   Assurance to subdivider. If the subdivider elects to install all
improvements before he or she applies for secondary approval and it is shown
that the conditions of the ordinance have been met and if the final plat
completely conforms to the primary approval, the Commission shall have no other
recourse than to grant secondary approval.
      (c)   Recording of plat.
         (i)   The designated officials shall sign the certificate granting se
secondary approval which shall be part of the tracing cloth or reproducible
Mylar of the subdivision plat, plus two Mylar prints of the subdivision plat.
The Mylar prints shall be returned to the applicant and his or her engineer of
surveyor.
         (ii)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider in the
presence of the Administrator or his or her designee to file the plat with the
County Recorder within 30 days of the date of signature. Failure of the
subdivider to file the plat as herein provided within 30 days shall constitute
a violation of this ordinance.
3-5 EXEMPT DIVISIONS.
   (1)   General procedure for Exempt I Divisions. In order for a land division
to be considered an Exempt I Division, the information prescribed for the
applicable type of division under §
6.5 shall be submitted to the Administrator so that he or she can determine
whether the division meets the provisions of the definition and §
3.1 for this classification and therefore can issue to the subdivider a
statement of compliance to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. Both
the subdivider and the Administrator shall hold copies of the statement of
compliance. When the parcel so exempted by this statement is conveyed to
another party the copy of the instrument of such conveyance shall be recorded
with the County Recorder bearing a stamp of approval signed by the
Administrator indicating that such statement of compliance has been obtained as
ascertained by the copy(s) of the statement which have been held for this
purpose.
   (2)   General procedure for Exempt II Divisions. In order for a land
division to be considered an Exempt II Division and thus be exempted from all
other provisions of this ordinance except the definitional requirements in §
2.2 under Subdivisions, the requirements of §
3.1 and the informational requirements of §
6.6, certain conditions shall be met and certified to the appropriate agency by
the Administrator after his or her determination of qualification for this
status has been made (see discussion of requirements, §
3.1(3) necessary conditions for Exempt II Divisions). In addition to
definitional requirements and §
3.1, a land division qualifying as an Exempt II Division shall be shown as
meeting the following conditions.
      (a)   If a parcel created by such an exempt division does not have
sanitary sewer service available to it, that tract shall contain within its
boundaries sufficient soil of a kind defined by the State Board of Health
Bulletin HSE13 (1988) or its successor to allow for the proper installation of
an on-site sewage disposal system.
      (b)   If a parcel created by such an exempt division has frontage on a
public road, the land divider shall dedicate to the public real property of a
width sufficient to meet one-half of the required right-of-way width for that
specific public road as indicated on the Town Thoroughfare Plan or the Official
Map and of a length along that public road equal to the length of that parcel
along that roadway.
      (c)   If a parcel created by such an exempt division has frontage on a
public road, the depth of that parcel shall not be greater than twice the
length of that frontage, such depth being measured from the front lot line to
the rear lot line of the parcel.
      (d)   If a parcel created by such an exempt division requires a private
roadway because such parcel lacks frontage on a public road, such roadway shall
either be fully constructed in accordance with the following minimum standards
prior to the issuance of a building permit or be adequately assured to the
permit issuer’s satisfaction that it will be constructed to the following
minimum standards:
         (i)   Minimum depth of 16 feet; and
         (ii)   Minimum depth of eight inches of Type P or O made stone or
gravel. Such private roadway need only provide access as far as the parcel’s
property line and is not intended to include any individual drive within the
parcel.
      (e)   Certification of Exempt II Divisions. As the conditions in §
3.2(2) apply, the land divider shall provide to the Administrator:
         (i)   Written evidence that the County Board of Health has been
satisfied by a duly authorized representative of a qualified soil testing
service as to the presence within the parcel of sufficient soil of a kind
defined by the State Board of Health Bulletin HSE13 (1988) or its successor to
allow for the proper installation of an on-site septic sewage disposal system;
         (ii)   Official documentation indicating the dedication of right-of-
way to the appropriate jurisdiction;
         (iii)   A metes and bounds description of the parcel being created
indicating that its depth is no more than twice the frontage; and
         (iv)   A notarized affidavit assuring construction of a private
roadway to the standards previously indicated, prior to the issuance of a
building permit for that parcel.
      (f)   Exempt division review process. Within three working days of the
land divider’s complete submission of the required information in the case of
Exempt I Divisions (§
6.5) or the required information and certification (§
3.5(e) above) in the case of Exempt II Divisions, the Administrator shall
review the submission and notify the land divider that his or her proposed land
division either qualifies as an exempt division and is thus exempt from all
other provisions of this ordinance, or does not qualify as an exempt division
and is thus subject to the relevant subdivision processes described in this
ordinance.
      (g)   Dissolution.
         (i)   A recorded Exempt II Division or portion thereof may be
dissolved by the property owner or owners if, in doing so, no provision of this
or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute or provision of law is
violated. To do so, ten copies of a statement dissolving the Exempt II Division
(or any part of it) shall be submitted to the Administrator for review of
compliance with above-stated ordinances, rules and the like. This statement,
signed by all legal owners, contract buyers and optionees of the property and
notarized, shall contain the Exempt II Division number assigned by the
Administrator and legal descriptions of the parcels involved.
         (ii)   Upon a finding of compliance, the Administrator or his or her
designee shall sign all ten statements. Once signed, the approved dissolution
is eligible to be recorded.
         (iii)   It shall be the responsibility of the land divider in the
presence of the Administrator or his or her designee to file the approved
dissolution with the County Auditor and Recorder within 30 days of signature.
Failure of the land divider to so file and record shall automatically
invalidate the approval, rendering it null and void and requiring a complete
resubmittal for approval.
         (iv)   Upon recording the dissolution statement, the landowner is once
more eligible to pursue the full Exempt II Division process as per this
subsection. That is, the land involved, for purposes of land diversion, is
restored to its pre-exempt II Division status.
Section IV
4-1 GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (1)   Conformance to applicable rules and regulations. In addition to the
requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with the
following laws, rules and regulations:
      (a)   All applicable state and local statutory provisions;
      (b)   The Town Zoning Ordinance, Building and Housing Codes and all other
applicable laws and ordinances of the appropriate jurisdictions;
      (c)   The Comprehensive Plan, Official Map or Thoroughfare Plan, Public
Utilities Plan and Capital Improvements Program of the town, including all
streets, drainage systems and parks shorn on the Official Map or Comprehensive
Plan as adopted;
      (d)   Section 4.5 deals with the provision of adequate potable water for
human consumption and adequate water for fire protection. Ensuring good water
supplies requires coordination between the area’s water suppliers, Health
Department and Fire Department together with such interested state agencies as
the State Board of Health and the State Department of Natural Resources. The
location of wells, where permitted, must take into consideration water quality
and quantity vis-a-vis water levels and draw-down and the possibility of water
contamination by sewage effluents from septic tank drain fields, polluted
streams and other sources. Sanitary sewerage and sewage treatment facilities (§
4.6 ) must be adequate to prevent water pollution and other health problems.
Requiring separate storm and wastewater sewerage systems is important for long-
run water pollution prevention even if the rest of the urbanized area still has
combined sewers because, in all probability, the regulations and any rules of
the Health Department and/or appropriate state agencies;
      (e)   The rules and regulations of the State Department of Highways if
the subdivision or any lot contained therein abut a state highway or state
frontage road;
      (f)   The highway and drainage standards and regulations adopted by the
County Engineer and all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the
county; and
      (g)   All pertinent standards contained within still valid planning
guides published by the Plan Commission.
   (2)   Conformance required. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision
is not in conformity with the above guides and requirements or with the
policies and purposes of these regulations established in §
1.4 of this ordinance.
   (3)   Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of
the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning
Ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or reference thereto may be
required to be indicated on the subdivision plat or the Commission may require
that restrictive covenants be recorded with the County Recorder in a form to be
approved by the Commission Attorney.
   (4)   Plats straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the
subdivision is required across land in another jurisdiction the Commission may
request assurance from the County Attorney that such access is legally
established and from the County Engineer that the access road is adequately
improved or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in
the amount to assure the construction of the access road. Lot lines shall be
laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines.
   (5)   Boundary improvements.
      (a)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, concrete monuments four inches square or four inches
in diameter and 40 inches long with an iron pipe cast in the center, at each
corner or angle of the ultimate outside boundary. They shall be set following
grading of each phase of the subdivision.
      (b)   The subdivider shall have placed, under the supervision of a
registered land surveyor, pipes or steel rods, three-fourths of an inch in
diameter by 30 inches in length at the corners of each lot. They shall be set
prior to the issuance of any building permit.
   (6)   Character of the land. Land which the Commission finds to be
unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, improper
drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or
topography, utility easements or other features which might reasonably be
harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be
subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer
and approved by the Commission, upon recommendation of the County Engineer, to
solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall
be set aside for such uses permitted by the Zoning Ordinance as shall not
involve any such danger.
   (7)   Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Commission shall have
final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be
determined at the time of primary approval.
4-2 LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (1)   Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be
no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other conditions in
securing building permits to build on each of the created lots in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and health regulations and in providing driveway
access to buildings on such lots from the appropriate approved street.
   (2)   Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
in the Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required
area for the zoning district, the Commission may require that such lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets
where they would be necessary to serve all such potential lots in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and these regulations. In general, side lot lines
shall be at right angles to the street lines (or radial to curving street
lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan.
Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of
buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. Depth
and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for all of the off-street
parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development
contemplated, as established in Zoning Ordinance.
   (3)   Double frontage lots and access to lots.
      (a)   Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be avoided except where necessary to provide for the separation of
residential development from the traffic on bordering arterials or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation affecting the subdivided
lots.
      (b)   Access from primary and secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in
general derive access from a primary or secondary arterial street. Where
driveway access for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require that
such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible
traffic hazards from multiple access to such streets. Where possible, driveways
should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into
traffic on primary or secondary arterials.
   (4)   Soil preservation, grading and seeding.
      (a)   Final grading. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots
or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six
inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs and shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting.
      (b)   Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general stormwater drainage pattern for the area. Drainage
shall be designed so as to avoid the accumulation of stormwater on any one or
more lots from adjacent lots. It shall be the responsibility of the lot owner
to maintain the lot grade, as it applies to drainage, as provided for in the
approved construction plans.
      (c)   Lawn-grass seed and sod. All lots shall be seeded from the road
side edge of the unpaved right-of-way back to a distance of 25 feet behind the
principal residence on the lot. The applicant shall submit an agreement in
writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a copy to the
Building Permit Official, that respreading of soil and seeding of the lawn will
be done during the immediately following planting season.
   (5)   Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones,
soil, junk, rubbish or other waste material of any kind shall be buried in any
land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of occupancy within
a subdivision, nor shall any be left or deposited in any area of the
subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond or dedication of
public improvements, whichever is sooner.
   (6)   Fencing. Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to furnish
and install fences wherever the Commission determines that a hazardous
condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed according to standards
established in the Zoning Ordinance and shall be noted as to height and
material on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
said fence improvements have been duly installed.
   (7)   Water bodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a
water body or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the
entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The
Commission may approve an alternative allocation of interests whereby the
ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so
placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No part of
the minimum area of a lot required under the Zoning Ordinance may be satisfied
by land which is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area
of a lot from the street from which it has access, provisions shall be made for
installation of a culvert or other structure, of a design approved by the
County Engineer.
   (8)   Performance bond to include lot improvement. The performance bond
shall include an amount to guarantee completion of all requirements contained
in §
4.2 of these regulations, including, but not limited to, soil preservation,
final grading, lot drainage, lawn-grass seeding, removal of debris and waste,
fencing and all other lot improvements required by the Commission. Whether or
not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, at the expiration of the
performance bond, the town may enforce the provisions of the bond where
compliance with the provisions of this section or any other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation has not occurred.
4-3 STREETS.
   (1)   General requirements.
      (a)   Frontage on improved streets. No subdivision shall be approved
unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an
existing street on the Official Map or, if there is not an Official Map, unless
such a street is:
         (i)   An existing state, county or township highway; or
         (ii)   A street shown upon a plat approved by the Commission and
recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. Such street or highway
must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulation
specifications or orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under
these regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these
regulations or as indicated on the Official Map or Thoroughfare Plan. Whenever
the area to be subdivided is to use an existing street frontage, such street
shall be suitably improved as provided herein above.
   (2)   Grading and improvement plan. Streets shall be graded an improved and
conform to the county construction standards and specifications and shall be
approved as to design and specifications by the County Engineer, in accordance
with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to secondary
approval.
   (3)   Topography and arrangement.
      (a)   Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. All
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible of the building
sites at, or above, the grades of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform
as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep
grades and sharp curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in
the design standards of these regulations.
      (b)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on
the Official Map or Thoroughfare Plan and/or Comprehensive Plan.
         (i)   Widths of streets and highways shall conform to the width
specified by the County Highway Superintendent, article 4, § 2 and thoroughfare
standards cross-section (§
6-6) are recommended specification.
         (ii)   All culs-de-sac shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with
a minimum diameter 100 feet and shall not exceed 600 feet in length.
         (iii)   Alleys shall be discouraged in Residential Districts but
should be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for loading
and unloading or access purposes. Where alleys are platted, they shall be 14
feet in width.
      (c)   All arterials and collector streets shall be properly related to
special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
churches and shopping centers, to population densities; and to the pattern of
existing and proposed land uses.
      (d)   Local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to
the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and utility systems and to require the minimum number of streets
necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the property.
      (e)   Rigid, rectangular “gridiron” street patterns are generally to be
avoided and the use of casually curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac or loop
streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable lay-
out and relate better to the existing topography. On flat land, innovative,
varying geometrical street patterns shall be encouraged where they are likely
to enhance visual interest and a sense of order for those using them (e.g.,
non-grid rectilinear, trapezoidal, polygonal or other geometric patterns).
      (f)   Proposed streets shall, where appropriate, be extended to the
boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless this is prevented by
topography or other physical conditions or unless in the opinion of the Plan
Commission such extension(s) is/are not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision under consideration with the
existing street layout or for the most advantageous future development of
adjacent tracts (see paragraph 11(a) below).
      (g)   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities and the provision of alleys, truck loading and
maneuvering areas, walkways, bikeways and parking areas so as to minimize
conflict of movement between the various types of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
Street Design
A.   Street (and alley when provided) shall be completed to grades shown on
plans, profiles and cross-sections, provided by the subdivider and prepared by
a registered professional engineer and approved by the Commission.
B.   The street shall be graded, surfaced and improved to the dimensions
required by such plans, profiles and cross-sections, and the work shall be
performed in the manner prescribed in Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and Maintenance (current issue) of the Department of
Transportation.
C.   The street pavement shall be of Portland cement concrete of a flexible
pavement of a width as shown in this ordinance and shall be constructed in
accordance with design characteristics at least equal to those given below.
   DESIGN CHARACTERISTICS OF STREET & ALLEY PAVEMENT
Kind of Pavement and Thickness Primary Secondary Local Alley
Kind of Pavement and Thickness                               Primary Secondary Local Alley
Portland cement concrete                                     8"      7"        6"    6"
FLEXIBLE
   Base-compacted aggregate or water bound macadam        8"      8"        6"    4"
   Binder-asphaltic-concrete or bituminous coated blended 5"      3"        3"    3"
aggregate
   Subbase-type II                                        6"      6"        6"    6"
   Surface-asphaltic concrete; type “B”               1-1/2"  1-1/2"    1-1/  1-1/
                                                                               2"    2"
   Total thickness                                        20-1/2" 18-1/2"   16-1/ 14-1/
                                                                               2"    2"
 
D.   Prior to placing the street and alley surfaces, adequate subsurface
drainage for the street shall be provided by the subdivider. Subsurface
drainage pipe, when required, shall be coated corrugated pipe or similar type
not less than 12 inches in diameter approved by the Commission. Plans and
profiles as built shall be filed with the Commission.
   (4)   Block.
      (a)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots
of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial street, railroads and waterways.
      (b)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 2,600 feet nor be less than
400 feet in length. Blocks along arterials and collector streets shall not be
less than 1,000 feet in length.
      (c)   In long blocks, the Commission may require the reservation of
easements through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or
pedestrian traffic. Pedestrian ways or crosswalks not less than ten feet wide,
may be required by the Commission through the center of blocks more than 800
feet long or at other appropriate locations and at the ends of the culs-de-sac
where deemed essential to provide for circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities.
Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be
determined to be suitable by the Commission for the intended use.
   (5)   Access to collector streets. Where possible, lots in single-family
residential subdivisions fronting on collector streets shall be avoided, and
lots at the corners of intersections between local and collector streets shall
front on the local street and have driveway access to it only and not to the
collector street. In multiple-family residential areas, entrances to group
parking lots shall have access only to collector streets (where possible) and
such entrances shall be widely spaced.
   (6)   Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or
contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the Commission may require
that access to it be limited by one of the following means:
      (a)   The subdivision of the lots so as to back onto the primary arterial
and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the
primary arterial and screening shall be provided within a strip of land along
the rear property line of such lots;
      (b)   A series of culs-de-sac or loop streets entered from and designed
generally to be at right angles to an access street that is at some distance
from and parallel to the arterial street, with the rear lines of their terminal
lots backing onto the arterial; and
      (c)   A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary
arterial by a landscaped and/or decoratively fenced grass street and having
access thereto at widely spaced suitable points).
   (7)   Street names. The sketch plan, as submitted, shall indicate names of
proposed streets. As part of his or her review, the Administrator shall refer
proposed street names to the local Postmaster for his or her comments regarding
duplication of names and possible confusion. After reviewing them the
Administrator shall inform the subdivider of his or her recommendations for
their possible revision during the sketch plan review. Names shall be
sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other street names in the
county or other nearby areas so as to avoid confusion. A street which is, or is
planned as, a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name.
   (8)   Street regulatory signs. The applicant shall provide and install a
street sign at every street intersection within his or her subdivision as
required by the County Engineer. The county shall inspect and approve all
street signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence on
the approved streets.
   (9)   Street lights. If installed, will be in accordance with the
specification set by the County Engineer.
   (10)   Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted
adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access to it from
adjacent property if such street is a local service street rather than a
collector or arterial street (see paragraphs (5) and (6) above).
   (11)   Construction of streets.
      (a)   Construction of streets other than culs-de-sac. The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent
subdivisions or other properties when such continuation is necessary for the
convenient movements of traffic, for effective fire protection, for efficient
provision of utilities and where such continuation is in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must
be a dead-end (stub) street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be provided for
all such temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat
that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors
whenever the street is continued. Temporary turnarounds must be provided at the
ends of such stub streets. The Commission may limit the length of temporary
dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards in these regulations.
      (b)   Culs-de-sac (permanent dead-end streets). Where a street does not
extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not
required by the Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall
normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the Commission
may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage
facilities, pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be
provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with county
construction standards and specifications available from the County Engineer’s
office. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be limited in length in accordance
with the design standards in these regulations.
   (12)   Design standards.
      (a)   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location,
width and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford
satisfactory access for police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation and
street maintenance equipment and to coordinate street location in order to
achieve a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties,
the following design standards for streets are hereby required (street
classifications may be indicated in the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan
or on the Official Map; otherwise, they shall be determined by the Commission).
      (b)   Street surfacing and improvements. After sewer and water utilities
have been installed by the developer, the applicant may be required to
construct curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause the roadways to be
surfaced to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said surfacing shall be
of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with
similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as
determined by the County Engineer. Adequate provision shall be made for
culverts, drains and bridges. All street pavement, shoulders, drainage
improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds and sidewalks shall conform to
all construction standards and specifications adopted by the Commission, County
Engineer or the county shall be incorporated into the construction plans
required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval.
      (c)   Excess right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards
designed in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography,
additional width is necessary to provide for adequate and stable earth slopes.
Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
      (d)   Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and
limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows.
         (i)   In Residential Districts, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in
depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall
be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway.
This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the
plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures hereon
other than earth berms, walls, fences and other landscape screening devices
approved by the Commission is prohibited.”
         (ii)   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses,
the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad
shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure a
suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
         (iii)   Streets parallel to a railroad when intersecting a street
which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be a
distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance
shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for
future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients.
      (e)   Intersections.
         (i)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an
angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should
be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than
two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by
the Commission.
         (ii)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than
150 feet shall not be permitted except where the intersected street has
separated, dual drives, without median breaks at either such intersection.
Where local streets intersect with arterials, their alignment shall be
continuous. Intersections of arterials shall be at least 800 feet apart.
         (iii)   Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets
shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving
a collector street shall be at least 25 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt
changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in
accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular
movement.
         (iv)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% grade at a
distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street.
         (v)   The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall
be 3% or less.
      (f)   Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the
Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without
reimbursement from the county. The sharing of expense for the construction of
bridges not of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the
Commission, will be fixed by special agreement between the county and the
applicant. Said cost shall be charged to the applicant pro-rata as the
percentage of his or her land developed and so served.
   (13)   Street dedications and reservations.
      (a)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Commission may
authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates
the entire required right-of-way width within his or her own subdivision’s
boundaries.
      (b)   Widening and realignment of existing streets. Where a subdivision
borders an existing narrow street or when the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map,
Thoroughfare Plan or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment
or widening of a street that would require use of some of the land in the
subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate such
streets at his or her own expense. Such frontage streets and other streets on
which subdivision lots front shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant
at his or her own expense to the full width required by these subdivision
regulations. Land reserved for any street purposes may not be counted in
satisfying the yard or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
4-4 DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS.
   (1)   General requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for approval
any subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for stormwater or
floodwater runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be
separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where
required, shall be designed as approved by the Commission and the County
Drainage Board, and a copy of the design computations shall be submitted along
with the plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried
across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in
the gutter or when the encroachment of stormwater into the street disrupts
traffic. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a
point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and catch
basins or inlets shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water
drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block.
   (2)   Nature of stormwater facilities.
      (a)   Location. The applicant may be required by the Commission to carry
away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist, either
previously to, or as result of, the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall
be located in the street right-of-way, where feasible, or in perpetual,
unobstructed casements of appropriate width and shall be constructed in
accordance with the county’s construction standards and specifications.
      (b)   Accessibility to public storm sewers.
         (i)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable
distance adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwater,
subject to the specifications of the County Engineer. However, in such
subdivisions containing lots of less than 15,000 square feet in areas and in
business and industrial districts, underground storm sewers systems shall be
constructed throughout the subdivision and be conducted to an approved outfall.
Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the County Engineer.
         (ii)   If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided
eventually, as determined by the County Engineer (see comment above) and the
Commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater
disposal by the public utility system at the time the plat received final
approval. Cost provision(s) for such connection(s) shall be incorporated by
inclusion in the amount of the performance bond or equivalent required for the
subdivision plat.
      (c)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
subdivision. The County Engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the required construction standards and
specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.
      (d)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The County Engineer (see
comment under subsection (b)(i) above) shall determine the effect of each
proposed subdivision on existing drainage facilities outside the area of the
subdivision. County drainage studies together with such other studies as may be
available and appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where
it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the
subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the
Commission may withhold secondary approval of the subdivision until provision
(such as a storage facility) has been made for the improvement of said
potential condition in such sum as the Commission shall determine. No
subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage from it will be provided
to an adequate drainage water course or facility.
      (e)   Areas of poor drainage. Areas which are not in the floodplain but
contain soils which are subject to flooding may be approved for subdivision by
the Commission, provided that the subdivider fills the affected areas of said
subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place building sites and streets two
feet above ponding levels.
      (f)   Areas of high seasonal water tables. In areas characterized by
soils having a high seasonal water table as determined by the County Soil and
Water Conservation District, lots shall be limited to slab-type construction
unless the Commission determines that appropriate engineering techniques will
be applied to alleviate the subsurface problem.
      (g)   Floodway areas. If a subdivision of land is proposed within the
floodplain, floodways shall be preserved and not diminished in the county by
filling or obstruction, except as approved by the Natural Resources Commission
in writing. No residential building site may be located within the floodway.
      (h)   Floodway fringe areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within an
area of the floodplain designated as a floodway fringe, the Commission may
approve such subdivision provided, that: all streets are elevated sufficiently
to be above the regulatory flood elevation; all lots for residential usage have
a flood protection grade two feet above the regulatory flood elevation; where
provided, water and sanitary sewer facilities are constructed to eliminate
contamination of or by, floodwater; and approval to fill the area from the
Natural Resources Commission has been obtained in writing. Lands below the
regulatory flood elevation shall not be used for computing the area requirement
for any lot.
      (i)   Floodplain areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within an area of
the floodplain for which floodway and floodway fringe designations have not
been made, the Commission shall not approve such a subdivision unless all
streets are raised sufficiently to be above the regulatory flood elevation; all
lots for residential usage have a flood protection grade of two feet above the
regulatory flood elevation; where provided, public water and sanitary sewer
facilities are constructed to eliminate contamination of or by floodwater; and
filling to achieve the above will not raise the level of the regulatory flood
elevation more than one-tenth of one foot for that reach of the stream. All
filling in the floodplain must be approved in writing by the State Natural
Resources Commission. Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be
used for computing the area requirement for any lot.
      (j)   Recording of plats in the floodplain and floodway fringe. All final
plats having within their boundaries areas whose elevation is below that of the
regulatory flood elevation shall show and label the regulatory flood boundary
and elevation, as of the date the final plat is drawn, on the final plat for
recording.
   (3)   Dedication of drainage easements.
      (a)   General requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
drainage course, drainage way, channel or stream, a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way shall be provided, granted or dedicated to the county
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width
and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose of both drainage
and maintenance of the right-of-way. Wherever possible it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate
width for maximum potential volume of flow.
      (b)   Drainage easements.
         (i)   Where topography or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street rights-of-way,
perpetual unobstructed easements at 15 feet in width for such drainage
facilities shall be provided across property outside the right-of-way lines and
with satisfactory access to the street. Easements shall be indicated on the
plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the street to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.
         (ii)   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by drainage or
conservation, easement land on both sides of existing watercourses of a width
to be determined by the Commission and in the case of legal drains, the County
Drainage Board.
         (iii)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water across
private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be
secured and indicated on the plat.
         (iv)   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or
overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for
dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage
ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be included in
the computations for determining the number of lots allowable under average
density procedures nor for computing the area requirement for any individual
lot.
4-5 WATER FACILITIES.
   (1)   General requirements.
      (a)   The applicant shall take all actions necessary to extend or create
a water-supply district for the purpose of providing a water-supply system
capable of providing for domestic water use and fire protection.
      (b)   Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall
install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) conforming to the
requirements and specifications of the state or local authorities. All water
mains shall be at least six inches in diameter.
      (c)   Water main extensions shall be approved by the officially
designated agency of the state, county or municipality concerned.
      (d)   To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, water
supply improvements and the boundary lines of proposed districts indicating all
improvements proposed to be served shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and
the cost of installing same shall be included in the performance bond to be
furnished by the subdivider.
      (e)   The design of all water facilities shall conform to or exceed the
standards described by the County Board of Health and the State Board of
Health.
   (2)   Individual wells and central water systems.
      (a)   In low-density zoning districts, if a public water system is not
available, at the discretion of the Commission, individual wells may be used or
a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of
potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water sample
test results shall be submitted to the Health Department for its approval, and
individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate
health authorities. These approvals shall be submitted to the Commission.
      (b)   If the Commission requires that a connection to a public water main
be eventually provided as a condition for approval of an individual well or
central water system, the applicant shall make arrangements for future water
service at the time the plat receives secondary approval. Performance or cash
bonds may be required to ensure compliance.
   (3)   Fire hydrants. Hydrants should be provided at each street intersection
and at intermediate points between intersections as recommended by the State
Insurance Services Office and the local Fire Department. Generally, hydrant
spacing may range from 350 to 600 feet depending on the nature of the area
being served as determined by the County Engineer.
4-6 SEWERAGE FACILITIES.
   (1)   General requirements. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed by the county construction standards and
specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules,
regulations and standards of the County Engineer, Health Department and other
appropriate state and federal agencies. In the case of a county system extended
into the county, the county’s engineering standards and the like would prevail.
   (2)   Sanitary sewerage system requirements. Where provided, sanitary
sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems and
shall be installed to serve each lot to grades and sizes required by approving
officials and agencies. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the
installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the
specifications, rules, regulations and guidelines of the Health Officer,
participating jurisdiction and appropriate state agency.
   (3)   Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities
are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot
areas shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and any
ordinance of any participating jurisdiction (where applicable) establishing lot
area for individual sewerage disposal systems.
   (4)   Selected design criteria.
      (a)   Alignment. All sewers shall be laid with a straight alignment
between manholes, unless otherwise directed or approved by the County Engineer.
      (b)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be installed at the end of each
line and at distances not greater than 400 feet for sewers 18 inches in
diameter and larger.
      (c)   Manholes. The difference in elevation between any incoming sewer
and the manhole invert shall not exceed 12 inches where required to match
crowns. The use of drop manholes requires approval by the County Engineer. The
minimum inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to those specified by the
County Engineer. Inside drop manholes will require special consideration;
however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance be less than that
indicated herein. The relationships between intersecting sewer lines shall meet
the standards required by the County Engineer (see (a) above).
      (d)   Sewerage locations. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street
or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access shall be provided to all manholes. Where
sewer lines in private easements cross public street or alley right-of-way, a
manhole shall be provided in such rights-of-way where possible. Imposed loading
shall be provided over the top of pipe in street and alley rights-of-way or
three feet in all other areas.
      (e)   Cleanouts. Cleanouts will not be permitted.
      (f)   Water supply interconnections. There shall be no physical
connection between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer
which will permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable
water system. Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other
water supply sources and structures.
      (g)   Relation of sewers to water mains. A minimum horizontal distance of
ten feet shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At points
where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of cast iron
pipe or encased in concrete for a distance often feet in each direction from
the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line. This will not be
required when the water line is at least two feet above the sewer line.
4-7 SIDEWALKS.
   (1)   Required improvements.
      (a)   Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated, unpaved portions
of the rights-of-way of all streets.
      (b)   Concrete curbs are required for all streets where sidewalks are
required by these regulations or required at the discretion of the Commission.
      (c)   A grassed or landscaped median strip at least two feet wide shall
separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs. The median strip shall be improved
according to §
4.2(4) of these regulations.
   (2)   Pedestrian accesses. In order to facilitate pedestrian access from the
street to schools, parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets, the Commission
may require perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width. Such
easements shall be indicated on both the preliminary and final plats.
4-8 UTILITIES.
   (1)   Location. All utility lines, including, but not limited to, gas,
electric power, telephone and CATV cables may be required to be located
underground throughout the subdivision. All utility lines and other facilities
existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the
preliminary plat or sketch plan in the case of a minor subdivision. Underground
service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be
installed at the subdivider’s expense. At the discretion of the Commission, the
requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of
adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership intended to be developed for
the same primary use.
   (2)   Easements.
      (a)   Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for
utilities (private and municipal). Such easements shall be at least ten feet
wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the
applicable utility companies for the coordination of utility easements with
those established in adjoining properties.
      (b)   Where topographical or other conditions are such as to make
impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided alongside
lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. All easements
shall be indicated on preliminary and final plats.
4-9 PUBLIC USES.
   (1)   Parks, playground and recreation areas.
      (a)   Recreation standards. The Commission may require that land be
reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreational purposes in locations
designated on the Comprehensive Plan or otherwise where such reservations would
be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension,
topography and general character and shall have adequate road access for the
particular purposes envisioned by the Commission. The area shall be shown and
marked on the plat: “Reserved for Park and/or Recreational Purposes.” When
recreation areas are required, the Commission shall determine the number of
acres to be reserved from the following table, which has been prepared on the
basis of providing three acres of recreation area for every 100 dwelling units.
The Commission may refer such proposed reservations to the local government
official or agency in charge of parks and recreation for recommendation. If
approved by such official or agency, the developer shall dedicate all such
recreation areas to the local government as a condition of secondary approval.
      (b)   Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of
a character and location suitable for use as playground, play field or other
active recreation purposes and shall be relatively level and dry. It shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the Commission, and the
cost of the improvements shall be included in the amount of the performance
bond. The Commission may refer any subdivision intended to contain a dedicated
park to the local government official, department or agency in charge of parks
and recreation for a recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to
the town or county for park purposes shall have prior approval of the town or
county and shall be shown on the plat as “Reserved for Park and/or Recreation
Purposes.”
      (c)   Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are
minimum standards. None of the preceding subsections of this ordinance shall be
construed as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation
purposes in addition to the requirements of this section.
4-10 PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.
   (1)   General. Existing features which would add value to the type of
intended development or to the county as a whole, such as trees, watercourses
falls, beaches, historic spots and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be
preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any
subdivision nor any change of grade of the land affected until primary approval
of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat which are
required to be retained shall be preserved and all trees, where needed, shall
be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plan shall show the
number and location of existing trees, as required by these regulations and
shall further indicate all those marked for retention and the location of all
proposed shade trees required along the street side(s) of each lot as required
by these regulations.
4-11 NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   (1)   General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect
to such land shall meet such special provisions as the Commission finds
appropriate and requires. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to
all the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Site plan approval and
nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the
discretion of the Planning Commission. A nonresidential subdivision shall be
subject to all the requirements of these regulations as well as such additional
standards required by the Commission and shall conform to the proposed land use
and standards established in the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and Zoning
Ordinance, except that where lot lines are to be established incrementally they
need not be shown on the sketch plan or the preliminary plat for primary
approval. All shopping centers and other nonresidential subdivisions of
buildings for leasehold shall be subject to the relevant provisions of this
ordinance.
   (2)   Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in these
regulations which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the
street, parcel and block pattern proposed are appropriate for the uses
anticipated and adequately take into account other uses in the vicinity. The
following principles and standards shall be observed.
      (a)   Proposed commercial or industrial parcels shall be suitable in
minimum area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated.
Proposals for incremental lot by lot subdivision must be made clear in a
statement on the preliminary plat which is satisfactory to the Commission.
      (b)   Street rights-of-way and pavement construction shall be adequate to
accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated
thereupon.
      (c)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission upon
recommendation of the county with respect to street, curb, gutter and sidewalk
design and construction.
      (d)   Special requirements may be imposed by the Commission with respect
to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and stormwater
drainage and preprocessing of sewage. Special requirements may also be imposed
regarding the storage and disposal of toxic materials.
      (e)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas
from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing onto existing or
potential residential development and provision of a permanently landscaped
buffer strip where necessary.
      (f)   Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas.
Section V
5-1 IMPROVEMENTS AND PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (1)   Completion of improvements. Before the plat is signed by the
designated officials, all applicants shall be required to complete, in
accordance with the Commission’s decision and to the satisfaction of the Town
Engineer all the streets, sanitary and other public improvements, including lot
improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in this
ordinance, specified in the approved construction plans and on the final
subdivision plat and as approved by the Commission and to dedicate the public
improvements to the town, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the
property and public improvements thus dedicated.
   (2)   Performance bond.
      (a)   The Commission, in its sole discretion, may waive the requirement
that the applicant complete all public improvements prior to the approval of
the final subdivision plat or section thereof and that in lieu thereof, the
applicant shall post bond securable to the Town of Bunker Hill, hereinafter
referred to as performance bond, in an amount equivalent to 100% of the
estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements. This amount
of bond shall be sufficient to secure to the participating jurisdiction the
satisfactory construction and installation of the uncompleted portion of
required public improvements, as provided for in §§
3.3(7)(a)(i) and
3.4(8)(a)(i) of this ordinance.
      (b)   In lieu of such a bond the subdivider may submit a certified check
made payable to the Town of Bunker Hill in an amount equivalent to 100% of the
estimated cost of completion of the uncompleted portion of required public
improvements as provided for in §§
3.3(7)(a)(i) and
3.4(8)(a)(i) of this ordinance. Any such check shall be held by the Town Clerk-
Treasurer.
      (c)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit irrevocable
letters of credit in behalf of the subdivider and securable by the town in an
amount equivalent to 100% of the estimated cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements as provided in §§
3.3(7)(a)(i) and
3.4(8)(a)(i) of this ordinance. In the event an irrevocable letter of credit is
used, it shall be written for a maximum length of two years. The Commission,
two months prior to the expiration of the letter of credit, shall determine if
the public improvements have been accepted for maintenance by the town or other
units of government having jurisdiction over them and if they have not been
accepted, shall so notify the subdivider of the town’s intent to secure the
funds pledged by such letter of credit or at the discretion of the Commission,
to grant an extension of the original period fixed by the Commission. No
extension shall exceed one year, and the subdivider shall file with the
Commission a new letter of credit for the period so extended.
      (d)   In lieu of such a bond, the subdivider may submit a certificate of
deposit made out to either the Town Clerk-Treasurer and the subdivider to be
held by the Town Clerk-Treasurer in an amount equivalent to 100% of the cost of
completion of the uncompleted portion of required public improvements as
provided for in §§
3.3(7)(a)(i) and
3.4(8)(a)(i) of this ordinance. The subdivider must endorse the certificate of
deposit before submitting it to the Commission so that the town may secure the
funds.
      (e)   A performance bond furnished pursuant to this ordinance shall
comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the
Commission Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set
forth in this ordinance. The period within which required public improvements
must be completed shall be specified by the Commission in the primary approval
of the preliminary plat and shall be incorporated into the bond and shall not
in any event exceed two years from date of secondary approval. Such bond shall
be approved by the participating jurisdiction as to amount. The Commission may,
upon proof of difficulty, grant an extension of the completion date set forth
in such bond for a maximum period of one year, provided that the bond submitted
for this extension period meets all other requirements herein. The Commission
may, at any time during the term of such bond, accept a substitution of
principal or sureties on the bond.
   (3)   Temporary public improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for
all costs of temporary public improvements required by the Commission and shall
maintain same for the period specified by the Commission. Prior to construction
of any temporary public facility or improvement, the subdivider shall file with
the Commission as separate suitable bond for temporary facilities. This bond
shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed,
maintained and removed (except for turnaround at ends of the peripheral stub
streets intended for connection into adjacent future subdivisions).
   (4)   Cost of public improvements. All required public improvements shall be
made by the applicant at his or her expense without reimbursement by the
participating jurisdiction or any public improvement district therein, unless
sharing of expenses is agreed upon by the town.
   (5)   Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bond provisions
apply may file a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies
authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of
this section in lieu of said bond.
   (6)   Failure to complete public improvements. For subdivisions for which no
performance bond has been posted, if the public improvements are not completed
within the period specified by the Commission in the primary approval of the
preliminary plat, or the sketch plan in the case of a minor subdivision, the
approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where a performance
bond has been posted and the required public improvements have not been
installed within the terms of such performance bond, the participating
jurisdiction may thereupon request the town to declare the bond to be in
default and cause all public improvements to be installed according to
secondary approval regardless of the extent of the building development at the
time the bond is declared to be in default.
   (7)   Acceptance of dedication offers. The approval by the Commission of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by
the town of any street, easement or park shown on said plat. The Commission may
require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The
approval relates only to the real property itself.
5-2 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (1)   General procedure. If the participating jurisdiction finds upon
inspection per §
3.3(7)(a)(i) and
3.4(8)(a)(i) that any of the improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the approved construction plans, the applicant shall be
responsible for completing the public improvements according to such plans.
Where the cost of the public improvements is covered by a performance bond, the
applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for
completing the public improvements according to specifications.
   (2)   Release or reduction of performance bond.
      (a)   Certificate of satisfactory completion. The town (or other
participating jurisdiction) shall not accept required public improvements, nor
the Commission release nor reduce a performance bond, until the town has
submitted to it a certificate stating that all required public improvements or
a pro rata part in the case of a reduction have been satisfactorily completed.
The applicant’s engineer or surveyor shall provide the participating
jurisdiction with detailed “as built” construction plans of the public
improvements, indicating location, dimensions, materials and other information
required by the Commission or participating jurisdiction. Upon such
certification, the town shall thereafter accept the public improvements for
maintenance in accordance with the established procedures unless the town has
reliable information as to noncompliance with the plans and specifications.
      (b)   Reduction of performance bond. A performance bond shall be reduced
upon actual acceptance of public improvements, but only by the amount
originally estimated for the completion of said public improvements.
5-3 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (1)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all public improvements on
the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and
sidewalks (where required) until acceptance of said public improvements by the
town (or other participating jurisdiction).
   (2)   The applicant shall be required to file a maintenance bond with the
Commission prior to acceptance, in an amount not to exceed 10% of the cost of
all public improvements and in a form satisfactory to the Commission Attorney.
The maintenance bond is provided to assure the satisfactory condition of the
required public improvements for a period of three years after the date of
their acceptance by the town.
5-4 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for the last 10% of lots in a final
subdivision plat or section thereof, or if 10% be less than two, for the last
two lots of a subdivision or section thereof, until all public improvements
required by the Commission for the plat with the exception of sidewalks have
been fully completed and accepted for maintenance by the participating
jurisdiction.
Section VI
6-1 SKETCH PLAN.
   Sketch plans submitted to the Commission, prepared in pen or pencil, shall
be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to an inch and shall
show the following information (see Figure 6-1).
   (1)   Name.
      (a)   Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision;
      (b)   Proposed name, if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any subdivision plat previously
recorded nor for which primary approval is still in effect; and
      (c)   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen (this is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known).
   (2)   Ownership.
      (a)   Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner or
agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date and land records reference;
      (b)   Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property;
      (c)   A complete copy of any existing covenants on the property; and
      (d)   Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional
person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of the public
improvements and for surveys.
   (3)   Description. Location of property, name of local jurisdiction, lot,
section, township, range and county, graphic, scale, north arrow and date.
   (4)   Features to be included on sketch plans.
      (a)   Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds,
railroad rights-of-way, watercourses and existing wooded areas, location, width
and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or
immediately adjacent to the tract, names of adjacent and adjoining property
owners;
      (b)   Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of existing sewers, water
mains, culverts and other underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles on
or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way;
      (c)   Approximate topography, at the same scale as the sketch plan
(normally showing two-foot contour intervals, but the Administrator may require
one-foot intervals on very flat land or permit five-foot intervals on very
steep slopes);
      (d)   The approximate location and widths of proposed streets;
      (e)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and
sanitary sewage systems or alternative means of providing water supply and
sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting
and discharging surface water drainage;
      (f)   The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all proposed of
existing lots;
      (g)   The approximate location, dimensions and areas of all parcels of
land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use or
for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision;
      (h)   The location of temporary stakes to enable the Commission to find
and appraise features of the sketch plan in the field;
      (i)   Whenever the sketch plan covers only a part of an applicant’s
contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale of no more than
200 feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision
area, together with its proposed street system and an indication of the
probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the
tract;
      (j)   A vicinity map showing street and other general development of the
surrounding area; and
      (k)   If the subdivision is classified as a minor subdivision, the sketch
plan must also comply with §
6.2.
6-2 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (1)   Preparation. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land
surveyor at a convenient scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch, may be
prepared in pen or pencil and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more
than one sheet is used and shall be of such size as is acceptable for filing in
the office of the County Recorder, but shall not be larger than 24 by 36 inches
(see Figure 6-2). It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary
plat may also be used for the final subdivision plat and, therefore, should be
drawn on tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar; preparation in pencil will make
required changes and additions easier.
   (2)   Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following:
      (a)   The location of the property with respect to surrounding property
and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record or the names
of adjoining developments; and the names of adjoining streets;
      (b)   The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property
to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot;
      (c)   The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams
and other pertinent features such as swamps, floodplains, railroads, buildings,
parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and topography (at the same scale
as the sketch plan);
      (d)   The location and width of all existing and proposed streets, alleys
and other public ways and their rights-of-way and of easements and building
setback lines, utilities, fire hydrants and stormwater facilities;
      (e)   The locations, dimensions, bearings and areas of all proposed or
existing lots;
      (f)   The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set
aside for park or playground use or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication
or reservation;
      (g)   The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be
subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner and
the name and registration number of the land surveyor;
      (h)   The date of the map, approximate true North point, scale and title
of the subdivision;
      (i)   Sufficient data acceptable to the County Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of all line and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground; also, the location of all proposed monuments;
      (j)   Names of the subdivision and all new streets subject to approval by
the Commission;
      (k)   Indication of the use of any single-family lot and all uses other
than residential proposed by the subdivider;
      (l)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical
order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name
shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions;
      (m)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. Outlots
shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered,
outlots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block; and
      (n)   All information required on the sketch plan should also be shown on
the preliminary plat and the following notation shall also be shown:
         (i)   Explanation of drainage easements, if any;
         (ii)   Explanation of site easements, if any;
         (iii)   Explanation of site reservations, if any; and
         (iv)   Endorsement of owner, as follows: Owner            Date
         .
6-3 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   General construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements.
Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 50 feet, and
map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat. The following
shall be shown.
   (1)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations lines of all
streets. Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets, the
elevation along the centerline of the existing street or streets within 100
feet of the intersection, shall be shown. Radii of all curves, lengths of
tangents and central angles on all streets.
   (2)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross-
sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot stations shall be shown at five
points as follows: on a line at right angles to the centerline of the street,
and all elevation points shall be at the centerline of the street, each
property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line.
   (3)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section of
street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements,
servitude, rights-of-way, manholes and catch basins; and street signs; the
location, size and invert elevations existing and proposed sanitary sewers,
stormwater drains and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or
proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas or
other underground utilities or structures.
   (4)   Location, size elevation and other appropriate description of any
existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing
streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams,
floodplains and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings,
features noted on the Official Map or Comprehensive Plan at the point of
connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision. The
water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and
the approximate high-and-low water elevations of such lakes or streams. All
elevations shall be referred to the USGS datum plane. If the subdivision
borders a lake, river or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line
established not less than 20 feet back from the ordinary high-water mark of
such waterways.
   (5)   Topography at the same scale as the sketch plan with a contour
interval of two feet, referred to the sea-level datum. All data provided shall
be the latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey data and should be so
noted on the plat.
   (6)   All specifications and references required by the county’s
construction standards and specifications, including a site-grading plan for
the entire subdivision.
   (7)   Notation of approval as follows:
      Owner               Date          
      Commission President            Date          
   (8)   Title, name, address, signature, registration number and seal of the
professional engineer and/or surveyor and date, including revision dates.
6-4 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (1)   Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be presented in India
ink on tracing cloth or reproducible Mylar at an appropriate scale and contain
the same information as on the preliminary plat, except for any changes or
additions required by the conditions of primary approval. The preliminary plat
is revised in accordance with the Commission’s approval. The final subdivision
plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed by the state.
   (2)   Features. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following:
      (a)   Notation of any self-imposed restrictions and locations of any
building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the
Commission in accordance with these regulations; and
      (b)   All monuments erected, corners and other points established in the
field shall be shown and noted in their places on the plat. The legend for
metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length and
weight per lineal foot of the monuments.
6-5 EXEMPT I DIVISIONS.
   The information that must be provided in order for the decision to be made
that a division is an Exempt I Division varies as follows according to the
definition for each type of Exempt I Division listed under Subdivision in §
2.2 of this ordinance. Thus:
   (1)   For type “A” divisions, a metes and bounds legal description of the
exempt division and the land from which it is being divided must be provided;
   (2)   For type “B” divisions, the old legal and new legal descriptions must
be provided;
   (3)   For type “C” divisions, a copy of the court decree showing by legal
description how the land is to be divided must be provided;
   (4)   For type “D” divisions, a legal description and plot plan showing the
parcel and the location of the street right-of-way must be provided;
   (5)   For type “E” divisions, a legal description and plot plan showing the
tract to be divided and the tract(s) to be added to must be provided; and
   (6)   For type “F” divisions, a plat of the cemetery showing the layout of
the private drives, parking areas and size of burial lots must be provided.
6-6 EXEMPT II DIVISIONS.
   See §
3.5(3) for the certification documents required of Exempt II Divisions.
   FORMS
 
   APPLICATION FOR SKETCH PLAN REVIEW
 
 
App No. S-
Date Rec’d
 
Name(s) of subdivider(s)                            
Address                                     
Phone(s)                                     
 
Subdivider’s Registered Land Surveyor                           phone           
 
I (we) hereby request sketch plan review and certificate of approval of the following described subdivision in accordance with the provision of the Town of Bunker Hill Subdivision Ordinance. I (we) am (are) the owner of the real estate included in the subdivision.
 
Name of Subdivision                                        
Section       Township       Range       in                           Township
County Road            NS       EW      
 
   (Legal description attached hereto)
Area in Acres       Number of Lots       Zoned                       
 
Electrical       Sewage: Private       Public        Sidewalk: Yes       No      
 
Water: Public       Well      
 
Major Subdivision            Minor Subdivision      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The undersigned, having been duly sworn on oath states the above information is true and correct as he or she is informed and believes.
 
Signature(s) of Subdivider(s)                                 
                                                   
 
State of Indiana)
            SS:
County of Miami)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this       day of                 19     
 
                                                   
                     Notary Public
Residing in                 County      My commission expires           
 
   REQUEST FOR PRIMARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT
 
 
File No. S-     
Date Rec’d     
 
Name(s) of Subdivider(s)                                                
Address(es)                                                                
Phone (s)                                                      
 
I (we) do hereby request primary approval of the following described subdivision in accordance with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. I (we) am (are) the owner(s) of the real estate included in said subdivision.
Name of Subdivision                           generally described as follows:
 
Section       Township       Range     in                           Township containing       acres; Number of Lots      ; Miles of new street to be dedicated to the public (in hundredths): Full Width      ; Half Width         .
 
Name of Registered Land Surveyor:                                     Phone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
 
The undersigned, having been duly sworn on oath states the above information is true and correct as he or she is informed and believes.
 
Signature(s) of Subdivider(s)                                        
 
State of Indiana)
            SS:
County of Miami)
 
Subscribed and sworn before me this       day of                       19     
 
 
                                                                      
                      Notary Public
 
Residing in              County
My Commission expires          
                                                                                                                                                                               
 
FOR STAFF USE: Date of public hearing before Commission             
 
Fee for additional lots of $       from Subdivider Date                             
 
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   After having given public notice of the time, place and nature of hearing on the application for primary approval of this subdivision
by publication in the Peru Daily Tribune more than ten days before the date set for the hearing thereon, under authority provided by I.C.
36-7-4-700 series enacted by the general assembly of the State of Indiana, and all amendatory thereof, this plat was given primary
approval by a majority of the members of the Town of Bunker Hill Advisory Plan Commission or its executive committee at a meeting held on
         day of                   , 19    .
 
 
                              Town of Bunker Hill Plan Commission
 
                                                                     
                               President
 
 
 
Attest:
 
                               
Secretary
 
   REQUEST FOR SECONDARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLAT
 
 
File No. S     
Date Rec’d     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
FOR STAFF USE:
 
Plat requires:         determination of conformance S-         Date approved      
                  Additional approval      Prelim. S-Date approved      
                  Restrictive Covenants received   Date        
                                                                                                                              
 
Name of Subdivider(s)                             
Address(es)                                       
Phone(s)                                          
 
I (we) do hereby request determination of conformance with the preliminary plat for the following described subdivision in accordance with the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan. I (we) am (are) the owner(s) of the real estate included in said subdivision.
 
Name of Subdivision                            generally described as follows:
 
Section        Township          Range         in                        Township containing            acres; Number of lots           ; Miles of new street to be dedicated to the public (in hundredths)                           .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
The undersigned, having been duly sworn on oath states the above information is true and correct as he or she is informed and believes.
 
Signature(s) of Subdivider(s)                               
 
State of Indiana)
            SS:
County of Miami)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this       day of                     19       .
 
 
                                                                 
                     Notary Public
 
Residing in                         County
 
My Commission expires                 
 
   NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON SUBDIVISION PLAT
 
   Notice is hereby given, that the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana Plan Commission, on the             day
of                   , 19       , at 7:00 P.M., in the Bunker Hill Community Building Meeting Room, Bunker Mill,
Indiana, will hold a Public Hearing on a request by                             for preliminary approval of
                           Subdivision.
 
   Said Subdivision involves the following described real estate in                                  Township, located
at                                to wit:
 
DESCRIPTION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Written suggestion or objection to the provisions of said request may be filed with the Secretary of the Town of
Bunker Hill Plan Commission at or before such meeting and will be heard by the Town of Bunker Mill Plan Commission at
the time and place specified. Said hearing may be continued from time to time as may be necessary.
 
Interested persons desiring to present their views on the said request, either in writing or verbally, will be given
the opportunity to be heard at the above mentioned time and place.
 
                        By:                                                            
                           President / Town of Bunker Hill Plan Commission
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1131.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1133.jpg]
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
   
154.01   Zoning Ordinance adopted by reference
   
Appendix A: Zoning Ordinance
§ 154.01 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference as set forth in
Appendix A of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. passed 10-21-1997; Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
APPENDIX A: ZONING ORDINANCE
   
1-1      Zoning Ordinance
   
1-2      Title
   
1-3      Provision of Ordinance to be minimum requirements
   
1-4      Serviceability clause
   
1-5      Repeal of conflicting ordinance; effective date
   
1-6      General purpose
   
1-7      Plan Commission members
   
1-7-1   Number of members
   
1-7-2   Organization
   
1-7-3   Powers and duties
   
1-8      Jurisdiction areas
   
1-9      Exhibit A
   
1-10   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
1-10-1   Organization
   
1-10-2   Powers and duties
   
1-11   Duties of Building Commissioner
   
1-12   Application and interpretation
   
1-13   Definitions
   
2-1      Districts
   
2-1-1   Districts in general
   
2-2      Primary uses
   
2-3      Improvement location permits
   
2-4      Certificate of occupancy
   
2-5      Temporary certificate of occupancy
   
2-6      Schedule of fees, charges and expenses
   
2-7      Special exceptions
   
2-7-1   Special exceptions; existing uses
   
2-7-2   Special exceptions; time limit
   
2-7-3   Special exceptions; approval
   
2-7-4   Special exceptions; requirements
   
2-8      Variances
   
2-9      Enforcement procedures
   
2-10   Appeals
   
2-10-1   Appeal procedures
   
2-11   Nonconforming use
   
2-11-1   Amortization of nonconforming uses or buildings
   
2-12   Restrictions
   
2-12-1   Setback requirements
   
2-12-2   Setback; downtown area
   
2-12-3   Setback; vision clearance at intersection
   
2-12-4   Accessory buildings
   
2-12-5   Primary use
   
2-12-6   Through lots
   
2-12-7   Corner lots
   
2-12-8   Measurement
   
2-12-9   Setbacks, fences and hedges
   
2-12-10   Lot coverage
   
2-12-11   Ground floor area
   
2-12-12   Lot frontage
   
2-12-13   Lot size
   
2-12-14   Height restrictions
   
2-12-15   Height exceptions
   
2-13   Restrictions
   
2-13-1   Residential Districts
   
2-13-2   Commercial Districts
   
2-14   Advertising signs
   
2-14-1   Permanent signs; Business Districts
   
2-14-2   Temporary signs
   
2-14-3   Home occupations or variances
   
2-14-4   Signs; general
   
2-14-5   Sign upkeep
   
2-14-6   Advertising signs off-premises
   
2-14-7   Restrictions
   
2-15   Industrial District Restrictions
   
2-15-1   Smoke
   
2-15-2   Odor
   
2-15-3   Toxic material
   
2-15-4   Glare and heat
   
2-15-5   Vibration
   
2-15-6   Noise
   
2-15-7   Fire hazard
   
2-15-8   Detonation material
   
2-15-9   Storage areas
   
3-1      Home occupation
   
3-1-1   Restrictions
   
3-2      Home workshop
   
3-3      Parking
   
3-3-1   Minimum requirements
   
3-3-2   Loading and unloading zones
   
3-3-3   Parking area improvements
   
3-4      Mobile homes and manufactured homes
   
3-4-1   Permanent occupancy in R1, R3, LB and GB Districts
   
3-4-2   Temporary occupancy in any District
   
3-4-3   Hardship temporary occupancy in any District
   
3-5      Mobile home courts
   
3-6      Plan Unit Development and subdivision control
   
3-6-1   General
   
3-6-2   Plan Unit Development conformance
   
3-6-3   Subdivision development conformance
   
3-7      Sidewalks
   
3-8      Violations
   
3-8-1   Remedies and penalties
   
Table 1      Authorized Uses
   Figure 1   Lot and Frontage Examples
   Figure 2   Vision Clearance
   Figure 3    Yard Areas and Street Improvements
   Figure 4   Sidewalk Requirements
   Figure 5   Mobile Home Foundation Requirements
   Figure 6   Foundation Requirements
Elevation View for Permanent Foundation
Editor’s note:
   This appendix derives from an ordinance passed 10-21-1997. Amendments to
specific sections of the these zoning regulations are noted following the
amended section.
1-1 ZONING ORDINANCE.
   An ordinance establishing a Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Bunker Hill,
Indiana and providing for the administration, enforcement and amendment
thereof, in accordance with the provisions of state laws and the repeal of all
ordinance in conflict herewith.
   Whereas, state laws empower the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana to enact a
Zoning Ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement and
amendments;
   Whereas the Town Council for the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana pursuant to
the provisions of state statutes, appointed a Town Plan Commission to recommend
the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to
be enforced therein;
   Whereas, the Town of Bunker Hill Plan Commission has divided the town into
districts and has prepared regulation pertaining to such districts in
accordance with a Comprehensive Plan so that adequate light, air, convenience
of access and safety from floods, fire and other danger may be secured; that
congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided; that property
values may be preserved, that the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare may be promoted;
   Whereas, the Town of Bunker Hill Plan Commission has given reasonable
consideration, among other things to the character of the districts and their
peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to preserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Town of Bunker Hill;
   Whereas, the Town of Bunker Hill Plan Commission has given due public notice
of hearings relating to Zoning Districts, regulations and restrictions, and has
held such public hearings; and
   Whereas, all requirements of Chapter 178, Acts of 1979, and as may
heretofore be amended, with regard to the preparation of this ordinance have
been met.
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana.
1-2 TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana.”
1-3 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to the minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety and the general welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this ordinance are at variance or in any other conflict with the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions
or covenants, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standard, shall
govern.
1-4 SERVICEABILITY CLAUSE.
   Each chapter, section, paragraph or sub-paragraph, or a part whenever
divisible, of this code or Zoning Ordinance is declared to be severable, and
the invalidity of any chapter, section or divisible part thereof, shall not be
construed to effect the validity of any other chapter, section or part thereof
of this ordinance.
1-5 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All previously enacted Zoning Ordinance are hereby repealed.
ESTABLISHING A PLAN COMMISSION
1-6 GENERAL PURPOSE.
   Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County,
Indiana that there be and there is hereby established a Plan Commission for the
Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana. To promote the orderly development
of its governmental units and environs, for the purpose of improving the
present health, safety, convenience and welfare of the citizens of Bunker Hill,
Indiana, to the end that highway systems be carefully planned, that new
community centers grow only with adequate highways, utilities, health,
educational and recreational facilities. That the needs of agriculture,
industry and businesses be recognized in future growth. That residential areas
provide healthy surrounding for family life, and that growth of the said Town
of Bunker Hill, Indiana is commensurate with and promotive of the efficient and
economical use of public funds. Said Plan Commission shall serve in an advisory
capacity to the Town Council of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana
and shall have such regulatory power affecting the public welfare of the
citizens of Bunker Hill, Miami County, Indiana as are not otherwise controlled,
and such other power as may from time to time be granted to carry out the
purpose of this ordinance.
1-7 PLAN COMMISSION MEMBERS.
1-7-1 NUMBER OF MEMBERS.
   Said Town Plan Commission shall consist of nine members as follows:
   (A)   The municipal legislative body (Town Council) shall appoint three
persons, who shall be elected or appointed municipal officials or employees in
the municipal government, as members.
   (B)   The Municipal Executive (President) shall appoint four citizen
members, of whom no more than two may be of the same political party.
   (C)   The executive of the county (County Commissioners) shall appoint two
members for the unincorporated area of the municipality in which the town has
jurisdiction. The citizen must:
      1.   Reside in the un-incorporated area; and
      2.   Be of the opposite political parties.
1-7-2 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   At the first meeting each calendar year, the Commission shall elect
from its members a President, Vice President and may appoint or hire a
secretary. The secretary is not required to be a member of the Board.
   (B)   Meetings shall be conducted pursuant to I.C. 5-14-1.5-1 et seq. (Open
Door Law).
   (C)   Meetings shall be held monthly and special meetings may only be called
by the President or 50% of the membership.
1-7-3 POWER AND DUTIES.
   To effectuate the purpose of this ordinance, the Town Plan Commission shall
have the power and duties as set forth in the state statutes.
1-8 JURISDICTION AREAS.
   Town of Bunker Hill
   Be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Bunker Hill, Miami County,
Indiana, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-205, that the town does hereby establish
zoning jurisdiction and subdivision control within the town and any part of the
contiguous un-incorporated area within two miles from the corporate boundaries
of the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana, more particular described on the attach
legal description marked exhibit “A” in this ordinance and shown on the map
marked exhibit “B” on file in the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s office.
1-9 EXHIBIT A.
   DESCRIPTION OF TOWN OF BUNKER HILL ZONING JURISDICTION
   Beginning in the southwest corner of Section 6, Township 25 North, Range 4
East, said beginning being the center of the intersection of U.S. Highway 31
and County Road 900 South; thence east along the centerline of County Road 900
South to the intersection of Strawtown Pike; thence north along the centerline
of Strawtown Pike to the junction of 600 South, said junction being the
northeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 27, Township 26 North,
Range 4 East; thence west along said 600 south boundary line and/or County Road
600 South centerline to the junction of U.S. Highway 31; thence south on the
centerline of U.S. Highway 31 to the junction of County Road 900 south; being
the point of beginning.
ENFORCEMENT
   It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of enforcement shall
be first presented to the Building Commissioner, and that such question shall
be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of the Building
Commissioner, and that recourse from the decision of the Board shall be to the
Courts as provided by law. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent any official
of the town from appealing a decision of the Board to the courts as provided in
state law. Any such appeal shall be made within 30 days of the Board’s written
decision.
1-10 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
1-10-1 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals for the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana is
hereby established in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-901, 36-7-4-902 and 36-7-4-
203 of the state and all acts now or hereafter amendatory thereto.
   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members as follows:
      (1)   Three citizen members appointed by the executive (President) of the
Town Council, of whom one must be a member of the Plan Commission, and two must
not be a member of the Plan Commission.
      (2)   One citizen member appointed by the fiscal body (Town Council), who
must not be a member of the Plan Commission.
      (3)   One citizen member appointed by the Advisory Plan Commission who
must be a member of the Plan Commission.
   (C)   The Board shall meet at regular scheduled monthly meeting or at the
call of the Chairperson.
   (D)   All meetings shall be open to the public, except those that are exempt
by state law.
   (E)   At the first meeting of the calendar year, the Board shall elect from
its members a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson. The Board of Zoning Appeals
may appoint a secretary and such employees as are necessary for the discharge
of its duties.
1-10-2 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to effectively carry out
its duties as follows:
   (A)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any order requirement,
decision or determination made under this ordinance, by the Plan Commission or
Building Commissioner;
   (B)   Permit and authorize contingent uses and special exception subject to,
and within the limitations prescribed by the provisions of this ordinance;
   (C)   Approve or deny, upon written application if specific cases, variances
from the terms of this ordinance. Such variances may be approved only upon
written determination by the Board of the findings set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-
918.4. As the same may be amended from time to time; and
   (D)   In exercising its power, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from as in its opinion, ought to be done in the premises; and to that end have
all powers of the official, person or entity from whom or which the appeal is
taken. In approving a special exception, contingent use or variance, the Board
may also impose such reasonable condition regarding the location, character and
other features of the proposed building, structure or use, with which the
appeal or application before it is concerned, as it may deem advisable if the
furtherance of the purpose of this ordinance and the protection of the public
convenience and welfare. Such conditions may include a requirement for the
recordation of a written instrument in a form acceptable to the Board, binding
the present and sequence owners of the parcel of land affected and all parties
having an interest therein, to the terms of such conditions.
1-11 DUTIES OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   With the advice of the Law Department:
      (1)   Upon finding that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being
violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for the
violation(s), ordering the action necessary to correct such violation(s);
      (2)   Order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or
structures;
      (3)   Order removal of illegal building or structures or illegal
additions or structural alteration; and
      (4)   Order discontinuance of any illegal work being done.
   (B)   Take other action authorized by the ordinance to ensure compliance
with or to prevent violation(s) of this ordinance;
   (C)   Issue improvement location permits and certificate of occupancy and
such other similar administrative duties as are permissible under the law; and
   (D)   Act as Plan Administrator.
1-12 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations,
terms, words and phrases used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as
set forth in this article.
   (B)   Whenever any words and phrase used herein are not defined herein but
are defined in the state laws regulating the creation and function of various
planning agencies, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such
words and phrases used herein, except when the content otherwise requires.
   (C)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and phrases used
herein shall be interpreted as follows.
      (1)   The word “person” includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other legal
entity.
      (2)   The masculine includes the feminine.
      (3)   The present tense includes the past and future tense, the singular
number includes the plural.
      (4)   The word “shall” is a mandatory requirement, the word “may” is a
permissive requirement and the word “should” is a preferred requirement.
      (5)   The word “used” or “occupied” includes the words “intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”
   (D)   All other words not herein defined in this ordinance shall be
interpreted according to the plain meaning of the word described therein. It
shall not be construed against the town, the applicant or the aggrieved party.
1-13 DEFINITIONS.
   ABANDONMENT. A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when: (1) The
use of the property is replaced by a conforming use; or (2) the building or
premises are left vacant for six months; and (3) most of the equipment and
furnishings have been removed and not replaced. This definition applies only to
nonconforming uses.
   ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use that relates to the same lot as a primary
use and is used other than for human occupancy.
   ACCESS ROAD. A road or easement that provides access to a parcel of land
that is a minimum of 20 feet in width.
   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion (more than one-third) of its stock and/or sales in, pictures, (still or
motion), books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis or matter depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities,” or “specified anatomical areas,” or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to (one-third or more of its
floor space) for sale or display of such material. There shall be no more than
one establishment located in any one block.
   (A)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Means (1) human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal, (2) acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, (3) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast.
   (B)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means (1) less than completely and
opaquely covered; (A) human genitals, pubic region; (B) buttock, and (C) female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; (2) human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
   AGRICULTURE. An activity for profit, but not limited to:
   (A)   The raising of trees, vines and crops of any kind;
   (B)   The maintaining, breeding and raising of poultry and livestock of any
kind; and
   (C)   The harvesting, curing, processing, packaging, shipping, packing and
selling of agricultural products for profit, produced on the premises.
   AGRICULTURE BUILDING. A structure utilized for the conduct of farming
operation for the purpose of housing farm animals, feed and farm equipment, but
does not include dwelling or garage.
   AICUZ. A study titled “Air Installations Compatible Use Zones” that gives
the impact of the flight operations at Grissom Aeroplex on future land use.
This document defines noise contours and identifies compatible land use
relationships.
   AIRCRAFT. A contrivance intended for use or designed for navigation of or
flight in the air or outer space, by humans, including missiles and all hobby
planes.
   AIRPORT. Any area which is used or intended to be used for takeoff and
landing of aircraft, including helicopters and any appurtenance area, which are
used or intended to be used for airport buildings or facilities, including open
spaces, taxi-ways and tie-down areas.
   ALLEY. A right-of-way other than a street, road, crosswalk or easement, that
provides secondary access for the special accommodation of the abutting
property.
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. An establishment where the business is to provide
entertainment for recreation such as, bowling, pool, billiards, video games or
other similar games or devices.
   AMUSEMENT PARK. A commercial establishment where the business is any outdoor
activity use for recreation purpose.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Means the same as DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
   AUTOMATIC CAR WASH. A building or portion thereof, where automobiles are
washed by mechanical devices of any kind.
   AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP. A lot where a franchise for new and used vehicles are
sold and serviced.
   AUTOMOBILE HOLD AREA. An area where wrecked, damaged or impounded vehicles
are stored or kept for a period of time waiting for insurance, title or police
release.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT. A lot arranged, designed or used for the display or
storage, for sale of motor vehicles where no repair work is done.
   AUTOMOBILE SALES AND SERVICE LOT. A lot in which new or used vehicles are
sold and no more than 20% of the trade is dedicated to minor repair.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. A residential building converted to a lodging house
available to transients which include the morning meal and where a portion of
the premises may be used by the person for a social, literary purpose, provided
that the social or literary does not exceed more than 35 guests and excluding
the sale of alcoholic beverages through any means.
   BLOCK. An area that abuts a street and lies between two adjoining street or
barriers such as a railroad right-of-way or a waterway.
   BOARD. The Town of Bunker Hill Board of Zoning Appeals.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building available to transients, in which lodging and
meals are regularly provided for compensation, for at least three, but not more
than 15 persons.
   BUILDING. A roofed structure for the shelter, support, enclosure or
protection of person, animals or property.
   BUILDING AREA. The horizontal projected area of the building on the lot,
including open areas and terraces, unenclosed porches not more than one story
high, and architectural features that project more than two feet.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. An officer, employee or agent of the town, who has
the authority to enforce this ordinance for the Town Plan Commission and the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no structural connection with another
building.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the adjoining street
centerline grade at a point opposite the principal frontage of the building to
the highest point of the ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat roof to
the deck line of a mansard roof and to the main height level between the eaves
and ridges of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Where the building may be measured
from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the
building.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building constituting the principal use on the lot.
   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. A legally existing building which fails to comply
with the regulations set forth in this ordinance applicable to the district in
which such building is located.
   BUSINESS. The purchase, sale or exchange of goods or services, or the
maintenance for profit of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Local Business (LB), General Business (GB) zone
districts.
   BUSINESS WHOLESALE. A business establishment that generally sells
commodities, including, but not limited to, perishable or flammable in large
quantities or by the piece to retailers, jobbers, other wholesale establishment
or manufacturing establishments. The commodities are basically for further
resale, for use in the fabrication of a product, or for use by business
service.
   CAMPGROUND. An area of land used or designed to be used to accommodate two
or more camping units, including cabins, tents, travel trailers or other
camping outfits.
   CARPORT. A structure with roof which is unenclosed or partly enclosed,
attached to dwelling or other structure, or unattached for the purpose of
providing protection for a motor vehicle or other goods.
   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbium, crematory, mausoleum or mortuary operated in
conjunction with and on the same tract as the cemetery.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Plan Administrator
stating that the occupancy and uses of the land or a building or structure
referred to therein complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
   CHILDREN’S HOME OR CHILD CARING INSTITUTION. Any children’s home, orphanage,
institution or other place maintained or conducted by any group or person
engaged in receiving and caring for dependent, neglected, handicapped children
or children in danger of becoming delinquent or in operating for gain a private
business of boarding children who are unattended by parent or guardian, or
person in loco parentis, except licensed foster homes.
   CLINIC. An establishment in which patients are admitted for study or
treatment of a disease, disorder or disability and in which service of a least
two physicians, dentists or chiropractors are provided.
   CLUB. A building, or portion thereof, or premises owned or operated by a
person for social, literary, political, educational or recreational purpose
primarily for the exclusive use of members and guest, including the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle over one ton used for commercial use,
including, but not limited to, tractor-trailers, dump trucks, semis and school
buses.
   COMMISSION. The Town Plan Commission.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A plan recommended by the Plan Commission and adopted by
the Town Council, in accordance with the laws of the state, for the promotion
of public health, safety, morals, convenience, order or the general welfare and
for the sake of efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Plan
Commission shall prepare a Comprehensive Plan, which may include policies for:
   (A)   The development of public ways, public spaces, public structures and
public and private utilities;
   (B)   The issuance of improvement location permits on platted and unplatted
lands; and
    (C)   The laying out and development of public ways and services to platted
and unplatted land.
   CONDOMINIUM. Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land and certain
parts of a building thereon which would normally be used by all the occupants,
such as yard, foundations, basements, floors, walls, hallways, stairways,
elevators and all related common elements, together with individual ownership
in fee of a particular unit.
   CONFINEMENT FEEDING. Shall mean as feeding of animals grown for food, fur or
pleasure purposes in lots, pens, ponds, sheds or buildings where feed is
supplied to them by means other than grazing. For the purpose of this
ordinance, the CONFINEMENT FEEDING shall be limited to the confined feeding of
(1) 300 or more cattle; (2) 600 or more swine or sheep, or (3) 30,000 or more
fowl. These numbers have be established by Pub. Law No. 175, Act of the 1971
Indiana General Assembly. In the event that said Act is amended, this ordinance
shall be deemed amended so that it is in conformity with said Act.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate
terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement, including
public safety vehicles.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Any service providing childcare, as defined in I.C. 12-7-2-
28.2, or qualifying as a childcare center, childcare home, childcare ministry
or child caring institution, as defined in I.C. 12-7-2-28.4, 12-7-2-28.6, 12-7-
2-28.8 and 12-7-2-29.
   DISTRICT OR ZONES. An area within which there are uniform regulations
governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of the use of building and
land and open space about the buildings.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. A building or structure in which food and/or drink area
primarily prepared for sale and human consumption under one or more or the
following conditions:
   (A)   Within vehicles on the premises with such structure;
   (B)   On the premises outside of such structure;
   (C)   Take-out restaurants for human consumption off the premises; and/or
   (D)   Access driveway to window for pickup orders.
   DRIVEWAY. The minimum area of land required to provide reasonable access
from the street to the dwelling.
   DUMP, OPEN. Any premises or portion thereof used for the disposal or storage
of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, waste material of any kind, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or vehicle parts thereof, offal, dead animals or hazardous
materials by abandonment, discarding, bumping reduction, burial, incineration
or any means and whatever purpose which does not conform to the requirement and
specification as set forth in this ordinance.
   DWELLING. A place or part of building that is used primarily as a place
abode, but not including a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, lodging house,
boarding house or tourist home or mobile home as defined in this ordinance.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A single building consisting of three or more
dwelling units, with varying arrangements of entrances and party walls.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building consisting of a single dwelling unit
only, separated from other dwelling units by open space.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling that is designed or converted into two
separate dwellings for occupancy of two family units which may be separated by
walls, carport or garage.
   EASEMENT. An authorization granted by the property owner for the use by
another of any designed use or interest of his or her property for clearly
specified purpose(s).
   ENLARGEMENT or TO ENLARGE. ENLARGEMENT means an addition to the floor area
of an existing building and increase in the size of any structure, and increase
in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use. TO ENLARGE is
to make an enlargement.
   FAMILY. One or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit, but not
including a group occupying a hotel, motel, club, nursing home, dormitory or
fraternity or sorority house.
   FARM, GENERAL. An area five acres or more used for agricultural operations,
including truck gardening, forestry. The operation of a tree or plant nursery;
provided, that a FARM shall not be construed to include farm confinement
feeding, as defined here or slaughtering house, including necessary buildings
and structures, shall be considered used for agriculture if not composed of
subdivision lots, or of the raising of crops, or animals, is the principal
occupation of the resident or uses of such area.
   FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A drive-in or other fast food establishment
permitting consumption of or carryout from the premises.
   FENCE. A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a
boundary.
   FIREWORKS BUSINESS. A place or booth where fireworks, such as a roll of
paper containing an explosive, set off as a noisemaker or celebration are kept,
stored or sold.
   FITNESS CENTER. A structure used for the development of the body or mind
which may include fitness equipment, spars, suntan booths, swimming pool, tract
and any other activity used in developing the body.
   FLEA MARKET. The retail sale of used merchandise from individually rented
spaces of land or structures that are open for business more than twice in any
one calendar year.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portions of the flood hazard area lying outside the
floodway, shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
hereafter be covered by floodwater from the regulatory flood.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of the river or stream and the portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream shown on the floodway-flood boundary maps of the Federal Insurance
Administration.
   FOUNDATION. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
   FOWL. A domestic cock or hen, or any of several domesticated or wild birds.
   FUNERAL HOME. A dwelling or structure used and occupied by a professional
licensed mortician for burial preparation and funeral services.
   FUR-BEARING PROPERTY. The raising or keeping of fur-bearing animals for the
purpose of collecting pelts to be used in manufacturing of clothing.
   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The area of a building in square feet as measured in a
horizontal plan, at the ground level within its largest outside dimensions,
exclusive of open porches, breezeway, terraces, garage and exterior stairways.
   GROUP HOME. A facility occupied by eight or less persons which may be
licensed by the department of state or local government to provide a family-
like and long-term living environment to individuals who are not related to the
head of household and who are developmentally disabled, mentally ill, aged,
blind, deaf or in need of adult supervision; which provides room and board and
other services in accordance with their individual needs and alternative family
programs; and semi-independent living programs. No GROUP HOME may be located
within 3,000 feet of any other similar facility in any residential area.
   GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN. The complete plan or any of its parts for the
orderly development of the town as prepared by the Commission and adopted in
accordance with Chapter 174, Acts of 1947, General Assembly of Indiana, and all
Acts amendatory thereof, as now or may hereafter be in effect.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility occupied by eight or less persons to provide a
family-like and short-term (under six months) living environment to individuals
who are not related to the head of household for rehabilitation, in need of
supervision, which provides room and board. No HALFWAY HOUSE may be within
3,000 feet of any other similar facility in any residential area.
   HAZARDOUS WASTES. Any solid or liquid waste with inherent dangers,
including, but not limited to, toxic chemicals, explosives, pathological
wastes, radioactive materials, materials likely to cause fires, liquids, semi-
liquids, sludge containing less than 30% solids, pesticides, pesticide
containers, raw animal manure, septic tank pumping and raw or digested sewage
sludge.
   HEIGHT. With respect to a building, the vertical distance measured from
elevation of the finished grade of the ground to the highest point of the roof
with respect to other than buildings, measured to the highest point of the
structure.
   HOME AGRICULTURE USE. The raising or keeping of not more than two livestock
animals; (i.e., ungulate mammal) or 15 fowl on an area two acres or more, zoned
agriculture. HOME AGRICULTURE USES shall not be authorized in any residential
subdivision or within the confines of the town limits.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A use conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling,
employing only the family inhabitants thereof which is clearly incidental and
secondary to residential occupancy and does not change the character thereof.
Specifically excluded is the storage and display of merchandise not produced by
such home occupation, any activity involving any building alterations, window
display, equipment, machinery or outdoor storage. Dancing and band instrument
instruction, nursing homes, tea rooms, tourist homes, beauty parlors, barber
shops, animal hospitals, kennels, automobiles repair and body shops, and retail
businesses, trade or sale of items not produced on the premises shall not be
considered HOME OCCUPATIONS (see § 3-1 of this ordinance).
   HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. A portion of a dwelling used as a professional
office by occupant of the dwelling, which use does not change the residential
character of the dwelling. Some examples of professional office may be
accountant, bookkeeper, surveyor, insurance salesperson, attorney and other
similar uses (see § 2-14-3 of this ordinance).
   HOME WORKSHOP. A use conducted entirely within a dwelling or in an accessory
building located on the same lot, parcel or tract of land as the dwelling use
for residential purposes, provided the home workshop is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes and does not
change the character thereof or having any exterior evidence. HOME WORKSHOPS
may not exceed more than 400 square feet of gross floor area. HOME WORKSHOPS
may not create any noise, odor or other nuisances beyond the premises that
could cause a hazard to public health, safety or welfare. Some examples of HOME
WORKSHOPS may be seamstress, woodcraft, interior decorator, arts and crafts and
other similar uses.
   HOSPITAL. A place which provides overnight medical or surgical facilities,
which care for the sick or injured persons.
   HOSPITAL, ANIMAL. A place with overnight facilities for the medical or
surgical care for sick or injured animals.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings in which lodging is
provided and offered to the public for compensation and catering primarily to
the public traveling by motor vehicle.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, work of art or other object
constituting a physical alteration of real estate or change of use.
   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit issued by an official of the town, who
has the responsibility for enforcing the Zoning Ordinance and authorizing an
improvement.
   INDUSTRIAL PARK. An area of land use or designed for several manufacturing
business that are located on the same or divided parcel of land.
   JUNK. Includes, but it not limited to, scrap metals and their alloys, bones,
rags, used cloth, rubber, rope, tinfoil, bottles, chemicals and plastic,
(discarded) old or used machinery, tools, appliances, fixtures, utensils,
lumber, boxes or crates, pipe or pipe fittings, used tires and manufactured
goods that are worn deteriorated or obsolete as to make them usable in their
existing condition.
   JUNKYARD. A place usually outdoors, where waste, junk or discarded used
property other than organic matter is accumulated and/or stored including one
or more unlicensed or inoperable vehicle(s).
   KENNEL. A place where three or more dogs are kept or maintained for pets,
breeding or sale of which are more than 12 weeks old.
   LANDFILL. See SANITARY FILL.
   LAUNDROMAT. A business that provides washer, dryer, dry-cleaning and/or
ironing machines for hire to be used by the customers on the premises.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space, at least ten feet wide and 50 feet long,
with a minimum height clearance of 14 feet, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or material, and
which abuts on a street or other appropriate means of access.
   LODGE. A social, fraternal or service oriented organization primarily for
the use of its members.
   LOT. A parcel, tract or area of land accessible by means of a street or
place abutting upon a street or easement.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and abutting two intersecting or
intercepting street (see Figure 1).
   LOT, COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by buildings
or structures.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot (see Figure 1).
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating the lot from the street. A corner lot
shall be deemed to have only two front lines. (Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
   LOT LINE, REAR. On an interior or corner lot, the lot line that is opposite
the front lot line and farthest from it, except for a triangular or irregularly
shaped lot, it shall be parallel to the front lot line, and wholly within the
lot, that is farthest from the front lot line. A through lot has no REAR LOT
LINE. (Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot line other than front or rear lot line.
   LOT, SETBACK LINE. The distance between a street line, property line or
structure that shall be kept free from any construction.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot fronting on two parallel, or approximately parallel
streets and includes lot frontage on both a street and a watercourse or lake
(see Figure 1).
   LOT, WIDTH. The distance between the side lot line as measured on the
building line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing
facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a seal
certifying that it is built in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Code or Pub. Law No. 360, Acts of 1971. Such
a unit shall also meet all of the following conditions:
   (A)   Contain at least 900 square feet of occupied space as manufactured per
dwelling unit, and may be double-section or multi-section manufactured housing
unit;
    (B)   Be constructed after January 1, 1981;
   (C)   Be placed onto a permanent under-floor foundation installed in
conformance with the State One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, or the State
Uniform Building Code in case of multi-family dwelling units, and the
manufacturers installation specification;
   (D)   Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed;
   (E)   Have siding material or a type customarily used on site constructed
residences; and
   (F)   Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site-constructed
residences. Roof material shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
   MANUFACTURING PLANT. The processing and converting of any unfinished or
finished materials or products, or any of these into article or substance of
different character, or for a different purpose. Also industries furnishing
labor in the case of manufacturing or the refinishing of manufacturing
articles.
   MINERAL EXTRACTION. Means (1) mining or quarrying, and (2) removal of earth
materials.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. A structure or enclosed storage area containing individually
rented or owned compartments or stalls for storage only.
   MOBILE HOME. A vehicle or other portable structure more than 30 feet in
length, that is designed to move on the highway and designed or used as a
dwelling, as manufactured.
   MOBILE HOME DWELLING. A movable, detached dwelling unit, designed for long-
term occupancy, more than 45 days, built on a chassis at a factory, with or
without a permanent foundation, and consisting of a complete package with major
appliances, plumbing and electrical facilities prepared for appropriate
connections. It is synonymous with trailer home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land on which five or more mobile homes are
regularly accommodated with or without charge, including any buildings or other
structure, fixture or equipment that is used or intended to be used in
providing the accommodation.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. An area of land within a mobile home park with a minimum
of 2,500 square feet for the placement of one mobile home which is designed for
the executive use of occupants. The minimum distance between any part of a
mobile home including any addition shall be 15 feet.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, semi-
trailers, motorcycles, scooters, buses and farm implements, whether self-
propelled or designed to be pushed, pulled or carried by another motor vehicle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. Any building, structure or land used for the
repair of motor vehicles, whether minor or major with all work done inside an
enclosed building.
   MUSEUM. An establishment operated as a repository or a collection of nature,
scientific or literary or historical curiosities or objects of interest of work
of art, not including the regular sale or distribution of the objects
collected.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building, structure or use of land existing at the time
of enactment of this ordinance, which does not conform to the regulations of
the district or zoning in which it is situated. A NONCONFORMING USE shall abate
and cease to exist 180 days from the time that the use is changed or
abandonment of a structure, whichever occurs first.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. A place where five or more children are kept for the purpose
of providing supplemental parental care, including day nursery, day care home
for children and kindergarten (see DAY CARE CENTER).
   NURSING HOME. An institution for the care of children or the aged or infirm,
or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders; but not including
facilities for surgical care or institutions for the care and treatment or
mental illness, alcoholism or narcotics addiction.
   OCCUPANCY, CHANGE OF. The change or use of the building, structure or land.
   OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. A graphic illustration of zoning boundaries and
classifications drawn and approved as part of the records of the town.
   OIL WELL. The drilling or extracting of petroleum minerals off a parcel of
land for private or commercial use, and related storage and equipment.
   PACKAGE STORES. An establishment offering for sale primarily intoxicating
beverages and accessory merchandise, and where no consumption of said
intoxicating beverages is permitted on the premises.
   PARKING LOT. A parcel of land other than a street, devoted to parking spaces
for motor vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE. An area enclosed or unenclosed sufficient in size to store
one vehicle, not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet long.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
or any group that act as a unit or legal entity.
   PET. A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A tract of land at least five acres in area, under
single, corporation, firm, partnership or association ownership, planned and
developed as an integral unit in a single development operation or a definitely
programmed series of development operation and according to an approved outline
development plan and a preliminary site plan (see the Plan Unit Development
Ordinance).
   PLAT. A map or chart that shows a division or parcel of land that is
intended to be filed for record.
   POOL, PRIVATE. Any constructed pool or portable private pool, used for
swimming, wading or recreation, over 24 inches in depth of water with a top
water surface exceeding 150 square feet and which is used for a pool in
connection with a family dwelling unit and is available only to the family of
the householder and his or her private guests.
   PRIMARY BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which
it is located is conducted, including a building that is attached to such a
building in a substantial way, such as by a roof. With respect to residential
use, it means the main dwelling.
   PRIMARY USE. The primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is
intended to serve.
   PRIVATE GARAGE. A detached accessory building or a portion of the main
building for the housing of vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling,
including carports.
   PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM. A system designed of connecting pipes to a tank,
distribution box and leach field for the purpose of carrying away sewage waste
and approved by the County Health Department.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Any building or portion thereof used or intended to be
used, but not limited to an office for lawyers, architects, engineers, land
surveyors, licensed insurance agents, real estate brokers, accountants,
physicians, surgeons, dentists and other similar professions.
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building held, used or controlled for public purposes
by any department or branch of the government, state, county or municipal, or
any building where the public is invited.
   PUBLIC GARAGE. Any garage operated for profit, for the purpose of parking
vehicles.
   PUBLIC OWNED USE. The use of any premises by a public body, board,
commission or authority, such as a municipal, county, state or federal
government, or any agency or department thereof for a governmental or
proprietary purpose. This shall also include PUBLIC STREET, ALLEY and PARKS.
   PUBLIC SEWAGE SYSTEM. A system constructed, installed, maintained, operated
and owned by the town, county, Taxing District, Regional Sanitary District,
utilities or private under the jurisdiction of the State Public Service
Commission which carries sewage for treatment.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle primarily designed as temporary living
quarters for recreation, camping or travel either with its own motor power or
mounted on or towed by another powered vehicle.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMPSITE. An area of land on which two or more
recreational vehicles are regularly accommodated with charge, including any
buildings or other structure, fixture or equipment that is used or intended to
be used in connection with providing accommodations day or overnight.
   RECREATION VEHICLE STORAGE AREA. A place where two or more unoccupied
recreational vehicles are regularly accommodated with charge.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. An R-1 or R-3 Residential District.
   RESTAURANT. A building structure in which food and drinks are prepared
primarily for sale and consumption within such structure, including incidental
take out service (see the definition of DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT).
   RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES. Department stores, variety stores, drug and
sundry store, restaurants, grocery stores, hardware store, furniture and floor
covering store, stationary store, shoe sales or repair shops, leather and
luggage shops, bakeries and other similar use that deal in retail sales or
services.
   ROADSIDE PRODUCE STAND. A temporary structure designed or used for the
display of agriculture and related products produced on the premises and sold
as a seasonal or temporary period of time not to exceed 90 days in a one-year
period.
   ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary structure or vehicle used for the display of
merchandise, goods or articles which are sold to the public.
   RUMMAGE SALE. The sale of used or new articles, not to exceed seven days and
no more than two sales in a one-year period. Includes garage, porch, yard and
other designated sales.
   SANITARY FILL. Any zoned lot used primarily for disposal by abandonment,
discarding, dumping, reduction, burial, incineration or other means and for
whatever purpose of garbage, trash, refuse, waste material of any kind, junk,
discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, but not sewage or animal waste
(see classification restrictions).
   SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit designed for carrying any combination of
water-carried wastes from residence, business, commercial building, public use
and industries, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as
may be present, but which are not intentionally admitted.
   SATELLITE DISH. A directional microwave antenna having a concave shape used
for television or radio frequency.
   SCHOOL. A place for systematic instruction in any branch or branches of
knowledge.
   SCHOOL, TRADE OR BUSINESS. A secretarial or business school or college when
not publicly owned or not owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a
religious, charitable or nonprofit organization; or a school conducted as a
commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering, hair
dressing or drafting, or for teaching industrial or technical arts.
   SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure or land used for the sale or
offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuel, oils or accessories
including lubrication or washing of automobiles, and replacement for
installation of minor parts and accessories.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of continuous retail stores, originally planned and
developed as a single unit, having a total ground floor building area of not
less than 50,000 square feet, with immediate adjoining off-street parking
facilities.
   SIGN. An identification, description, illustration or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or
land and which directs attention to a product, place activity, service, person,
institution or business.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. The same as a sign, except it is not on a permanent
structure.
   SLAUGHTERHOUSE. A commercial establishment where animals are butchered.
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. The authorization of a use that is designated as such by
Table 1, as being permitted in the district concerned, if it meets special
conditions, and upon application is specifically authorized by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
   STORAGE. The keeping, maintaining or housing of goods, articles, equipment
or other valuable that can or will be used in the future.
   STREET, FEEDER. A street designed to facilitate the collection of traffic
from local street and to provide circulation within the neighborhood area, and
convenient ways to reach secondary streets.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street designed primarily to provide access to abutting
property.
   STREET, PRIMARY. A street designed for high volume traffic.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A street established for or dedicated to the public use.
   STREET (ROAD). A right-of-way other than an alley, dedicated or otherwise
legally established to public use, usually affording the principal means of
access to abutting property. A STREET may be designated as a highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, land, drive or other
appropriate names.
   STREET, SECONDARY. A street designed to facilitate the collection of traffic
from feeder streets, and usually located on the neighborhood boundaries.
   STRUCTURAL CHANGE. A change, or repair in a supporting member of a building,
such as a bearing wail or partition, column, beam or girder, or in the exterior
wall, or the roof.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or in
the ground, or attachment to something having a location on or in the ground.
   SUBDIVISION. A parcel of land containing less than ten acres, comprised of
two or more lots with common egress and ingress. May have common water and
sewage systems but not required. Must comply with the Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
   SWIMMING POOL. An above or in-ground pool which holds water, use for private
or commercial swimming or recreational purpose.
   TAVERN. Includes, but is not limited to, an establishment commonly known as
bars, grills, cafés, taverns and night clubs, and where intoxicating beverages
are sold, and primarily consumed on the premises.
   TEMPORARY USE. A use of land, building or structure not intended to be
permanent duration.
   THEATER. A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures or other
performance, for admission to which entrance money is received.
   THEATER, ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE. An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than 25 persons used for presenting material having as a con-(sis)
presenting material distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities,” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this section), for observation by
patrons therein.
   THEATER, ADULT MOTION PICTURES. An enclosed building with a capacity for
more than more than 25 persons used for presenting material having as a con-
(sis) presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities,” or
“specified anatomical areas” (as defined in this section), for observation by
patrons therein.
   TOURIST HOME. A building in which not more than five guest rooms are used to
provide or offer overnight accommodation to transient guest for compensation.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town of Bunker Hill Town Council which consists of five
members.
   TRUCK SERVICE CENTER. An occupancy which provides especially for the
servicing of trucks, with incidental operations similar to those permitted for
automobile service stations.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. An establishment where three or more trucks for hire are
stored or parked, along with service of fuel, fuel oil, minor or major repair.
   USE. The employment or occupation of a structure or land for a person’s
service, benefit or enjoyment.
   VARIANCE. A special authorization, granted under § 2-8 to deviate from what
the ordinance otherwise prescribes.
   VARIANCE, AREA. An authorization granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals
involving matters such as setback lines, frontage requirements, height
limitations, lot size restrictions, density regulations and yard requirements,
and shall follow the land.
   VARIANCE, USE. An authorization granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals which
permits a use of a building or land other than which is prescribed by the
Zoning Ordinance. A USE VARIANCE shall not follow the land.
   VISION CLEARANCE. A triangular space at an intersection, free from any kind
of obstruction to vision between the height of three and eight feet above the
established grade, determined by a diagonal line connecting two points,
measured 15 feet equal distance from the street corner along each property
line.
   WORK TRAILER. A mobile trailer designed to move upon a highway, to be used
as a temporary office, storage or breakroom on a construction site while
construction is being done.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, unoccupied
other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lamp posts, shrubs and similar
structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the nearest street
right-of-way and the front line of the building. The FRONT YARD shall be
determined by the location of the main entrance of the structure.
   YARD, REAR. A yard that extends across the full width of a lot and is
bounded on the rear by the rear lot line, and the depth of which is the least
distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the principal building and the adjacent side lot
line that extends from the front yard, or street right-of-way where there is no
front yard, to the rear yard, and the width of which is the least distance
between the side lot line and the adjacent side of the building.
   ZONING MAPS. Maps showing the town and its jurisdiction, marked exhibits,
that shows districts or primary street routes or jurisdiction of the town.
2-1 DISTRICTS.
   The following zoning districts are hereby established for the Town of Bunker
Hill, Indiana. For the interpretation of this ordinance, the zoning districts
have been formulated to realize the general purposes as set forth in the
preamble of this ordinance. In addition, the specific district shall be as
stated.
AGRICULTURE: “A-1”
   “A-1” District is to preserve and protect the decreasing supply of prime
agricultural land by controlling the indiscriminate infiltration of urban
development into agricultural areas. “A-1” Districts are established to include
substantial areas where the primary use is farm land and where little or no
urbanization has occurred or is likely to occur in the near future. It use
should be primarily limited to the growing of crops and raising of livestock.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: “R-1”
   “R-1” classification depicts residential areas utilizing typical “suburban”
development patterns. Housing would be predominately single-family in nature,
and densities would range from one to two units per acre (duplexes) and be
served by public sanitary sewer and one unit per acre or less in areas not
served by public sanitary sewer.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: “R-3”
   “R-3” land use type classifies multi-family housing opportunities which are
located at or near major employment centers or transportation facilities.
Densities could range from approximately three to 15 units per acre.
LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS: “LB”
   “LB” District is to encourage the establishment of areas for convenience
business use which tend to meet the daily requirement of the residents of an
immediate neighborhood. No businesses that can create noise, odor or common
nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood shall be allowed in this District.
GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS: “GB”
   “GB” Districts is to encourage the establishment of areas for convenience
business use to meet the needs of the community. The areas are established for
the sale of goods and services. These areas shall be located on a major highway
and away from residential areas. Manufacturing plants should be discouraged in
this area.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS: “I-1”
   “I-1” Districts is to encourage the establishment of areas for development
of small manufacturing and wholesale business establishment which are clean,
quiet and free of hazardous or objectionable elements, operated entirely within
enclosed structures. Storage areas shall be enclosed with a six-foot high wood
or chain link fence.
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: “I-2”
   “I-2” District is to encourage the development of major manufacturing,
processing, warehousing and major research and testing operation. The Districts
are established for heavy industrial uses that require isolation from other
District. Such areas shall be located where no or little residences are
located. The areas shall be screened or fenced from other Districts or shall
have a minimum of 200-foot buffer from other Districts.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT: “FP”
   “FP” Districts is to guide development in the flood-prone areas of any water
course so as to avoid or limit damage resulting from high waters. The Districts
are established in areas adjoining the river or stream which has been or may
thereafter be covered by floodwaters or any floodplain District as delineated
by Zone (A) on the flood hazard boundary map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
FLOODWAY DISTRICT: “FW”
   “FW” District is to regulate land use in the channel of a river or stream
and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, which are
reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak floodwater of
any river or stream. Any construction within this District shall require the
release from the State Department of Natural Resources.
FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICTS: “FF”
   “FF” Districts is to regulate land use in the flood hazard area outside the
floodway, designated as flood hazard area (B) on the Flood Hazard Maps. The
Town Plan Commission may regulate these areas as deemed appropriate. Any
construction in these areas shall be two feet above regulatory flood profile as
established by the Department of Natural Resources.
   In the “FP,” “FW” and “FF” District established here, the degree of flood
protection established in this ordinance is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific considerations.
Large floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes such as ice or debris jams. This
ordinance does not imply that area outside flood hazard district as defined
herein, will be free of flooding or flood damage. This ordinance does not
create any liability on the part of the town or the Commission of Natural
Resources, the state or any elected or appointed official or employee thereof
for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
2-1-1 DISTRICTS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   The boundaries of the district established are shown on the Zoning
Maps, which is part of this ordinance. Districts shall only be changed by
amending this ordinance.
   (B)   When the exact boundaries of a district are uncertain, they shall be
determined by use of the Zone Map.
   (C)   When a right-of-way is vacated, the districts adjoining each side are
respectively extended to the center of the area so vacated.
   (D)   If a district divides a lot frontage on a street, a restriction that
applies to the front of the lot shall apply to the entire lot.
2-2 PRIMARY USES.
   The following table shall be used to determine when a use is authorized in a
district. If the use is marked with an (X), this shall mean that the use is
authorized in that district. A use that is marked with (HO) shall be authorized
as a home occupation only providing all requirement in § 3-1 are met. Whenever
a use is marked with (S), it shall require a special exception from the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   A use not found in the primary use table shall use the most similar use and
have the same restriction as that similar use.
   See Table 1 of this ordinance.
2-3 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered unless an improvement location permit has been issued by
the Town Building Commissioner. No change in use of a building or land shall be
made without an improvement location permit issued by the Town Building
Commissioner. An improvement location permit shall be issued only upon finding
that the propose use complies with the requirements of this ordinance or upon
written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals granting a variance, appeal or
special exception.
   (B)   The application for an improvement location permit shall be submitted
to the Building Commissioner and signed by the owner or applicant attesting to
the accuracy of all information. Each application shall clearly state that the
permit shall expire and be revoked if work has not begun within six months or
been substantially completed within one year from date issued, unless an
extension has been granted by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   An applicant applying for an improvement location permit shall furnish
the Building Commissioner office with the following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant;
      2.   Legal description of property;
      3.   Existing and/or proposed use;
      4.   The location and size of all improvement, existing and proposed;
      5.   Location of all adjacent streets and alleys;
      6.   Estimated cost of improvement;
      7.   Plot plan showing the size and shape of lot to be built on; and
      8.   Drainage plan for the area (if required).
   (D)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for any commercial use
unless all plans have been approved by the State Administrative Building
Council.
   (E)   As a condition of issuing an improvement location permit, the Building
Commissioner may require the relocation of any structure or entrance or exit,
if the requirement is necessary in the interest of safety, or public welfare of
the community.
   (F)   Any person filing for an improvement location permit shall be required
to disclose the identity of his or her contractor (if required). Such a person
is eligible to receive a permit only if his or her contractor is eligible.
   (G)   All plans filed with the Building Commissioner office shall be public
records and shall be maintained by the Plan Commission office as permanent
records.
   (H)   No improvement location permit shall be considered for approval for
any property not served by a community sewage system until a written letter of
approval of the private sewage system plan is received from the County Health
Department and a copy of same is attached to said application.
   (I)   No certificate of occupancy will be issued for any property not served
by a community water system until a written letter of approval of water quality
is received from the County Health Department and a copy presented to the
Building Commissioner.
   (J)   No improvement location permit shall be required for the following use
or structures:
      1.   Bird baths and bird houses;
      2.   Detached storage sheds (80 square feet or less) and under $1,000
value;
      3.   Curbs;
      4.   Driveways;
      5.   Lamp posts;
      6.   Mail boxes;
      7.   Walks;
      8.   Poles, lines and hydrants;
      9.   Retaining walls under three feet;
      10.   Trees, shrubs, plants and flowers; provided, that visibility is not
obstructed;
      11.   Fences and hedges (not to exceed four feet in height within the
front yard and six feet in height within the side and back yard. Fences shall
not be closer than 18 inches from any sidewalk or alley; and
      12.   Other similar uses.
   (K)   Any person filing for an improvement location permit shall at the same
time apply for a certificate of occupancy which shall be certified by the
Building Commissioner upon completion before the structure or use is occupied.
   (L)   If a building contractor receives notice of violating the Zoning or
Subdivision Ordinance three times in a 365-day period, he or she shall be
ineligible to receive an improvement location permit for one year from the date
of the third violation. A contractor may appeal the decision made by the
Building Commissioner to the Board of Zoning Appeals within 30 days from
receipt of any notice as outlined in § 2-10-1 of this ordinance.
2-4 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use of
structure until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Commissioner. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the proposed use of
the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance and that
the Building Commissioner has inspected the property and attested to that fact.
This fee is to be collected at issuance of the improvement location permit.
2-5 TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Commissioner for a period not to exceed six months pending completion of
modifications in order to comply with this ordinance.
2-6 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   The Town Council shall by ordinance, establish a schedule of fees, charges
and expenses and a collection procedure for improvement location permits,
amendments, appeals, variances, special exceptions, Plan Unit Development and
other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this
ordinance requiring investigations, legal, advertising, postage and other
expenses. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Building
Commissioner and may be amended or altered only by the Town Council. Until all
applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid, no action shall be taken
on any application or appeal.
Type of Service Fees; Charges; Expenses
Type of Service                          Fees; Charges; Expenses
Appeals                                  $10
Area variance                            $50
                                         $2, to be collected at time of
Certificate of occupancy                 application of improvement location
                                         permit
Failure to procure an ILP or late filing $25, plus permit fees
fee
Improvement location permits             $10 plus $1 per thousand or any part
                                         thereof
Petition for amendment to Zoning         $50
Ordinance maps
Plan Unit Development                    $50
Special exception                        $50
Subdivision                              $50, plus $2 per lot in excess of 4
Use variance                             $50
 
2-7 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Special exceptions may be permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals
after a public hearing only in the specified districts indicated in table one
of the primary uses. No permit for a special exception shall be granted unless
the Board shall have first found that the public convenience and welfare will
substantially be served and that the proposed use will not be unduly
detrimental to the surrounding area. In the exercise of its approval, the Board
may impose, such additional conditions regarding the location, character and
other features of the proposed building or structure or use as it may deem
advisable in the furtherance of the proposes of this ordinance.
   (B)   Upon approval for the special exception, the Building Commissioner
shall issue an improvement location permit.
   (C)   Upon a finding by the Board that the special exception with additional
special requirements may be issued, the Board shall order the Building
Commissioner to issue an improvement location permit for the special exception,
providing the applicant agrees in writing to such additional special
requirements.
   (D)   A finding by the Board that the special exception is not consistent
with the spirit, propose or intent of this ordinance, may substantially or
permanently injure the appropriate use of the neighboring property, or will not
serve the public convenience or welfare, the Board shall disapprove the special
exception.
   (E)   The Board may table the application for a special exception, and refer
it to the Building Commissioner or committee with a request for further
information, review and recommendations to the Board.
2-7-1 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS; EXISTING USES.
   An existing use which is listed herein as a special exception and which is
located in a district in which such special exception may be permitted, is a
conforming use, however, any expansion of such special exception involving the
enlargement of the building structure, or the land area devoted to such use,
shall be reviewed by the Building Commissioner for compliance and may be
subject to Board procedure described in this section.
2-7-2 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS; TIME LIMIT.
   In the event that the applicant has failed to commence construction within
six months after such permit has been issued, or failed to proceed with
construction, once commenced, in accordance with construction time table
commonly prevailing in the construction industry, and subject to the Board’s
discretion as to the reasonableness of construction delays or fails to conform
to the provisions of the development plan, and supporting data finally approved
by the Board, and upon the basis of which such improvement location permit for
the special exception was issued, said Board may upon its motion or upon the
written petition of any aggrieved person at a public hearing, require the
applicant to show cause why the Board’s order should not be withdrew and the
improvement location permit for the special exception be revoked.
2-7-3 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS; APPROVAL.
   A special exception shall be a authorized use in a district provided that
all requirements can be met and the Board of Zoning Appeals find that the use
will not create an unnecessary hardship or nuisance on the surrounding
property.
   All requirements shall he or she completed prior to any operation of that
use being started.
   The following uses may be permitted as a special exception in districts as
outlined in Table 1 of the primary use chart. These requirement shall be
considered the minimum requirements and the Board may make any other reasonable
restrictions they feel is necessary to protect that district.
2-7-4 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS; REQUIREMENTS.
   All parking requirement shall be in accordance with the parking requirement
outlined in § 3-3 of this ordinance.
   All special exception shall conform to the following restrictions.
   (1)   Lights shall be placed in such a way that they do not infringe upon
the rights of adjacent property owners. At no time shall any light be placed
within ten feet from any property line.
   (2)   Parking areas shall be a minimum of 25 feet away from any other
residential dwelling and shall be screened where light or noise will interfere
with the comfort of the adjacent property owner.
   (3)   No unsafe, uncomfortable or offensive vibrations, noise, visual
effects, odors or air pollutants that would cause and unnecessary hazard to
health or general welfare of the surrounding area shall be allow to radiate
across lot lines.
   (4)   The following shall be the minimum setbacks for any building listed in
the special exception uses. Any use not listed will require the minimum setback
listed in § 2-12-1.
Uses Front Rear Side
Uses                                Front Rear Side
Adult book store                    Minimum requirements
Anhydrous ammonia sales or storage  300   300  300
Asphalt plant                       200   100  100
Campground                          75    50   50
Cemetery or crematory               50    10   10
Contractor storage yard             75    25   40
Country club or golf course         75    50   50
Explosives manufacturing or storage 100   100  100
Fairground                          75    75   75
Farm confinement feeding            100   50   50
Farm equipment sales                50    25   20
Golf driving ranges                 50    50   25
Hospital                            50    25   25
Hotel and motel                     50    25   25
Junkyard                            50    25   25
Kennel                              50    25   25
Lodge or private clubs              Minimum requirements
Marina                              Minimum requirements
Mineral extraction                  300   300  300
Mobile home court                   50    25   15
Nursing home                        50    25   25
Oil wells                           300   300  300
Orphanage home                      50    25   15
Pet shop                            Minimum requirements
Private landfill                    100   100  100
Private recreational development    100   50   50
Public utilities                    50    35   40
Race track (auto)                   200   50   100
Race track (horse)                  100   50   75
Ready mix plant                     75    35   40
Recreational enterprise             50    25   50
Recycling plant                     75    50   50
Sale barn livestock                 100   25   50
Sanitary transfer station           75    50   50
Sewage disposal plant               75    50   50
Shooting range (outdoor)            75    200  50
Slaughterhouse                      50    40   40
Stadium, athletic field             75    50   50
Theater (outdoor)                   100   25   25
Travel trailer park                 75    25   25
Truck sales and service             50    25   20
Truck terminal                      50    35   30
Veterinary clinic                   50    25   25
Warehouse storage grain             50    25   25
Wholesale produce terminal          50    25   25
 
   (5)   The following special exceptions shall require the minimum lots size.
Airport                            80 acres
Anhydrous ammonia sale and storage 5 acres
Campground                         5 acres
Fairground                         5 acres
Farm confinement feeding           5 acres
Industrial park                    5 acres
Junkyard                           10 acres
Landfills                          20 acres
Mobile home court                  1 acre
Plan Unit Development              5 acres
Private recreational development   10 acres
Sale barn                          2 acres
Sale barn for livestock            2 acres
Travel trailer park                2 acres
 
   (6)   The following uses shall be no closer to churches, schools or
residential dwellings than the following distances.
Adult book store                     1,000 feet
Anhydrous ammonia sale or storage    500 feet
Campgrounds                          300 feet
Farm confinement feed                300 feet
Industrial parks                     500 feet
Junk yards                           1,300 feet
Landfills                            1,000 feet
Mineral extraction and storage yards 1,000 feet
Oil wells                            500 feet
Private recreational development     500 feet
Recycling plants                     500 feet
Sale barns for livestock             1,000 feet
Slaughterhouse                       1,000 feet
 
   (7)   No loading berth may be closer than 50 feet from any residential
dwelling.
   (8)   All areas which are used for outside storage shall be screened or
fenced with no less than six-foot fencing or screening.
   (9)   No more than one entrance or exit shall be authorized with a use
unless approved by the Board.
   (10)   Buildings within the following areas may be located no closer to
interior roads than distance, in feet, respectively prescribed below.
 
Campgrounds                                50 feet
Fairgrounds                                50 feet
Golf course                                50 feet
Industrial parks                           75 feet
Junk yards                                 50 feet
Mobile home parks and travel trailer parks 50 feet
Outdoor recreational parks                 75 feet
 
2-8 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific
cases such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary
hardship. No nonconforming use or neighboring land, structures or buildings in
the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of land, structure or
buildings in other district shall be grounds for issuance of a variance.
Variances shall not be granted on the grounds of convenience of profit, but
only where strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would result
in unnecessary hardship.
   (B)   A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals unless and until a written application for the
variance is submitted to the Building Commissioner and the Board of Zoning
Appeals containing:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of applicant(s);
      2.   Legal description of the property;
      3.   Description of nature of variance requested; and
      4.   Public notice is given in accordance with subsection (D) below.
   (C)   A variance, in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-918.4, shall not be granted
unless the Board make specific findings of facts based directly on the
particular evidence presented to it, which supports conclusion that all of the
standards and conditions imposed by the following subsection have been met by
the applicant(s):
      1.   The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the community;
      2.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in
the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
      3.   The need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to the
property involved;
      4.   The strict application of the terms of the ordinance will constitute
an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the variance is
sought; and
      5.   The approval does not interfere substantially with the Comprehensive
Plan adopted under this ordinance.
   (D)   Before holding the public hearing, notice of such hearing shall be
given in the local newspaper of general circulation of the town at least ten
days before the date of said hearing. The notice shall set forth the date, time
and location of the public hearing, and the nature of the proposed appeal or
variance.
   (E)   The cost for all publication for an appeal or variance shall be paid
by the applicant.
   (F)   Before holding the public hearing written notice of such hearing shall
be mailed to all adjoining property owners by first class mail at least five
days before the hearing. This notice shall contain the same information as
required of the notice published in the local newspaper.
   (G)   Within ten days after the public hearing, written notice shall be sent
to the applicant stating that the variance or appeal has been approved,
approved with supplementary conditions or disapproved. If the appeal or
variance is disapproved the Board of Zoning Appeals shall state reason for the
denial.
   (H)   No variance shall be granted in an R-1 or R-3 District allowing
alcohol beverages to be sold or served on the premises for any bed and
breakfast.
2-9 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of enforcement shall
be first presented to the Building Commissioner, and that such question shall
be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision of the Building
Commissioner, and that recourse from the decision of the Board shall be to the
courts as provided by law. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent any official
of the town from appealing a decision of the Board to the courts as provided in
state law. Any such appeal shall be made within 30 days of the Board’s written
decision.
2-10 APPEALS.
   (A)   A decision of the Building Commissioner enforcing this ordinance may
be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person who is adversely
affected by the decision. When an appeal is taken to the Board, upon the denial
of an application for an improvement location permit, for a use not
specifically stated or implied elsewhere in these regulations, and not listed,
the Board shall refer the matter of the proposed use to the Plan Commission for
consideration as an amendment to this ordinance.
   (B)   On an appeal under subsection (A) above, the Board may affirm the
decision of the Building Commissioner; the Board may reverse and place any
conditions different than the decision of the Building Commissioner as it is
empowered to do according to law.
   (C)   Any decision of the Board may be appealed to the county circuit or
superior court within 30 days from the date the decision or order of the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   Any final decision as defined by case law of the Plan Commission may
be appealed to the Board of Zoning appeals or directly to the county circuit or
superior court within 30 days from the date of the Plan Commission decision.
2-10-1 APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any appeal of the Building Commissioner’s decision shall be made in
writing to the Board of Zoning appeals within 30 days from the date of the
written decision.
   (B)   All appeals to the Board shall follow the guidelines listed in the
following paragraphs 1 and 2:
      1.   Be submitted in duplicate copies, stating reason of appeal; and
      2.   Submit name, address, phone number and legal description of the
property.
2-11 NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   A lawful use of a building or premises existing at the time of passage
of this ordinance may continue although such use does not conform to all the
provisions of this ordinance.
   (B)   A nonconforming use may be changed to any other use of the same or
greater restrictions, provided no structural changes are made in the building.
Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, that use shall not
thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
   (C)   Any nonconforming use that is destroyed by fire or act of God in
excess of 50% of the value of the structure the structure shall not be restored
except in accordance to this ordinance. Whenever a nonconforming structure is
destroyed by fire or act of God of more than 50% of the value, the structure
shall be removed and the use discontinued.
   (D)   No building shall be erected upon any premises devoted to a
nonconforming use unless the use can conform to the regulation of this
ordinance.
   (E)   A nonconforming structure may be repaired or altered provided no
structure changes are made or unless the structure change would bring the
structure into conformance with this ordinance.
2-11-1 AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING USES OR BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six
months, such use shall not thereafter be re-established and used thereafter
unless it shall be in conformance with this ordinance.
   (B)   Any nonconforming billboard or advertising structure not attached to a
building, lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance shall be
discontinued on or before three years after the effective date of this
ordinance.
   (C)   On all temporary billboards or advertising structures shall be removed
within 90 days from the effective date of this ordinance.
2-12 RESTRICTIONS.
2-12-1 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   The regulations set by this ordinance within each District shall be the
minimum setback requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land use, unless otherwise specified in other parts of this
ordinance.
 
Primary Use     Primary St. Secondary St. Local Sts.
Lot line, front 50          35            25
Lot line, rear  25          25            25
Lot line, side  10          10            10
Lot line, front 50          35            25
Lot line, rear  5           5             5
Lot line, side  3           3             3
 
(Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
2-12-2 SETBACK: DOWNTOWN AREA.
   The downtown area shall be defined as any parcel that is located on either
side of East Broadway Street between the centerline of Railroad Street and West
to the centerline of Elm Street.
 
Primary Use     Primary St. Secondary St. Local Sts.
Lot line, front 10          10            10
Lot line, rear  10          10            10
Lot line, side  0           0             0
Lot line, front 50          35            25
Lot line, rear  5           5             5
Lot line, side  3           3             3
 
(Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
2-12-3 SETBACK: VISION CLEARANCE AT INTERSECTION.
   At the intersection of a corner lot, the triangular space determined by two
lot lines at the corner and by a diagonal line connecting the two points on
those lines that are 15 feet respectively from the corner shall be free of any
obstruction to vision between the height of three feet to eight feet above the
established grade (see Figure 2).
2-12-4 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building shall be erected in any required setback area of any
street abutting the property, and no separate accessory building shall be
erected within five feet of any other building.
(Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
2-12-5 PRIMARY USE.
   When more than 50% of the lots in a block are occupied by buildings, the
minimum front yard setback shall be the average setback of those buildings.
2-12-6 THROUGH LOTS.
   A through lot shall have a front yard set back on each abutting street (see
Figure 1).
2-12-7 CORNER LOTS.
   A corner lot shall have two front setbacks.
(Am. Ord. passed 7-21-1998)
2-12-8 MEASUREMENT.
   All setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way.
2-12-9 SETBACKS, FENCES AND HEDGES.
   Fences and hedges shall be at least 18 inches from sidewalks and alley, and
all gates shall swing inward. It is recommended that fences be erected at least
one inch inside the side property line and post be placed inside toward the
property.
2-12-10 LOT COVERAGE.
   No lot for residential use may exceed the following lot coverage with
buildings:
 
District            A1 R1 R3 LB GB
Percent of coverage 20 60 60 75 75
 
2-12-11 GROUND FLOOR AREA.
   No dwelling shall be established, erected or changed so that its ground
floor area, in square feet, is less than that prescribed in the following
table.
One-Story Dwellings
Mobile homes  900 sq. ft. per unit, all districts*
Multi-family  500 sq. ft. per unit, all districts
Single-family 1,000 sq. ft. per unit, all districts
Two-family    700 sq. ft. per unit, all districts
*The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a special exception for smaller size
mobile homes in a district.
Two-Story Dwellings
Multi-family  500 sq. ft. per unit, all districts
Single-family 1,000 sq. ft. per unit, all districts
Two-family    700 sq. ft. per unit, all districts
 
2-12-12 LOT FRONTAGE.
   No dwelling may be erected on any lot that has less frontage than described
in the following districts:
 
District A1  R1 R3 LB GB
Frontage 150 66 66 66 66
 
   Lots of record individually held prior to the passage of this ordinance may
be smaller in width than the figure prescribed, however setbacks shall be
maintained.
2-12-13 LOT SIZE.
   No dwelling shall be erected on any lot that does not have the minimum
square footage prescribe in the following table:
 
Kind of Dwellings                            A1     R1     R3     LB     GB
Multi-family with community sewage disposal  25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000
system
Multi-family with individual sewage disposal 43,560 43,560 43,560 43,560 43,560
system
Single-family with community sewage disposal 18,000 15,000 10,000 15,000 15,000
system
Single-family with individual sewage         43,560 43,560 43.560 43,560 43,560
disposal system
Lots of record or individually held prior to the passage of this ordinance may
be smaller in area than figure prescribed above provided they are approved by
the County Health Department.
 
2-12-14 HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   Except as herein provided, no building or structure shall be erected,
altered, enlarged or reconstructed so that the height exceed the following
height limit within the district listed:
 
District   Maximum Height
A1, GB, I1 75 feet
FF, FP, FW 90 feet
R1         35 feet
R3, LB     50 feet
 
2-12-15 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   In an R3 and LB District, structures may be erected or changed to a
height not greater than 65 feet, however for each foot above 50 feet, side yard
setbacks shall exceed one foot.
   (B)   In an I1 and GB District, structures may be erected or changed to a
height not to exceed 100 feet, however for each foot above 75 feet, side yard
setbacks shall exceed one foot.
   (C)   Television aerials, electrical transmission and communication poles,
towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, water towers, grain
elevators, silos and other similar structures may be erected to a height not to
exceed 200 feet provided that FAA lighting is installed at 15 feet interval
above 150 feet.
   (D)   No structure shall be erected that will interfere with FAA flight
restriction.
2-13 RESTRICTIONS.
2-13-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   These districts have been created to preserve and enhance a safe, pleasant
living environment and it is intended to provide a variety and mix of dwelling
types. In order to maintain that environment the following restrictions shall
apply to all Residential Zone Districts.
   (A)   Automotive vehicles, including campers and motor homes, of any kind or
type without current license plates, nor dismantled vehicles shall be parked or
stored for more than seven days on any residential zoned property other than
inside a completely enclosed building.
   (B)   Major recreational vehicles may be parked or stored on the side or
rear lot in these districts, provided that they do not violate any other part
of this ordinance and no more than two pieces of equipment are present,
further, that no such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, camping or
housekeeping while parked or stored on a residential lot.
   (C)   Recreational vehicles may be parked in front or on the street for
loading and unloading purposes for a period not to exceed 24 hours, provided
they do not interfere with the control of traffic, or present a traffic hazard.
   (D)   Vehicle, motor homes, mobile homes, campers or other similar vehicles
shall not be used as storage facility in any residential lots or districts.
   (E)   Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard or
along the edge of any yard providing that driveways entrances are not shielded
in such a way as to obstruct the view of a driver entering a public way from
the driveway (see § 2-12-3).
   (F)   No farm equipment shall be parked, stored or maintained on any lot in
a Residential District unless it is stored inside an enclosed building.
   (G)   Private swimming pools, above or in-ground, may be authorized in a
Residential District; provided, that minimum setbacks are met and they are
completely enclosed by a minimum five-foot high fence, wall or building. No
electrical wires running above the pool may be within ten feet of any portion
of the pool.
   (H)   Firewood and building materials shall be stacked in a neat and orderly
manner on the rear of the property and shall be maintained so that it does not
cause a nuisance or health hazard to the neighborhood.
   (I)   No farm animals, rabbits, wild animals or fowl, shall be kept, raised
or maintained on any lot within the town jurisdiction that is zoned residential
unless said lot is five acres or more in size.
   (J)   No person shall keep, raise or maintain in any Residential District
more than two dogs that is more than 12 weeks old.
   (K)   Rummage sales shall be limited to two per calendar year, which does
not extend more than seven days per sale.
   (L)   Trash, rubbish and discarded used property shall not be kept, stored
or maintained on porches, patios or on any lot in a Residential District.
   (M)   Vehicles shall not be parked or stored on or across sidewalks or alley
and no more than one vehicle may be displayed for sale at a time on any lot.
Such vehicles shall have current license plates.
   (N)   The raising or keeping of bees shall be prohibited within the confines
of the town limits or within 500 feet from any resident within the town
jurisdiction.
   (O)   Satellite dishes may be authorized in a Residential District.
   (P)   No accessory building may be used or occupied as a residential use
unless authorized by the Commission as a authorized use.
   (Q)   No commercial vehicle large than one ton may be parked or stored in
any Residential District except for loading and unloading only.
   (R)   There shall be no major repair on any motor vehicle outside of an
enclosed building in any Residential District.
2-13-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   In order to maintain a safe and economic community, the following
restrictions shall apply to all Commercial Districts.
   (A)   No merchandise shall be displayed across sidewalks or protrude more
than three feet from any building that would interfere with the pedestrian
right-of-way, however during community events such as circus days, heritage
days or other community events merchandise may be displayed on sidewalks.
   (B)   Auto repair shop, body shop and other similar shops shall not store or
maintain unlicensed or dismantled vehicles on the premises more than 72 hours
unless said vehicle is stored inside an enclosed building.
   (C)   Discarded used property, rubbish or trash shall be placed in a
dumpster or waste container which shall be disposed of at least once a week.
   (D)   Semi-trailers shall not be used as storage building for merchandise
for more than 72 hours on any commercial lot.
   (E)   Temporary building shall not be used for commercial businesses unless
authorize by the Plan Administrator.
   (F)   Banners, streamers or sales flags shall not be located on any site
below the height of eight feet, and when banners, streamers or flags become
distorted or in need of repair they shall be removed.
2-14 ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   All advertising signs must be approved by the Building Commissioner and an
improvement location permit issued (with the exception of those signs at
Grissom Aeroplex which must conform to the covenants for that location).
2-14-1 PERMANENT SIGNS; BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   In order to present a uniform standard, create a more attractive and
economically vital business climate, enhance and protect the physical
appearance of the community, reduce the incidence of signs or advertising
distractions which may contribute to traffic accidents, the following
restrictions shall apply to all advertising signs. No advertising signs shall
be erected or placed without the written approval of the Town Plan Commission.
   (A)   Advertising signs shall be located upon the premises in which the
business is located and shall not encroach on any other property.
   (B)   Advertising signs attached to a building shall not be less than eight
feet from the ground level.
   (C)   Advertising signs and billboards on permanent poles shall be no less
than eight feet above ground level and shall not protrude with any portion of
the sign closer than three feet from the right-of-way line.
   (D)   No sign shall have flashing light or be illuminated where they will
cause distraction to vehicular traffic or interfere with vision.
   (E)   No free standing/lawn sign shall have more than two faces per sign and
no other sign may be attached to a free standing sign. No lawn sign may be more
then six feet in height.
   (F)   Whenever a business is terminated, advertising signs shall be removed
from said premises by owner.
2-14-2 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Temporary signs may be authorized for a period not to exceed 45 days,
provided they are approved by the Plan Administrator and an improvement
location permit has been issued. Whenever a temporary sign has been removed no
other temporary sign may be placed on the premises for a period of 45 days.
   (B)   Temporary signs may not be placed on any portion of sidewalks, street
or alley.
   (C)   Temporary signs may be placed in residential area for a period not to
exceed three days, provided they do not advertise a business operation and an
improvement location permit has been issued.
   (D)   All temporary signs that are presently in place shall have 90 days to
remove signs from premises from the date of this ordinance.
   (E)   No person, firm or business shall place more than one temporary sign
on any lot unless said lot has more than 150 feet road frontage. The minimum
distance between each sign shall be 50 feet with a maximum of three temporary
signs.
2-14-3 HOME OCCUPATIONS OR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Whenever an authorized home occupation or variance has been granted in
a residential area, a two-foot by two-foot sign shall be authorized advertising
that business. The sign shall be mounted on a four-inch square post not to
exceed six feet in height, located no closer than three feet from the front
property line. No illuminating advertising sign or other devises shall be
authorized.
2-14-4 SIGNS; GENERAL.
   All advertising signs shall have an improvement location permit except the
following:
   (1)   Directional sign;
   (2)   Political signs;
   (3)   Public service signs;
   (4)   Real estate sign; and
   (5)   Real estate development signs.
2-14-5 SIGN UPKEEP.
   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain any sign
placed on a premises. If a sign becomes deteriorated or becomes inactive for a
period of 90 days, the owner of the sign or the owner of the property upon
which the sign is located shall, upon written notice from the Plan
Administrator, remove said sign.
   Any person may be required to remove or relocate an advertising sign within
60 days after the Plan Administrator has been notified that the land on which
the sign is located has been rezoned to residential or within 50 feet of a
residential dwelling.
2-14-6 ADVERTISING SIGNS OFF-PREMISES.
   An OFF-PREMISES SIGN is a sign which communicates the availability of goods,
services and ideas not necessarily available on the premises on which the sign
is located.
2-14-7 RESTRICTIONS.
   All signs which are placed off-premises shall conform to the following
restrictions.
   (A)   No advertising sign shall be located within 50 feet of any residential
dwelling.
   (B)   There shall be a signed contract from the property owner along with an
agreement stating maintenance upkeep for assigned responsibility.
   (C)   No portion of an advertising sign shall be closer than ten feet from
the right-of-way line.
   (D)   There shall be no more than two facing per sign and no such sign shall
have more than 300 square feet per facing. The maximum area of such sign shall
be no more than 700 square feet.
   (E)   No billboard or advertising sign shall be within 300 feet of another
advertising sign on the same side of the street, measured in linear feet along
right-of-way line.
   (F)   No advertising sign shall exceed more than 40 feet in height from the
ground level.
   (G)   Upon notification from the Plan Administrator that the sign is in poor
condition or in need of maintenance the advertising sign shall be removed
within 15 days from receipt of notice.
   (H)   All advertising signs shall be removed or relocated within 60 days
upon notification from the Zoning Administrator that the property has been
rezoned to residential.
   (I)   Off-premises signs shall be authorized in general business and
industrial zoned area; provided, that the use is not being used as a
residential use.
   (J)   A permanently attached or affixed signs legally existing prior to the
adoption of this ordinance but no longer conforming to this ordinance shall be
consider a nonconforming use. It shall not be replaced except in conformance
with this ordinance.
2-15 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS.
2-15-1 SMOKE.
   (A)   No light industrial use may emit more than ten smoke units per hour,
per stack or smoke in excess of Ringelmann No. 2. However, once during any 24-
hour period, for soot blowing, process purging and fire cleaning, each stack
may emit an additional ten smoke units, and, during that time, it may emit
smoke up and including Ringelmann No. 3.
   (B)   No heavy industrial use may emit more than 30 smoke units per hour,
per stack or smoke excess of Ringelmann No. 2, however, once during any six-
hour period, for soot blowing, process purging and fire cleaning, each stack
may be permitted an additional ten smoke units, and, during that time, it may
emit smoke, up to and including Ringelmann No. 3.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the term RINGELMANN NUMBERS means the
number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that most nearly matches the light-
observing capacity of smoke. The Ringelmann Chart is described in the U.S.
Bureau of Mines Information Circular 6888 or amendments, on which are
illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating smoke density. Smoke
below the density of Ringelmann No. 0 and Ringelmann No. 1 shall be considered
as no smoke.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, SMOKE UNIT means the number obtained
when the smoke density in Ringelmann number is multiplied by the time of
emission in minutes. For the purpose of the calculation, a Ringelmann density
reading shall be made at least once a minute during which it is observed. The
products so computed shall than be added to give the total number of smoke
units observed during the entire observation period.
2-15-2 ODOR.
   No light or general industrial use may release an offensive odor that is
detectable at the lot line.
2-15-3 TOXIC MATERIAL.
   For a light or general industrial use, the emission of toxic or noxious
materials may not produce and concentration at a Residential or Business
District boundary line exceeding the percentage of the threshold limit values
set forth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
2-15-4 GLARE AND HEAT.
   No light or heavy industrial use may cause heat at the lot line so intense
as to cause a public nuisance or hazard. No such use may cause illumination at
or beyond any Residential District boundary in excess of 0.1 footcandle.
   For the purpose of this section, the term FOOTCANDLE means a unit of
illumination at all points that are one foot from a uniform point source of one
candle power.
2-15-5 VIBRATION.
   No light or heavy industrial use may cause continuous earth-borne vibration
that can be measured at the lot line boundary.
2-15-6 NOISE.
   No light or heavy industrial use may produce a sound pressure level that can
be detected beyond the boundary lot line that would create a nuisance for
surrounding area. Noise may be detected by using an sound level meter to
measure decibels.
2-15-7 FIRE HAZARD.
   Solid substance ranging from dry, active burning to intense burning may be
stored, used or manufactured only within a completely enclosed walls and
protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system.
   The storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or materials
which produce flammable vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with
the rules and regulation of the State Fire Marshal’s office, stating that the
plans and specifications for light and heavy industrial use complies with the
rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal, shall accompany the
application for an improvement location permit.
   For the purpose of this section, the term FREE BURNING shall mean a rate of
combustion described by a substance that burns activity and easily supports
combustion, and INTENSE BURNING shall mean a rate of combustion described by a
substance that burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.
2-15-8 DETONATION MATERIAL.
   No activity involving the storage, use or manufacture of materials that
decompose by detonation may be carried on, except in accordance with the rules
and regulation issued by the State Fire Marshal and State Administrative
Building Council. These materials include primary explosives such as lead
azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene, high explosives such as TNT,
RDX, HMX, PETN and PICRIC ACID, propellants and their components, such as
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives,
pyrotechnics and fireworks, such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and
potassium nitrate, blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin,
unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles and ozonides, strong
oxidizing agents such as liquid oxygen, perchlorates, chlorates and hydrogen
peroxide in concentrations greater than 35% and nuclear fuels, fissionable
material and products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium
239.
   Restriction that apply to industrial uses shall apply to general business
uses when used for manufacturing.
2-15-9 STORAGE AREAS.
   All storage areas shall be enclosed with a six-foot fence surrounding the
entire storage areas.
3-1 HOME OCCUPATION.
   Home occupations shall be categorized as follows.
   CLASS A. Home offices which do not involve supplies or client business
visits to the premises or the use of equipment or processes on the premises of
the home occupation which may adversely affect nearby dwelling units or
properties through noise, vibrations, odors, fumes, fire hazard, light glare,
electrical or radio wave interference. CLASS A shall be allowed in all
residential and agriculture districts.
   CLASS B. Home occupations which include limited supplies and clients and
will not cause an adverse affect on the surrounding properties or dwellings
within the district. Examples of CLASS B home occupations shall be one-chair
beauty shops, music lessons, ceramics classes, professional offices, phone
services and similar occupations.
3-1-1 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restriction shall apply to all home occupations and shall be
approved by the Plan Administrator, and an improvement location permit shall be
issued authorizing such use.
   (A)   The home occupation shall be conducted by the people who are residents
of the dwelling only.
   (B)   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the
residential use and shall under no circumstance change the residential
character of the dwelling.
   (C)   The floor area devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 25% of
the floor area of the dwelling unit. However, up to 300 square feet in an
attached or detached garage of the dwelling or an accessory building may be
used for the home occupation in lieu of floor space within the dwelling unit.
Home occupation shall not be authorized in apartments or mobile homes.
   (D)   There shall be no changes in the outside appearance of the premises
other than one non-illuminated sign, not to exceed two square feet. The sign
may be mounted flat against the wall of the building or mounted on a four-inch
by four-inch post located on the premises.
   (E)   All display of products and storage of materials or supplies used in
the home occupation shall be done in enclosed building and space limitations of
paragraph (C) above.
   (F)   No vehicular traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in
greater volumes that would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood,
and any need for parking generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall
be met off the street and on the premises, other than the front yard.
   (G)   The home occupation shall not adversely affect the habitability or
value of the surrounding properties nor alter the essential residential
character of the neighborhood.
   (H)   Any violation of these regulations may result in an automatic
revocation of any home occupation permit in addition to any other remedy for
such violations provided in this ordinance or by law.
   (I)   The issuance of a permit to engage in a home occupation in accordance
with this ordinance shall not be deemed to be a change of zoning nor official
expression of opinion as to the proper zoning for the particular property.
3-2 HOME WORKSHOP.
   The following restriction shall apply to a home workshop.
   (1)   Home workshop shall not be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
to 7:30 a.m.
   (2)   No outside storage of material shall be permitted for home workshop
operations.
3-3 PARKING.
3-3-1 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   The following off-street parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained by the owner, for each building which is hereafter erected or at the
time any structure is enlarged or increased in capacity or at the time the use
of the property is hereafter changed, off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as follows.
   (A)   Each automobile parking space shall be not less than nine feet by 20
feet in area.
   (B)   For any place of assembly without fixed seats at least one parking
space for each 130 square feet of gross floor area thereof.
   (C)   For any auditorium, gymnasium, stadium, church or theater, or any
similar place of assembly, at least one parking space for each six seats based
on maximum seating capacity, including fixed or movable seats.
   (D)   For any automatic car wash, three parking space for each wash lane.
   (E)   For banks, finance institutions, office buildings, professional
buildings, libraries, museums, welfare institutions or similar uses, at least
one parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area thereof.
   (F)   Funeral homes shall have a minimum of 20 parking spaces.
   (G)   For barber shops or beauty shops, at least two parking spaces per
barber or beautician using the shop.
   (H)   For bowling alleys, at least four parking space for each bowling lane.
   (I)   For shopping centers, department stores, super markets, at least one
parking space for each 325 square feet of gross floor area thereof.
   (J)   For commercial retail stores with less than 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area, one parking space for each 400 square feet of gross feet area
thereof.
   (K)   For any eating or drinking establishment or other similar use where
customers are seated and served within a building, one parking space for each
200 square feet of gross floor area thereof.
   (L)   For furniture stores, household appliance stores or mechanical trades
display stores and other similar uses, at least one parking space for each 800
square feet of gross floor area thereof.
   (M)   For high schools, colleges, trade schools, business schools and other
similar uses, one parking space for each seven students enrolled.
   (N)   For hospitals, sanitariums, sanatoriums, convalescent homes or other
similar uses, one parking space for each three beds.
   (O)   For hotels, motels, boarding houses, dormitories, fraternity houses or
other similar uses, one parking space per sleeping room.
   (P)   For launderettes, laundromats, self-service laundries, washateria or
other similar uses, one parking per three washing machines.
   (Q)   For any manufacturing, processing, warehousing, storage or other
similar industrial or commercial establishment not specifically set out herein,
one parking space per three employees, plus sufficient spaces to park all
company owned or leased motor vehicles, semi-tractors and trailers.
   (R)   For a medical clinic or similar use, at least three parking spaces per
doctor or dentist using the facility, plus one parking space per two employees.
   (S)   For mobile home courts, at least two parking spaces per mobile home
space.
   (T)   For each single-family dwelling, two parking spaces per dwelling.
   (U)   For apartments and other similar uses, two parking spaces per unit.
   (V)   For mix uses in the same building or structure, the total requirement
for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various
uses, one use shall not be considered as providing required parking facilities
for the other unless approved by the Building Commissioner.
   (W)   All parking spaces provided pursuant to this ordinance shall be on the
same lot with the building or use, except that the Board, after a public
hearing, may permit the parking spaces to be on any lot within 300 feet of the
building.
   (X)   The distance to any parking space area as herein required shall be
measured between the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the
nearest point of the building of said parking facilities it is to serve.
   (Y)   All parking facility shall have accessible from a public street or
alley.
3-3-2 LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   (A)   All commercial or business uses shall provide and maintain loading and
unloading zones for receiving and shipping of material and merchandise.
   (B)   Loading and unloading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 35 feet
with 14 feet clearance in height. Loading and unloading zones may not be part
of the requirement for off-street parking.
   (C)   In the event the loading and unloading is within 100 feet of a
Residential District or within 25 feet of a resident the loading zone shall be
screen.
   (D)   Loading and unloading may be permitted in the downtown area, provided
that traffic is not obscured more than five minutes and no traffic hazards
exist.
3-3-3 PARKING AREA IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   All land hereafter that is placed in use for off-street parking and
all driveways thereto shall be paved or surfaced with materials and in the
manner which meets such minimum specifications prescribed by the town.
   (B)   All land used for off-street parking shall not use any part of the
street, alley or sidewalk for parking.
   (C)   Any light used to illuminate land used for off-street parking shall be
installed and maintained so as to reflect the light away from residential area
and street.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to apply to any off-
street parking spaces or driveways for single-family dwelling units.
3-4 MOBILE HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOMES.
3-4-1 PERMANENT OCCUPANCY IN R1, R3, LB AND GB DISTRICTS.
   All mobile homes placed on lots other than in a mobile home court shall
conform to the following restrictions:
   (1)   Shall have at least 900 square feet of occupied space and manufactured
after January, 1981;
   (2)   Shall be placed on a permanent under-floor foundation (see Figure 5);
   (3)   The home shall be covered with an exterior material customarily used
on site building residential dwellings, and such material shall extend over the
top of the foundation;
   (4)   The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily used on
site built residential dwelling, such as fiberglass, asphalt or tile, which
shall be installed onto a surface appropriately pitched for the materials used;
   (5)   The home shall be securely anchored which shall consist of a minimum
of eight tie-downs;
   (6)   Shall have wheels removed and tow-in-hitch shall be skirted or
removed;
   (7)   Shall meet the same setbacks requirements as other residential uses
within that district; and
   (8)   Any one adversely affected by these conditions may appeal to the Board
of Zoning Appeals through the proper procedure as outlined in § 2-10-1 of this
ordinance.
3-4-2 TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY IN ANY DISTRICT.
   (1)   A mobile home, travel trailer, work trailer or storage van may be
utilized as a contractors office, watchman’s shelter or tool or equipment
storage on a site and only during the period of construction of improvement
project.
   (2)   A mobile home may be placed on a lot while construction of a dwelling
is in progress if approved by the Building Commissioner, however the mobile
home shall be removed within 30 days from completion of the dwelling or within
eight months whichever is the least.
   (3)   Temporary mobile homes may be smaller than permanent occupancy but no
less than 500 square feet of occupied space as manufactured. All requirement of
this ordinance and other ordinance of the town with respect to setbacks, lot
coverage, water and sanitary disposal shall be met.
3-4-3 HARDSHIP TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY IN ANY DISTRICT.
   (1)   The permit must be obtained from the Building Commissioner/Plan
Administrator. The fee is a one time charge of $5 and must be renewed at the
end of each six months. Renewal will be obtained from the Building Commissioner
at no charge.
   (2)   The permit must be displayed in a conspicuous location on the premises
until a certificate of occupancy is issued.
   (3)   The wheels to mobile home must remain on.
   (4)   There must be a minimum of eight tie-downs attached.
   (5)   The incoming water and water/sewage disposal must be tied into the
existing permanent dwelling on the property.
   (6)   The mobile home must be skirted.
   (7)   The same setback requirements as other residential uses within that
district must be met.
   (8)   When the dependency no longer exists, the mobile home must be removed.
3-5 MOBILE HOME COURTS.
   (A)   When a special exception is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals for
a mobile home court the following shall apply.
      (1)   All plans shall be approved by the State Building and Fire
Commission.
      (2)   There shall be a minimum of 15 feet separation between all mobile
homes, including patios, porches or storage sheds.
      (3)   Each mobile home lot shall have a minimum of 2,500 square feet per
lot.
      (4)   Each unit shall have two parking spaces.
      (5)   All streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have
suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic, satisfactory surface
water and groundwater drainage, uniformly grade and compacted.
      (6)   All entrances and other collector streets within the court shall be
36 feet with street parking and 18 feet with off-street parking.
      (7)   The mobile home court shall be provided with a complete sanitary
sewer system, which shall connect with an existing approved sanitary sewer
outlet or shall be provided with a state approved system.
      (8)   No mobile home within a mobile home court shall have less than 400
square feet of occupied space.
      (9)   No mobile home may be placed on any lot within the mobile home
court until all construction has been completed and a certificate of occupancy
has been issued.
      (10)   Mobile home courts shall be restricted to the same requirements as
other residential areas with the exception to mobile home size.
3-6 PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL.
   The purpose of this section is to provide for regulations regarding uses of
land.
3-6-1 GENERAL.
   It shall be the policy of the town to promote progressive development of
land.
3-6-2 PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE.
3-6-3 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT CONFORMANCE.
3-7 SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever a sidewalk is replaced or new sidewalks constructed, the following
specifications shall apply.
   (A)   All sidewalks shall be constructed of porcelain cement and clean sand
and gravel in proper proportion to make a durable material; it shall be made in
suitable pieces properly joined, of uniform size, not less than four inches in
thickness and laid on a bed of not less than four to six inches of gravel, sand
or cinder sub-base unless sub-grade is well drained.
   (B)   Whenever sidewalks are installed adjoining a street a curb shall be
installed with expansion joint between curb and sidewalk (see Figure 4).
   (C)   It is desirable to have the edge of the sidewalk separate from the
curb by a strip of grass to accommodate light poles, fire hydrants and other
utilities and possible landscaping where it can be safely incorporated.
   (D)   Where there are no curbs, sidewalks shall be set back from the street
at least three feet to five feet from the edge of street (see Figure 4).
   (E)   Sidewalks four feet in width shall be a minimum of four inches thick,
sidewalks six to eight feet in width shall be a minimum of five inches thick,
and sidewalks ten feet or more in width shall be at least six inches thick.
   (F)   There shall be no specifications for private sidewalks.
   (G)   If a sidewalk is offset it shall be well marked with a high yellow
paint.
3-8 VIOLATIONS.
3-8-1 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Commissioner determines that any person, firm,
corporation or municipal corporation is violating or about to violate the Town
of Bunker Hill Zoning Ordinance, a cease and desist order shall be served and a
notice sent by certified mail of said violation.
   (B)   Within ten days from receipt of notice, such offender shall file with
the Town Plan Commission a verified report showing what steps have been or will
be taken to correct said violation.
   (C)   If no report has been received within ten days from receipt, the
Building Commissioner shall instruct the Town Attorney to proceed with any
legal action to abate said violation.
   (D)   The Town Attorney shall request to the courts all attorneys’ fees and
a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300 a day (each 24 hours) for
each day the violation exists after the first ten days subject to the provision
of I.C. 36-1-3-8 or acts amended thereof.
   (E)   Any person or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, who violates any provisions of this ordinance, shall be subject to
the fines and fees as outlined in I.C. 36-1-3-8 or acts amended thereof.
   (F)   The erection, construction, enlargement, conversion, moving or
maintenance of any building which is continued, operated or maintained,
contrary to any of the provisions of this ordinance, is hereby declared to be
in violation of this ordinance and unlawful. The Commission or enforcement
officer may institute a suit for injunction in the county circuit or superior
court to restrain any person from violating the provisions of this ordinance.
The Commission or Enforcement Officer may also institute a suit for mandatory
injunction directing any person, firm or corporation to remove a structure
erected or located in violation of the provision of this ordinance. If the
Commission or Enforcement Officer is successful in its suit, the respondent
shall pay the cost of such action, including reasonable attorneys’ fees to be
allowed by the court. Such action may also be instituted by any property owner
who may be especially damaged by any violation of this ordinance.
   (G)   The remedy provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive
and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
   (H)   Any person starting construction or change of use without an
improvement location permit may be charged a late filing fee of $25 plus permit
fees.
TABLE 1
AUTHORIZED USES
PRIMARY USE DISTRICT
            A1 R1 R3 LB GB FP FF I-1 I-2
TABLE 1
AUTHORIZED USES
PRIMARY USE                    DISTRICT
                               A1 R1 R3 LB GB FP FF I-1 I-2
Agricultural Uses
Commercial green house         X           X     X  X
Farm confinement house         X
Farm equipment sales           S           X        X   X
Farm general                   X  X  X        X  X
Hay, grain & feed store        X           X        X   X
Plant nursery                  X           X        X
Roadside produce sales         X        X  X
Sale barn for livestock        S           S        S   S
Veterinary clinic              S        S  X        X
Amusements and Recreation
Bar & lounge                               X        X
Billiards or pool hall                     X        X
Bowling alley                              X        X
Campground                     S           S  S  S  S
Country club/golf course       S        S  X  S  S  S
Dance hall                                 X        X
Fairground                     S           X        X
Golf driving range             S        X  X  S  S  X
Lodge/private club                      S  X
Marina                         S           X  S  S      X
Miniature golf course          X        X  X     X  X
Museums or art galleries                S  X
Private recreation development S           S        S
Race track (auto)              S           S     S  S   S
Race track (horse)             S           S     S  S
Recreational enterprise        S           S
Seasonal lodge                 X           X     X  X
Shooting range (indoor)                    X        X   X
Shooting range (outdoor)       S           S        S   S
Skating rink                               X        X
Stadium, athletic field        S           X        X
Swim pool (commercial)                     X
Tennis court                   X        X  X  X     X   X
Theater (indoor)                           X        X
Theater (outdoor)              S           X        X
Travel trailer park            S           S     S  S   S
Education Service
Art & music school                      X  X
College                                    X
Elementary school              X        X  X
High school                    X        X  X
Junior college                 X        X  X
Libraries                      X  X  X  X  X
Pre-school                     S        S  S
Trade/business school          X        X  X
Food Sales
Bakery shop                             X  X
Candy, nuts & confectionery             X  X
Catering service                        X  X
Dairy products                          X  X
Delicatessen                            X  X
Dinner theater                             X
Drive-in restaurant                     X  X
Fast food restaurant                    X  X
Grocery store                           X  X
Health food store                       X  X
Ice cream shop                          X  X
Restaurant                                 X        X
Supermarket                                X        X
Government Services
Government buildings                    X  X        X   X
Highway & Street Dept.                     X        X   X
Jail & penal institutions                  S        S   S
License branch                          X  X
Police & fire station          X  X  X  X  X        X   X
Postal service                          X  X        X   X
Public parks                   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X   X
Public utilities               S  S  S  S  S     X  X   X
Industrial Uses
Advertising structure                      X        X   X
Anhyd/ammonia sales            S                        S
Asphalt plant                  S                        X
Auto body shop                             X        X   X
Auto car wash                              X        X   X
Auto hold area                             X        X   X
Auto sales & service                       X        X   X
Auto truck sales                           X        X   X
Cemetery or crematory          S
Cold storage locker                        X        X   X
Comm. livestock breed          X
Commercial parking lot                     X        X   X
Contractor storage yard        S           S            X
Explosive manuf. or storage                             S
Fuel and oil dealer            X                    X   X
Ice plant                                           X   X
Industrial park                                         S
Junk yard                                               S
Laundry plant                              X        X   X
Linen supply                                        X   X
Liquefied petroleum storage                             X
Mineral extraction             S                        S
Mobile home court              S           S
Motorcycle sale & service                  X        X   X
Oil well                       S              S  S      S
Parking garage                             X        X   X
Plan unit developments         S           S        S   S
Private landfills              S                        S
Ready mix plant                S           S        S   X
Recycling plants               S                        S
Sanitary transfer station      S                        S
Sewage disposal plant          S                        S
Shopping center                            X        X   X
Slaughter house                S                        S
Truck rental                               X        X   X
Truck sales & service                      S        X   X
Truck terminal                             S            X
Warehouse storage                          X        X   X
Warehouse storage grain                    X        X   X
Welding shop                                        X   X
Wholesale produce term.        S           S        X   X
Wrecker service                            X        X   X
Medical Services
Ambulance service              X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X   X
Blood bank                                 X        X
Clinics                                 X  X        X   X
Convalescent home                    S  S  X
Doctor’s office                       X  X        X
Eye clinic                              X  X        X
Hospital                       S  S     X  X        X
Medical & dental labs                   X  X
Miscellaneous Services
Barber shop                                X  X
Beauty shop                                X  X
Coin-operated laundry                      X  X
Electrical repair shop                     X        X   X
Equipment rental                           X        X   X
Funeral parlor or mortuary     X        X  X
Kennel                         S        S  S        X   X
Printer or copy shop                       X        X   X
Radio or television repair              X  X        X   X
Reducing or health spa                  X  X
Roadside stand                          X  X        X
Shoe repair                             X  X        X
Upholstery shop                            X        X   X
Watch, jewelry repair                   X  X        X
Non-profit Organizations
Business association                    X  X
Charitable organization                 X  X
Church or temple               X  X  X  X  X     X  X
Civic, social center                    X  X
Labor Union Hall                        X  X     X  X
Political organization                  X  X     X
Religious organization                  X  X
YMCA & YWCA                                X
Residential
Apartment                               X  X
Bed & breakfast                      X  X  X
Boarding house                       X  X  X
Community home                       X  X  X
Condominium                    X  X  X  X  X
Dwelling, duplex                     X  X  X
Dwelling, multi-family         X  X  X  X  X
Dwelling, single-family              X  X  X
Fraternity house                     X  X  X
Halfway house                        X  X  X
Hotel or motel                 S     S  S  X
Mobile home                    X  X  X  X  X
Nursing home                         S  X  X
Orphanage home                       S  X  X
Senior citizen home                  X  X  X
Personal Services
Accounting, auditing              HO HO HO X  X
Auctioneer office                 HO HO HO X  X
Bank & finance service                     X  X         X
Bookkeeping                       HO HO HO X  X
Bondsman                          HO HO HO X  X
Dance studios                              X  X
Employment service                         X  X
Insurance broker                           X  X
Interior decorator                         X  X
Law office                                 X  X
Music lessons                              X  X
Photo studios                              X  X
Professional office               HO HO HO X  X
Stockbroker office                         X  X
Travel agent                               X  X
Retail Business
Adult book store                           S
Antique & secondhand store              X  X        X
Appliance shop                             X        X
Bait & gun shop                            X
Bicycle shop                            X  X        X
Boat sales                                 X        X
Books & stationary                      X  X
Camera & photo shop                     X  X
Clothing store                          X  X
Department store                           X
Drug store                              X  X
Electric supplies                          X        X
Fireworks business                         X        X
Florist shop                            X  X
Furniture shop                             X        X
Gift & novelty shop                     X  X
Hardware store                             X        X
Jewelry shop                            X  X
Liquor store                               X
Lumber & building material                 X        X   X
Mobile home sales                          X        X
Monument sales                             X        X
Office supplies                            X
Pawn shop                                  X
Paint & wallpaper store                    X        X
Pet shop                                S  X        X
Plumbing, heating & air                    X        X   X
Shoe & leather shop                     X  X
Sporting goods                          X  X
Variety shop                            X  X
Wholesale warehouse                        X        X   X
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1135.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1137.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1139.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1141.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1143.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1145.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1147.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/97ff7efdfd8f20e79e116b737805c5055b08598a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1149.jpg]
CHAPTER 155: GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
Section
   
155.01   Growth Management Plan adopted by reference
§ 155.01 GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Growth Management Plan of the Town of Bunker Hill, Indiana, is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
(Prior Code, § 154.01) (Ord. passed 9-16-1997)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   BONDS
      
IV.   FRANCHISES
      
V.   VACATIONS
      
VI.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Agreement for electric energy for power and light for
1             5-6-1964    operating a municipal water pumping system between
                          the Town of Bunker Hill and Public Service Company of
                          Indiana, Inc.
                          Agreement for engineering services between the Town
1             3-1-1967    of Bunker Hill and Richard M. Stoeppelwerth d/b/
                          a Stoeppelwerth and Associates.
                          Agreement between the Town of Bunker Hill and Pipe
4             5-20-1974   Creek Township for the establishment and maintenance
                          of a park and recreation facility.
                          Agreement between the Town of Bunker Hill and VW
—           9-12-2025   Waste Services d/b/a On Point Waste Services for
                          trash pickup services.
                         
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Annexing a number of tracts of land located as a part
4             11-12-1996  of the northwest corner of Section 32, Township 26
                          North, Range 4 East.
 
TABLE III: BONDS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
2             7-2-1959    Authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds in the
                          amount of $32,000.
3             11-20-1959  Amending Ord. 2, passed 7-2-1959 regarding the
                          issuance of revenue bonds.
1             7-8-1960    Amending Ord. 2, passed 7-2-1959 regarding the
                          issuance of revenue bonds.
4             3-21-1967   Issuance of sewerage revenue bonds in the amount of
                          $392,790.
7             7-5-1967    Amending Ord. 4, passed 3-21-1967 regarding the
                          issuance of revenue bonds.
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
3             8-4-1965    Granting a franchise to the Northern Indiana Public
                          Service Company.
3             4-14-1993   Renewing the franchise agreement with Cardinal
                          Communications, Inc. for a period of 15 years.
 
TABLE V: VACATIONS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. Date Passed Description
No.
Res. 55   5-31-1910   Vacating a certain part of the present Main Court
                      between Elm Street and Main Street.
                      Vacating that part of West Street extending north from
83        5-1-1924    Pearl Street to the right-of-way of the Pennsylvania
                      Railroad System.
3         4-22-1985   Vacating a certain alley in Cain’s Addition.
4         7-1-1993    Vacating a public alley in the Kroutter Addition.
9         8-30-1993   Vacating two sections of a public alley in the Duckwall
                      and Myers Addition.
                      Vacating a platted alley of 12 feet in width which runs
12        10-21-1997  east and west in the town, the north side of which abuts
                      Lots 52, 53, 54 and 55; the south side of which abuts
                      Lots 56, 57, 58 and 59.
2         5-22-2008   Vacating a public alley adjacent to a part of the
                      southerly end of the west edge of Duckwall’s Addition.
4         5-10-2011   Vacating two certain east/west alleys, undeveloped
                      Fourth Street and a north/south alley.
6         9-27-2011   Vacating two east/west alleys and one north/south alley.
5, 2016   6-13-2016   Vacating the undeveloped section of North Main Street.
6, 2019   4-15-2019   Vacating a public alley in Meeks Addition, more commonly
                      known as 167 South West Street.
 
TABLE VI: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
2             7-6-1994    Rezoning eight lots in the Highland Addition from
                          Industrial to R1 Residential.
                          Rezoning a parcel of land located west of the
3             9-14-1994   abandoned north elevator and south of New Main Court
                          (East Main Street) from Industrial to R1 Residential.
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Section Code Section
I.C. Section         Code Section
1-1-1-5              10.04
1-1-1-7              10.12
1-1-1-8              10.06
1-1-4-5              10.05
1-1-5-1              10.11
1-1-6-1              10.08
3-5-2.1-82           33.02
4-2-6-16             33.02
5-2-1-9              32.22
5-2-1-9(f)           32.02
5-2-8-2              34.19
5-3-1                Ch. 153, App. A, 3-3;
                     Ch. 153, App. A, 3-4
                     Ch. 152, App. A, 1-5;
5-3-1-2              Ch. 152, App. A, 1-7;
                     Ch. 152, App. A, 1-8
5-3-1-4              Ch. 152, App. A, 1-5
5-11-1-27            34.35
5-11-13-1            33.02
5-14-1.5             30.04
5-14-1.5-1 et seq.   Ch. 154, App. A, 1-7-2
5-14-1.5-3           Ch. 153, App. A, 3-3
5-14-1.5-3.1         30.08
5-14-1.5-6.1         30.03
5-22                 33.02;
                     34.02
5-22 et seq.         34.02
5-22-10              34.02
6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A)  34.20
8-1.5-3-9            52.15
8-22-3-1             34.20
8-22-3-2             34.20
8-23-5               34.20
8-23-30              34.20
9-21-1-2             70.01
9-21-1-2(c)          70.02
9-21-4-3(b)          70.05
9-21-5-6             71.01
9-21-5-6(a)(1)       71.01
9-21-5-6(a)(4)       71.01
9-21-9-3             73.19
9-21-11-14           73.99
9-21-16-7            72.01
9-22-1               90.05
9-22-1-1             90.02
9-22-1-3             90.08
9-22-1-4             90.03
9-22-1-7             90.04
9-22-1-27            90.07
9-22-1-30            90.07
9-22-1-32            90.06
9-25-4               73.38
12-7-2-28.2          Ch. 154, App. A, 1-13
12-7-2-28.4          Ch. 154, App. A, 1-13
12-7-2-28.6          Ch. 154, App. A, 1-13
12-7-2-28.8          Ch. 154, App. A, 1-13
12-7-2-29            Ch. 154, App. A, 1-13
14-8-2-5.7           73.35
14-8-2-185           73.35
22-9-1-4 et seq.     96.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.     96.01
22-9.5-2-2           96.02
22-9.5-2-3           96.02
22-9.5-2-4           96.02
22-9.5-2-8           96.02
22-9.5-2-9           96.02
22-9.5-2-11          96.02
22-9.5-2-13          96.02
22-9.5-3             96.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.     96.09
22-9.5-4-8           96.10
22-9.5-5             96.02
22-9.5-5-1           96.03
22-9.5-6             96.02;
                     96.10
22-15-4              150.04
31-37-3              130.01
32-30-6-6            92.02
32-30-6-7            92.01
32-30-6-8            92.03;
                     92.99
33-19-8-3 (Repealed) 34.18
33-36-3 (Repealed)   35.03
35-33-1-1            31.21
35-45-1-2            130.02
35-45-1-3            130.03
35-46-3-1            91.03;
                     91.99
35-46-3-7            91.99
35-50                130.99
36-1-3-4             Ch. 153, App. A, 1-4
36-1-3-8             Ch. 153, App. A, 1-14;
                     Ch. 154, App. A, 3-8-1
36-1-3-8(a)(10)      10.99;
                     50.99
36-1-7-7             31.21
36-1-12              33.02
36-1-20.2            33.02
36-4-6-9             31.01
36-5-1-10.1          30.01
36-5-2-3             30.01
36-5-2-4.1           30.01
36-5-2-8             31.01
36-5-7-3             31.02
36-5-7-4             31.02;
                     31.21
36-7-1-2             Ch. 153, App. A, 2-2
36-7-3-10            Ch. 153, App. A, 1-12
36-7-4-203           Ch. 154, App. A, 1-10-1
36-7-4-205           Ch. 154, App. A, 1-8
                     Ch. 153, App. A, 1-4;
36-7-4-700           Ch. 153, App. A, 2-2;
                     Ch. 153, App. A, Forms
36-7-4-701           Ch. 153, App. A, 2-2
36-7-4-708           Ch. 153, App. A, 3-3
36-7-4-711           Ch. 153, App. A, 1-12
36-7-4-901           Ch. 154, App. A, 1-10-1
36-7-4-902           Ch. 154, App. A, 1-10-1
36-7-4-918.4         Ch. 154, App. A, 1-10-2;
                     Ch. 154, App. A, 2-8
                     Ch. 152, App. A, 1-2;
36-7-4-1500          Ch. 152, App. A, 1-5;
                     Ch. 152, App. A, 1-10
                     151.02;
36-7-9               151.07;
                     151.09
36-7-9-2             151.03
36-7-9-4             151.06;
                     151.07
36-7-9-5             151.05
36-7-9-5(a)(2)       151.07
36-7-9-14            151.09
36-7-9-28            151.99
36-7-10.1-3(b)(1)    94.09
36-7-10.1-3(b)(2)    94.01
36-7-10.1-3(b)(3)    94.02
36-7-10.1-3(b)(4)    94.03
36-7-10.1-3(b)(5)    94.04
36-7-10.1-3(b)(6)    94.05
36-7-10.1-3(b)(7)    94.08
36-7-10.1-5          94.07
36-9-16-1 et seq.    34.15
36-10-3-4            93.25
36-10-3-5            93.26
36-10-3-6            93.26
36-10-3-8            93.27
                     
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2024 Code Section
32.01              32.01
32.02              32.02
32.03              32.03
32.04              32.04
32.05              32.05
32.06              32.06
32.07              32.07
34.01              34.01
34.10              34.15
70.01              70.01
70.02              70.02
70.03              70.03
70.04              70.04
70.05              70.05
70.06              70.06
70.07              70.07
70.08              70.08
70.99              70.99
71.01              71.01
71.02              71.02
71.03              71.03
71.04              71.04
72.01              72.01
72.02              72.02
72.03              72.03
72.04              72.04
72.05              72.05
72.06              72.06
73.01              73.01
73.02              73.02
73.99              73.99
Ch. 74, Schd. I    Ch. 74, Schd. I
Ch. 74, Schd. II   Ch. 74, Schd. I
Ch. 75, Schd. I    Ch. 75, Schd. I
90.01              90.01
90.02              90.02
90.03              90.03
90.04              90.04
90.05              90.05
90.06              90.06
90.07              90.07
90.08              90.08
91.01              91.01
91.02              91.02
91.03              91.03
91.04              91.04
91.05              91.05
91.06              91.06
91.07              91.07
91.08              91.08
91.09              91.09
91.20              91.20
91.21              91.21
91.22              91.22
91.23              91.23
91.24              91.24
91.25              91.25
91.26              91.26
91.27              91.27
91.28              91.28
91.29              91.29
91.30              91.30
91.31              91.31
91.32              91.32
91.99              91.99
92.01              92.01
92.02              92.02
92.03              92.03
92.04              92.04
92.99              92.99
93.01              93.01
93.09              93.08
93.10              93.09
93.11              93.10
93.14              93.13
93.26              93.26
93.28              93.27
94.01              94.01
94.02              94.02
94.03              94.03
94.04              94.04
94.05              94.05
94.06              94.06
94.07              94.07
94.08              94.08
94.09              94.09
110.01             110.01
110.02             110.02
130.01             130.01
130.02             130.02
130.03             130.03
131.99             131.99
150.01             150.01
150.02             150.02
150.03             150.03
150.04             150.04
150.05             150.05
150.06             150.06
150.07             150.07
150.08             150.08
150.09             150.09
150.10             150.10
150.11             150.11
150.12             150.12
150.13             150.13
150.14             150.14
150.15             150.15
150.16             150.16
150.17             150.17
150.18             150.18
150.99             150.99
151.01             152.01
152.01             153.01
153.01             154.01
154.01             155.01
SO Table I         TSO Table I
SO Table II        TSO Table II
SO Table III       TSO Table III
SO Table IV        TSO Table IV
SO Table V         TSO Table V
SO Table VI        TSO Table VI
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed  Code Section
55       5-31-1910      TSO Table V
1, 2009  7-1-2009       94.10
7, 2009  12-30-2009     34.03
01-2014  2-24-2014      33.04
1, 2017  7-10-2017      33.05
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Ord. No.       Date Passed  Code Section
                              131.01;
                              131.02;
                              131.15;
3, 1998        - -            131.16;
                              131.30—
                              131.34;
                              131.99
                              132.01—
1, 2003        - -            132.03;
                              132.99
                              53.01;
5, 2012        - -            53.02;
                              53.99
83             5-1-1924       TSO Table V
110            3-6-1940       110.01;
                              110.02
2              7-2-1959       TSO Table III
3              11-20-1959     TSO Table III
1              7-8-1960       TSO Table III
1              5-6-1964       TSO Table I
3              8-4-1965       TSO Table IV
5              8-4-1965       34.15
1              3-1-1967       TSO Table I
4              3-21-1967      TSO Table III
7              7-5-1967       TSO Table III
4              5-20-1974      TSO Table I
3              4-22-1985      TSO Table V
3              4-14-1993      TSO Table IV
4              7-1-1993       TSO Table V
9              8-30-1993      TSO Table V
2              7-6-1994       TSO Table VI
3              9-14-1994      TSO Table VI
4              11-12-1996     TSO Table II
13             - -1997        Ch. 74, Sched. I;
                              Ch. 75, Sched. I
3              9-3-1997       94.01—
                              94.09
                              150.01—
4              9-10-1997      150.18;
                              150.99
-              9-16-1997      155.01
                              92.01—
5              9-16-1997      92.04;
                              92.99
6              9-16-1997      130.01
                              91.01—
7              9-16-1997      91.09;
                              91.99
                              91.20—
8              9-16-1997      91.32;
                              91.99
                              152.01;
-              10-21-1997     153.01;
                              154.01
9              10-21-1997     90.01—
                              90.08
12             10-21-1997     TSO Table V
                              93.01;
                              93.08—
10             11-5-1997      93.10;
                              93.13;
                              93.26;
                              93.27
                              150.01—
-              11-18-1997     150.18;
                              150.99
11             11-18-1997     32.01—
                              32.07
                              70.01—
                              70.08;
                              70.99;
                              71.01;
                              71.02;
16             11-18-1997     72.01—
                              72.06;
                              73.01;
                              73.02;
                              73.99;
                              Ch. 74, Sched. I;
                              Ch. 75, Sched. I
3              2-4-1998       131.99
                              154.01;
                              Ch. 154, Appendix A, 1-13;
-              7-21-1998      Ch. 154, Appendix A, 2-12-1;
                              Ch. 154, Appendix A, 2-12-2;
                              Ch. 154, Appendix A, 2-12-4;
                              Ch. 154, Appendix A, 2-12-7
4, 1998        9-2-1998       33.01
1              4-13-2004      34.01
                              151.01—
1, 2000        5-11-2004      151.09;
                              151.99
3, 2004        6-8-2004       34.17
6, 2004        8-10-2004      35.09
7, 2004        8-10-2004      34.18
8, 2004        8-10-2004      34.19
                              71.03;
13             12-11-2007     71.04;
                              Ch. 74, Sched. I;
                              Ch. 74, Sched. II
2              5-22-2008      TSO Table V
2              9-8-2009       130.01—
                              130.03
                              93.02—
                              93.07;
                              93.11—
10, 2004       4-13-2010      93.13;
                              93.25;
                              93.26;
                              93.99
                              92.01—
5              8-10-2010      92.04;
                              92.99
4              1-11-2011      150.09;
                              150.17
4              5-10-2011      TSO Table V
6              9-27-2011      TSO Table V
14, 2012       6- -2012       33.02
6, 1997        - -2015        130.01—
                              130.03
1, 2009        - -2015        34.16
4, 2015        7-8-2015       91.45
                              50.01;
                              50.02;
1, 2010        1-11-2016      50.15—
                              50.22;
                              50.24;
                              50.99
1, 2016        4-11-2016      111.01—
                              111.09
1, 2005        6-13-2016      32.22
2, 2016        6-13-2016      34.35—
                              34.39
3, 2016        6-13-2016      34.20
5, 2004        6-13-2016      31.15—
                              31.21
5, 2016        6-13-2016      TSO Table V
3, 2005        6-12-2017      34.02
4-2017         6-22-2017      95.01
1-2006         7-10-2017      35.01—
                              35.08
                              30.01—
2-2017         7-10-2017      30.08;
                              31.01—
                              31.04
3              7-10-2017      94.04
                              73.35—
3, 2017        7-10-2017      73.44;
                              73.99
7, 2017        11-13-2017     34.21
                              52.01—
                              52.03;
3, 2018        4-9-2018       52.15—
                              52.29;
                              52.40—
                              52.46
8, 2018        12-10-2018     33.03
1, 2019        1-14-2019      96.01—
                              96.10
6, 2019        4-15-2019      TSO Table V
                              51.01—
                              51.03;
                              51.15—
4, 2018        5-21-2019      51.21;
                              51.35—
                              51.44;
                              51.55—
                              51.61
                              73.15—
8, 2012        7-12-2021      73.23;
                              73.99
2, 2005        12-12-2022     34.50—
                              34.57
3, 2022        12-12-2022     32.21
4, 2022        12-12-2022     32.20
5, 2022        12-27-2022     32.35—
                              32.38
1, 2018        5-8-2023       53.03
1, 2018        4-22-2024      53.03
                              51.03—
                              51.03;
                              51.15—
Am. 2, 4, 2018 8-11-2025      51.21;
                              51.35—
                              51.44;
                              51.55—
                              51.61
—            9-12-2025      TSO Table I
                             
 
