CITY OF CHARLESTOWN, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025; and
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service,
2024 Acts, Pamphlet No. 3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.17   General appeals procedure
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “City of Charleston
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances,” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or subsection.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
(I.C. 1-1-1-5)
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Common Council.
      COUNCIL. The Common Council.
      COUNTY. Clark County, Indiana.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(I.C. 1-1-4-5)
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section is severable.
If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) above with respect to that
chapter, subchapter or section.
(I.C. 1-1-1-8)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Council
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
(I.C. 1-1-6-1)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section or
law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law is
not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section shall
not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under
the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The section
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of sustaining any
proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or
liability.
(I.C. 1-1-5-1)
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
Statutory reference:
   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:
(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(I.C. 36-5-2-2)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 19xx and subsequently amended, the previous
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(19xx Code, §     
).”
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.17 GENERAL APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   Unless another method for the appeal of penalties or enforcement actions
imposed for violating a city ordinance is specified in a city ordinance, state
statute or administrative regulation, the following process for appeals of
penalties or enforcement actions imposed by city ordinances shall apply.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGGRIEVED PARTY. Any person subject to penalties or enforcement actions
taken by a city official or city enforcement officer for violation of a city
ordinance.
      BOARD. The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety.
      CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
      CITY OFFICIAL. An employee, officer, elected official, appointed
representative or other person having been vested with authority to act on
behalf of the city in an official capacity.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A person designated by a city official to conduct or
assist with inspections, as well as with the enforcement of laws, ordinances
and regulations in the city.
      PERSON. Means an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
legal representative, trustee, receiver or any other group or legal entity
capable of owning property.
   (B)   Appeal procedures.
      (1)   Persons who may appeal. Any person subject to penalties or
enforcement actions taken by a city official or city enforcement officer for
violation of a city ordinance (an “aggrieved party”) may appeal that
determination or action.
      (2)   Initiating an appeal.
         (a)   Any aggrieved party wishing to initiate an appeal must do so by
delivering a written notice of an appeal within ten business days of the time
that proper notice of any penalty or enforcement action is provided (in any
permissible way) by a city official or enforcement officer. The notice of an
appeal shall be delivered to the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer at 304 Main
Cross, Charlestown, Indiana 47111 during regular business hours.
         (b)   A notice of appeal may be sent by U.S. mail, certified mail,
return receipt requested, at the risk of the aggrieved party.
      (3)   Contents of notice of appeal.
         (a)   The notice of an appeal provided for above must be in writing
and shall be presented in at least ten point type or legible printing stating,
at a minimum, the following information:
            1.   The name of the aggrieved party;
            2.   The residence address of the aggrieved party;
            3.   The mailing address to which notices and decisions can be
mailed to the aggrieved party via the U.S. Postal Service;
            4.   The specific action or determination of the city official or
enforcement officer from which an appeal is being taken;
            5.   The date(s) that the action or determination of the city
official or enforcement officer described above occurred;
            6.   The location where the violation of a city ordinance is
alleged to have occurred;
            7.   Each reason that the aggrieved party disputes, disagrees with
or challenges the determination of the city official or enforcement officer;
            8.   Whether the aggrieved party is challenging the fact an
ordinance was violated, is requesting a reduction or waiver of a fine or
cessation of an enforcement action, or both;
            9.   The name and address of all persons the aggrieved party
intends to present as witnesses at the appeal hearing; and
            10.   A description of any documents or written proof the aggrieved
party intends to present to support the aggrieved party’s appeal.
         (b)   The form of notices should be liberally construed by the Board
as to form. A person pursuing an appeal can present the required information in
either enumerated paragraphs or in a written narrative format.
   (C)   Issues on appeal. The issues on appeal are limited to:
      (1)   Whether the aggrieved party is the party identified by the city
official or enforcement officer;
      (2)   Whether that regulated behavior or condition took place within the
city;
      (3)   Whether the aggrieved party upon which a penalty or enforcement
action was imposed was provided with adequate notice of violation of city
ordinances;
      (4)   Whether a preponderance of evidence exists to justify a finding
that a violation of a city ordinance occurred;
      (5)   Whether fines or other enforcement actions that were imposed were
reasonable under the circumstances; and
      (6)   Such other issues as may be necessary to conduct a just appeal.
   (D)   Appeal hearing. An appeal of any action taken by the enforcement
officer or city official shall be by a hearing before the Board, and would
ideally be conducted within 30 calendar days after the filing of the notice of
appeal, or as soon thereafter as convenient and practical under the
circumstances. The aggrieved party shall be sent a notice of the date, time and
place of the appeal hearing at least five days in advance of the hearing date.
   (E)   Presentation of case. The aggrieved party can choose to rely on the
information contained in the aggrieved party’s notice of appeal filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer or, alternatively, will be provided with a reasonable
opportunity to testify, present testimony November 8, 2022 by witnesses, cross-
examine adverse witnesses and present evidence relevant to the issues on appeal
at the hearing. The city official or enforcement officer shall also have those
rights.
   (F)   Appeal of Board action. Decisions of the Board may be appealed to the
County Circuit Court within 30 calendar days of notice of a decision being sent
by the Board to the aggrieved party. A party wishing to appeal the Board’s
final decision shall do so to the County Circuit Court in the City of
Jeffersonville, Indiana. Such an appeal is to determine if the Board’s record
contains evidence sufficient to support the Board’s determinations and is not
to be a trial de novo.
(Ord. 2018-OR-24, passed 12-3-2018)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent violations,
except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and parking.
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COMMON COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
34.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
CHAPTER 30: COMMON COUNCIL
Section
   
30.01   Council districts
   
30.02   Rules of conduct
§ 30.01 COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-5, there shall be a total of five Council
members on the Common Council, with four legislative districts. One
Councilperson shall be elected from voters in each of the Legislative Districts
and the fifth shall be elected “at large” by all voters in the city. This
results in each voter being able to vote for two Council members.
   (B)   The four legislative districts shall be designated as districts A, B,
C, and D, rather than 1, 2, 3, and 4, in order to avoid confusing legislative
districts with precinct numbers, to wit:
      (1)   District A, previously referred to as District 1, will follow the
precinct boundaries for Precinct 1. This district will have to total calculated
population of 2,043 residents.
      (2)   District B, previously referred to as District 2, will include all
of Precinct 2 but with the addition of three more contiguous areas, since
Precinct 2 only has a population of 983 residents. These areas will be: 1) the
portion of Precinct 3 that is north of Highway 403, with approximately 580
residents; 2) the Pleasant Ridge neighborhood from Precinct 3 of approximately
367 residents; and 3) the small portion of Precinct 6 that is within city
boundaries north of Highway 403 of approximately 75 residents. This results in
District B having a total calculated population of 2,005 residents.
      (3)   District C, previously referred to as District 3, will include the
remainder of Precinct 3 (approximately 692 residents), the remainder of
Precinct 6 within city boundaries west of Bethany Rd. (approximately 1,095
residents), and Precinct 4 minus an area referred to as the Parkwood Trace
Apartments (we have referred to it as the Parkwood Trace Apartments but it also
includes several census blocks surrounding the Parkwood Trace apartments,
having approximately 413 residents). This would result in District C having a
total calculated population of 2,200 residents.
      (4)   District D, previously referred to as District 4, includes all of
Precinct 5 (approximately 1,809 residents), the Skippers Ridge development (no
current residents), and the Parkwood Trace apartments (approximately 405 total
residents), for a total calculated population of 2,214 residents.
(Ord. 2005-OR-22, passed 12-5-2005; Ord. 2012-OR-15, passed 11-5-2012; Ord.
2022-OR-19, passed 10-3-2022)
§ 30.02 RULES OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   Rules of order.
      (1)   The Common Council specifies these rules as its rules of conduct of
its own meetings.
      (2)   If these rules do not address a given situation, Roberts Rules of
Order shall be the rule of default.
   (B)   Agenda. The Common Council shall adopt an agenda format that it may
modify from time to time. It adopts, at this time, the agenda format attached
to the ordinance from which this section was codified as “Exhibit A.”
   (C)   Chair of meeting. The Mayor of the city shall preside at and conduct
all Common Council meetings, pursuant to I.C. 34-4-6-8 (I.C. 34-4-6-8 has been
repealed). In the absence of the Mayor, the President of the Common Council
shall preside.
   (D)   Special meetings and workshops. A special meeting of the Common
Council shall be any meeting that is not held at regularly scheduled times on
the first and third Mondays of the month.
   (E)   Calling special meetings. The Mayor, the President pro tempore of the
Common Council or any three elected Common Council members shall have the
authority to call a special meeting pursuant to I.C. 5-14-1.5 et seq. Written
notice of such a meeting shall be served on the Clerk-Treasurer and published
in accordance with law. Each member of the Common Council, the Mayor and the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be personally notified of a special meeting, at least 48
hours in advance of such a meeting, by telephone, if possible, or by leaving a
written notice at the home address of the official, if telephone contact is not
practical.
   (F)   Workshop meetings. A workshop meeting is a meeting that is not a
regular meeting and that is held solely for the purpose of education, budgeting
or legal advice from the Common Council’s attorney. No official action, as
defined by I.C. 5-14-1.5-2(d), may take place at such a workshop.
   (G)   Executive sessions. Any meeting where litigation, personnel matters or
education in regard to legal issues is allowed as an executive session must be
held in accordance with I.C. 5-14-1.5-6.1.
   (H)   Investigative meetings. If at a regular or special meeting, actions
pursuant to I.C. 34-4-6-21 (legislative investigative hearings) (I.C. 34-4-6-21
has been repealed) are authorized, the Common Council shall schedule said
investigative hearings with notice from the Clerk-Treasurer. The President of
the Common Council shall moderate the hearings with assistance from individuals
designated to offer technical assistance or legal advice.
   (I)   Sponsoring ordinances and resolutions. The Mayor or members of the
Common Council may sponsor legislation to be considered by the Common Council.
Each agenda where action is expected to be taken upon such legislation shall
indicate who sponsors the legislation.
   (J)   Numbering and distribution of legislation. The Clerk-Treasurer shall
assign a number to each ordinance or resolution when it is filed at the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer and shall provide copies of all new ordinances and
resolutions, as well as an agenda of upcoming business, to all members of the
Common Council, the Common Council’s attorney, the City Attorney and the Mayor,
at least seven days prior to the meeting where the first official action is to
take place.
   (K)   Introduction of ordinances. All proposed ordinances or resolutions
that authorize the appropriation or expenditure of city funds shall be filed
with the Clerk-Treasurer at least ten days prior to the first reading or public
introduction of the matter for official action by the Common Council. The
proposed legislation shall be added as an item on the next agenda, or at a
subsequent meeting, if requested by the sponsor of the legislation.
   (L)   Procedure for adoption of legislation. At the meeting where the first
introduction of the legislation shall take place, the introduction shall be in
the following format.
      (1)   Readings required. An ordinance shall require three readings before
passage, except as otherwise provided by these rules. A resolution may be
passed on one reading.
      (2)   First reading. If three of the five Common Council persons vote in
favor of the matter, it may proceed to future agendas for a second and third
reading. (If the number of Council members increases to seven, then four must
vote in favor on the first reading.)
      (3)   Second and third readings. The action on second and third readings
may be combined for final action if said action occurs at least 30 days after
the passage of the first reading. Otherwise, a second and third reading must
occur at separate meetings.
      (4)   Suspension of the rules and passage on the first reading. For a
matter to pass at the first meeting where it is introduced, a motion must be
passed by unanimous vote of the Common Council to suspend these rules and adopt
the ordinance on all three readings. The motion to pass the ordinance must then
pass by a two-thirds majority vote.
   (M)   Public hearings. At any meeting where a public hearing is required to
be held. The following procedures shall be followed.
      (1)   Written comments shall be accepted and preserved as part of the
official records, provided the name and address of the submitter are included
and verified.
      (2)   An announcement shall be made by the presiding official to the
effect that only persons who sign up to speak will be recognized and allowed to
give comment.
      (3)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall provide a sign-in sheet for any person
desiring to comment to sign up to speak. This list shall require the person
commenting to indicate his or her name and address and shall be completed prior
to allowing the person to be recognized and comment on the issue at hand.
      (4)   Assistance to sign up shall be given to anyone that cannot write.
This list shall be preserved as part of the public record.
      (5)   Each person wishing to comment shall be allowed up to two minutes
to make comment. The Clerk-Treasurer shall serve as timekeeper.
   (N)   Appointments. Sixty days prior to the expiration the term of any
appointment of any position made by the Council, the Clerk-Treasurer shall list
that appointment on the agenda for discussion. At the following meeting the
appointment shall be listed on the agenda for action.
   (O)   Amendments to rules. These rules may be amended from time to time by a
majority of the Council voting in a regular or special meeting. Any amendment
to the rules must be in writing and introduced 30 days in advance of the
meeting where official action will be required.
   (P)   Interpretation of rules. If any rule conflicts with existing state
statutes, the state statute controls. However, the two shall be read in harmony
and reconciled, if possible.
(Ord. 2003-OR-11, passed 3-3-2003)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
31.01   Compensation of elected officials
   
31.02   Compensation of city employees
   
31.03   Development Coordinator
   
31.04   Building Inspector
§ 31.01 COMPENSATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   (A)   (1)   The salary of the Mayor of the city for the year 2025 shall be
paid as follows: From the General Fund at the rate of $53,335.68 per year and
from the Sewer Fund at a rate of $17,359.68 per year for a total annual
compensation of $70,695.36 to be paid on a monthly basis.
      (2)   The compensation of the Mayor will also include the PERT
contribution that is statutorily required and medical, dental, vision, and life
benefits in the amount determined by the Mayor's enrollment up to $31,234.
   (B)   (1)   The salary of the Clerk-Treasurer of the city for the year 2025
shall be paid as follows: From the General Fund at the rate of $48,062.28 per
year and from the Sewer Fund at a rate of $17,997.96 for a total annual
compensation of $66,060.24 to be paid on a monthly basis.
      (2)   The compensation of the Clerk-Treasurer will also include the PERF
contribution that is statutorily required and medical, dental, vision, and life
benefits in the amount determined by the Clerk-Treasurer’s enrollment up to
$31,234.
   (C)   The salary of each of the five Common Council members of the city
payable out of the General Fund for the year 2025 shall be at the rate of
$7,494.28 per year to be paid on a quarterly basis. In addition, the President
of the Common Council will receive additional compensation of $2,000 per year
paid on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   Elected officials may receive a wellness incentive in an amount
determined by the city’s medical insurance provider and a medical insurance
rebate as allowed by the medical loss ratio provision of the Affordable Care
Act.
   (E)   Elected officials shall receive no additional salary increases in
subsequent years above the average amount given to all hourly employees. This
amount will not include any incentives or bonus amounts given to an hourly
employee.
(Ord. 2021-OR-23, passed 10-4-2021; Ord. 2022-OR-20, passed 10-3-2022; Ord.
2023-OR-15, passed 10-2-2023; Ord. 2024-OR-12, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   Effective January 1, 2025, the maximum allowable compensation of all city
employee positions shall be increased to the maximum weekly salaries or hourly
rates listed below. Actual 2025 salary increases for all current or future city
employees shall be subject to approval of the Mayor or Clerk-Treasurer
regarding their respective employees.
 
Office Weekly Salary Hourly
Office                                                                           Weekly    Hourly
                                                                                 Salary
City services:
   Director of City Services                                                  $1,171.13
   Supervisor                                                                 $1,171.13 $28.38
   Laborer                                                                              $22.60
   Lead laborer                                                                         $25.04
   Part-time laborer                                                                    $20
Clerk-Treasurer’s office:
   Deputy Clerk-Treasurer                                                               $29
   First-class deputy                                                                   $27.34
   Second-class deputy                                                                  $22.34
Economic development:
   Director of Economic Development                                           $1,096.16
   Multimedia assistant                                                                 $13
   Multimedia Director                                                        $1,128
Mayor’s office:
   Mayor’s assistant                                                        $920.37   $23.01
   Reception                                                                            $18
Parks:
   Director of Parks                                                          $1,171
   Park laborers                                                                        $20
   Program Coordinator                                                        $1,128
Planning and zoning:
   Director of Planning and Zoning                                            $1,135
   Building Inspector/code enforcement                                                  $26.01
MS4 Incentives:
   Director                                                                   $192.31
   Management                                                                 $57.69
   Administration                                                             $38.46
   Operations                                                                 $38.46
Police Department:
   Assistant Chief/Lt. Colonel (includes rank pay of 25% first-class patroler $1,673.08
salary)
   Captain (includes rank pay of 15% first-class patroler salary)             $1,557.69
   Chief/Colonel (includes rank pay of 30% first-class patroler salary)       $1,730.77
   Corporal (includes rank pay of 2.5% first-class patroler salary)           $1,413.46
   Evidence technician                                                        $1,158.95
   Lieutenant (includes rank pay of 10% first-class patroler salary)          $1,500
   Major (includes rank pay of 20% first-class patroler salary)               $1,615.38
   Patroler                                                                   $1,384.62
   Police Secretary                                                                     $23.49
   Sergeant (includes rank pay of 5% first-class patroler salary)             $1,442.31
The numbers above represent the maximum longevity of 20%
   Supplemental compensation:
      K-9 ($5,000 annually, paid on a weekly basis)                        $96.16
      SWAT ($2,000 annually, paid on a weekly basis)                       $38.47
      Field Training Off. ($2,000 annually, paid on a weekly basis)        $38.47
Redevelopment:
   Laborer                                                                              $20.29
   Lead laborer                                                                         $21.46
Utility billing office:
   Utilities clerk                                                                      $25.22
   Utility billing supervisor                                                           $23.05
Wastewater:
   Auxiliary support                                                          $25 per meeting
   Board member                                                               $150 per meeting
   Collection system supervisor                                                         $30.95
   Laborer                                                                              $25.73
   Lead laborer                                                                         $27.86
   Operation manager                                                          $1,386.38
   Plant operator                                                             $2,249.32
   Part-time laborer                                                                    $20
   Secretary/Treasurer                                                        $150 per meeting
   Stenographer                                                               $150 per meeting
*An employee who is on call for a consecutive seven-day period shall receive $50 additional
compensation for the period.
Notes to Table:
Employees may receive a wellness incentive in an amount determined by the city’s medical
insurance provider and a medical insurance rebate as allowed by the medical loss ratio provision
of the Affordable Care Act.
Incentive bonus up to $1,500
Uniform allowance up to $1,400
 
(Ord. 2022-OR-05, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-OR-10, passed 8-1-2022; Ord. 2022-
OR-16, passed 10- 3-2022; Ord. 2023-OR-04, passed 2-6-2023; Ord. 2023-OR-14,
passed 10-2-2023; Ord. 2024-OR-02, passed 3-4-2024; Ord. 2024-OR-05, passed 7-
2-2024; Ord. 2024-OR-11, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 31.03 DEVELOPMENT COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The position of Development Coordinator is hereby established. The
individual serving as Development Coordinator shall be responsible for the
following duties:
      (1)   Helping establish policy relating to the development of land in the
city and around the city affecting the citizens of the city;
      (2)   Preparing applications for financial subsidies and grants to help
in the development of the city;
      (3)   Participating in confidential negotiations relating to development
activities in and around the city area;
      (4)   Following the directives of the Mayor of the city in activities
relating to development in and around the city; and
      (5)   By assisting the city-owned utilities in planning for and providing
services to new customers in and around the city.
   (B)   The person filling this position shall not be entitled to exercise any
executive authority on behalf of the Mayor or otherwise.
   (C)   The annual salary for the Development Coordinator for the city shall
be $30,000, plus the other benefits shared by all common employees of the city.
(Ord. 2000-OR-04, passed 5-1-2000)
§ 31.04 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   The salary of the Building Inspector of the city is paid in increments
associated with a full-time city employee as determined by the office of the
City Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2000-OR-08, passed 8-21-2000)
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Department of Redevelopment
   
32.02   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals
   
32.03   Advisory Plan Commission
   
32.04   Advisory Parks Council
   
32.05   Department of Economic Development
   
32.06   Police Merit Board
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established in the government of the city, in
addition to existing executive departments, a Department of Redevelopment, to
be known as the city’s Department of Redevelopment, which is under the control
of a board of five members to be known as the city’s Redevelopment Commission.
      (2)   The Mayor of the city must appoint three members, and the Council
must appoint two members, of the city’s Redevelopment Commission.
      (3)   The duly appointed members must meet within 30 days after their
appointment at a time and place designated by the Mayor, for the purpose of
organization.
   (B)   The city’s Redevelopment Authority is hereby created as a separate
body corporate and politic and as an instrumentality of the city to exercise
all power granted to the authority under and pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14.5-1 et
seq., as well as other powers and authority that the Common Council might
hereafter grant unto it.
(Ord. 2004-OR-06, passed 4-19-2004; Ord. 2016-OR-13, passed 7-5-2016)
§ 32.02 ADVISORY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-901 et seq. the existing Board of Zoning Appeals is
abolished and a new Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals is established effective
June 1, 2004 under the following statutory guidelines.
   (A)   The city’s Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five
members as follows:
      (1)   The municipal fiscal body (Common Council) shall appoint one
citizen member who must not be a member of the Plan Commission and may not hold
other elective or appointive office in municipal, county or state government.
      (2)   The municipal executive (Mayor) shall appoint three citizen
members, of whom one must be a member of the Plan Commission and two must not
be members of the Plan Commission, and none of them may hold other elective or
appointive office in municipal, county or state government.
      (3)   The Plan Commission shall appoint one citizen member of the Plan
Commission other than the same citizen member of the Plan Commission appointed
to the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals by the Mayor under division (A)(2)
above.
   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall certify in writing the members and their
terms of office for the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals members appointed by
the Common Council to the Common Council and the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (C)   The Mayor shall certify, in writing, the Mayor’s appointments and
terms of office for the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals members appointed by
the Mayor to the Common Council and the Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (D)   The Advisory Plan Commission shall certify its appointment and term of
office to the Mayor, the Common Council and the Advisory Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (E)   The new members of the city’s Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be appointed to the following Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals slots designated
as member positions one through five for the initial terms as noted.
Thereafter, their appointments and terms shall comply with I.C. 36-7-4-906 et
seq.
      (1)   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals member one shall be appointed by
the Common Council for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday,
January 3, 2005.
      (2)   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals member two shall be appointed by
the Advisory Plan Commission for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through
Monday, January 2, 2006.
      (3)   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals member three shall be appointed by
the Mayor for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday, January 1,
2007.
      (4)   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals member four shall be appointed by
the Mayor for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday, January 7,
2008.
      (5)   Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals member five shall be appointed by
the Mayor for an initial term from June l, 2004 through Monday, January 7,
2008.
(Ord. 2004-OR-07, passed 5-20-2004)
§ 32.03 ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-202 et seq., the existing Advisory Plan
Commission is abolished, and a new Advisory Plan Commission is established
effective June 1, 2004 under the following statutory guidelines.
      (1)   The City’s Advisory Plan Commission shall consist of seven members
as follows.
         (a)   The municipal legislative body (Common Council) shall appoint
three persons, who must be elected or appointed municipal officials or
employees in the municipal government, as members.
         (b)   The municipal executive (Mayor) shall appoint four citizen
members, of whom no more than two may be of the same political party.
      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall certify, in writing, the members and
their terms of office for the Advisory Plan Commission members appointed by the
Common Council to the Common Council and the Advisory Plan Commission.
      (3)   The Mayor shall certify, in writing, the Mayor’s appointments and
terms of office for the Advisory Plan Commission members appointed by the Mayor
to the Common Council and the Advisory Plan Commission.
      (4)   The new members of the city’s Advisory Plan Commission shall be
appointed to the following Advisory Plan Commission slots designated as member
positions one through seven for the initial terms as noted. Thereafter their
appointments and terms shall comply with I.C. 36-7-4-218 et seq.
         (a)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number one shall be appointed by
the Common Council and the term is pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-217 and I.C. 36-7-4-
218 et seq.
         (b)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number two shall be appointed by
the Common Council and the term is pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-217 and I.C. 36-7-4-
218 et seq.
         (c)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number three shall be appointed
by the Common Council and the term is pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-217 and I.C. 36-
7-4-218 et seq.
         (d)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number four shall be appointed
by the Mayor for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday, January 1,
2007.
         (e)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number five shall be appointed
by the Mayor for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday, January 1,
2007.
         (f)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number six shall be appointed by
the Mayor for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday, January 7,
2008.
         (g)   Advisory Plan Commission Member number seven shall be appointed
by the Mayor for an initial term from June 1, 2004 through Monday, January 7,
2008.
(Ord. 2004-OR-08, passed 5-20-2004)
§ 32.04 ADVISORY PARKS COUNCIL.
   An Advisory Parks Council is established, consisting of seven members; two
nominated by and serving at the pleasure of the Common Council; one nominated
by and serving at the pleasure of the City Clerk-Treasurer, which may be the
Clerk-Treasurer; and four nominated by and serving at the pleasure of the
Mayor. Members of the Advisory Parks Council shall be residents, landowners or
business owners of the city. This Council shall work cooperatively with the
office of the Mayor and meet no less than bi-monthly.
(Ord. 2008-OR-04, passed 3-7-2008)
§ 32.05 DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   The Department and the Commission controlling it are hereby created and
granted all powers and duties of such Department and such Commission as are set
forth in I.C. 36-7-11.9 and 36-7-12.
(Ord. 2004-OR-19, passed 9-17-2004)
§ 32.06 POLICE MERIT BOARD.
   (A)   A five-member Merit Board for the Police Merit Commission shall be
established pursuant to the terms of I.C. 36-8-3.5-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Merit Commission shall adopt rules governing the items referred to
in I.C. 36-8-3.5-1 et seq., including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Applications and hiring;
      (2)   Conduct of police officers;
      (3)   Performance ratings and evaluations of officers;
      (4)   Promotions;
      (5)   Discipline of police officers;
      (6)   Demotion of police officers;
      (7)   Dismissal of police officers from the Department;
      (8)   Due process for all of the above; and
      (9)   Any appropriate matter added to I.C. 36-8-3.5-1 et seq. by future
legislation or any federal or state case law which may govern Police
Departments and their administration.
   (C)   Each commissioner shall serve a four-year term of office with no
limitations of terms other than the appointment by the respective appointive
body.
   (D)   The Mayor of the city shall appoint two members (during the initial
appointment one shall serve two years and one shall serve four years) who must
be of different political parties.
   (E)   The Police Department shall by its members elect two members (during
the initial appointment one shall serve two years and one shall serve four
years) who must be of different political parties and not active members of any
Police or Fire Department.
   (F)   The Common Council of the city shall appoint one member for a four-
year term.
   (G)   Within 60 days of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section,
the Public Works and Safety Board shall give at least three weeks written
notice to all active members of the Police Department that a meeting will be
held to approve or reject the merit system.
   (H)   The notice shall be personally delivered to all active police officers
and accompanied by a copy of this section and a full copy of I.C. 36-8-3.5-1 et
seq. at least one week prior to the meeting.
   (I)   At the meeting, each active police officer shall have the right of
secret written ballot.
   (J)   Any active police officer on duty for the public safety at the time of
the meting shall have an opportunity to cast his or her vote prior to the
meeting.
   (K)   The merit system shall take effect January 1 following the vote and
Commissioners shall be appointed by March 1 of that year.
   (L)   The Commission shall elect a President, Vice President and Secretary
and shall record all proceedings.
   (M)   The minutes of all meetings shall be kept in written form and signed
by the members present and voting.
   (N)   This section hereby incorporates all other aspects and components of
I.C. 36-8-3.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-OR-15, passed 12-3-2007)
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Employee handbook
   
33.02   Adopting internal control standards
   
33.03   Nepotism prohibited
   
33.04   Purchasing; reverse auction procedure
Drugs and Alcohol Testing Policy
   
33.15   Definitions
   
33.16   Purpose
   
33.17   Tests covered by this policy
   
33.18   Types of drugs to be tested
   
33.19   Employees subject to this policy
   
33.20   Participation requirements
   
33.21   Prohibited behavior
   
33.22   Administration
   
33.23   Test and collection
   
33.24   Test refusal
   
33.25   Violations
   
33.26   Employee re-qualification
   
33.27   Conviction of crime
Minimum Standards for Employment
   
33.40   Application and definitions
   
33.41   Management authority and responsibility
   
33.42   Employee responsibility
   
33.43   Hiring and promotion
   
33.44   Regular work schedules
   
33.45   Holidays
   
33.46   Annual leave
   
33.47   Excused days with pay; personal leave; sick leave
   
33.48   Military leave
   
33.49   Funeral leave
   
33.50   Maternity leave
   
33.51   Court and jury duty leave
   
33.52   Excused leave without pay
   
33.53   Travel reimbursement
   
33.54   Disciplinary and dismissal actions
   
33.55   Resignations; layoffs; reduction in force
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK.
   (A)   The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety shall have exclusive
responsibility for and shall adopt an employee handbook setting forth the
general rights, responsibilities and benefits provided to all city employee.
   (B)   The Common Council shall retain exclusive authority for the fixing of
compensation for city employees by way of a salary ordinance per I.C. 36-4-7-3.
   (C)   The Common Council shall be notified prior to the adoption of an
employee policy handbook by the Safety Board and shall further be immediately
notified upon the adoption of any amendments thereto.
(Ord. 2001-OR-04, passed 3-5-2001)
§ 33.02 ADOPTING INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The internal controls standards and procedures developed by the
state’s Board of Accounts are hereby adopted the city.
   (B)   The personnel training materials developed by the state’s Board of
Accounts are hereby adopted and all personnel shall be required to receive
training according to those materials.
(Ord. 2017-OR-03, passed 3-6-2017)
§ 33.03 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The provisions of the state’s House Enrolled Act 1005 (2012)
prohibiting nepotism in the hiring of employees codified in I.C. 36-1-20.2 are
adopted as the minimum standards for hiring new employees of the city on and
after July 1, 2012.
   (B)   The provisions of the state’s House Enrolled Act 1005 (2012)
prohibiting or the letting of certain contracts, codified in I.C. 36-1-20-1 et
seq. are adopted as the minimum standards for eligibility for contracting with
the city on and after July 1, 2012.
   (C)   To the extent that any ordinance, policy or practice of the city
conflicts with the requirements of I.C. 36-1-20.2-1 et seq. or 36-1-20-1 et
seq., that ordinance, policy or practice of the city shall be rescinded or
discontinued.
(Ord. 2012-OR-08, passed 7-2-2012)
§ 33.04 PURCHASING; REVERSE AUCTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Use of third party to conduct reverse auctions.
      (1)   The purchasing agency is authorized to use a third party to conduct
reverse auctions on behalf of the city for the purchase of supplies. The
purchasing agent is authorized to select the third party that will conduct the
reverse auction, who must have prior experience in conducting reverse auctions
on behalf of local governments.
      (2)   The purchasing agent shall obtain a copy of the procedures
established by the third party to conduct the reverse auction on behalf of the
city and present those procedures to the Board of Accounts for adoption and
inclusion in its applicable procedures prior, to participating in a reverse
auction conducted by the third party.
   (B)   Transmission of notices, solicitations and specifications.
      (1)   Notices.
         (a)   The Board shall give notice of a reverse auction by:
            1.   Publishing notice of the invitation to bid two times, at least
one week apart, with the second publication at least seven days before the
commencement of the reverse auction in accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-5, 5-22-18
and 5-3-1;
            2.   Posting the invitation to bid on the city’s website; and
            3.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf
of the purchasing agency, by posting or permitting to have posted, the
invitation to bid on the third party’s website.
         (b)   Posting the invitation to bid on a website requires compliance
with I.C. 5-22-3-4.
         (c)   The Board may also give notice of a reverse auction by
electronic mail or faxes.
      (2)   Solicitations and specifications. The Board shall transmit
solicitations and specifications:
         (a)   In accordance with the invitation to bid, identifying a
designated location where, during regular business hours, the invitation to bid
may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained;
         (b)   By making them available on the city’s website or providing
information on the website identifying a designated location where, during
regular business hours, the invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or
copies may be obtained; and
         (c)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf of
the purchasing agency, making them available on the third party’s website.
Posting the invitation to bid on a website requires compliance with I.C. 5-22-
3-4.
   (C)   Pre-qualification of bidders.
      (1)   All bidders desiring to participate in a reverse auction must be
pre-qualified by submitting documentation to ensure that they meet the
specifications identified by the buyer as to the types of supplies to be
offered for purchase no later than 24 hours prior to the time for the
commencement of the reverse auction, as provided in the invitation to bid.
      (2)   The pre-qualification process shall be used to determine whether
the bidder is responsible and responsive, as provided in I.C. 5-22-7.5-1 et
seq. (“the Act”), whether there is any bidding or purchasing preference or
preferences applicable to a particular bidder, and whether the bidder has
submitted evidence of financial responsibility, as required by the purchasing
agency. In order to assist the Board in pre-qualifying bidders, the bidder must
submit, in accordance with the invitation to bid, all documentation and other
information relating to the supplies being offered for purchase, except for
price, and any other information that may assist the Board in making its
determination. Such documentation will include evidence of financial
responsibility or a certified check, as specified in the invitation to bid.
      (3)   In determining whether a bidder is responsible, the purchasing
agent may consider the following factors:
         (a)   The ability and capacity of the bidder to provide the supplies;
         (b)   The integrity, character and reputation of the bidder; and
         (c)   The competency and experience of the bidder.
      (4)   In determining whether a bidder is responsive, a purchasing agent
may consider the following factors:
         (a)   Whether the bidder has submitted information demonstrating that
its offer for supplies conforms in all material respects to the specifications;
         (b)   Whether the bidder has submitted documentation that complies
specifically with the solicitation and the instructions to bidders; and
         (c)   Whether the bidder has complied with all applicable statutes,
ordinances, resolutions or rules pertaining to the award of a public contract.
      (5)   The determination that a bidder is not responsive or not
responsible must be made in writing by the Board.
      (6)   Pre-qualification of bidders must be done by the purchasing agent
or an authorized representative of the purchasing agency in the presence of one
or more witnesses and must be completed no later than 24 hours prior to the
commencement of the reverse auction bidding period.
      (7)   The Board shall notify any bidder determined not to be pre-
qualified in writing, by facsimile or electronic mail (as requested by the
bidder) and shall exclude the bidder so notified from participation in the
reverse auction.
      (8)   The Board’s determination that a bidder is not pre-qualified is
limited to the reverse auction for which the request for pre-qualification was
received.
   (D)   Contents of invitation to bid. The invitation to bid must include all
of the following:
      (1)   A purchase description;
      (2)   A statement that bids will be accepted by means of a reverse
auction process;
      (3)   A description of all contractual terms and conditions that apply to
the purchase, including the requirement of a non-collusion affirmation by the
successful bidder;
      (4)   The criteria that will be used by the purchasing agency to pre-
qualify bidders to determine whether a bidder is responsive and responsible;
      (5)   The information and other documentation required to be submitted
for pre-qualification, including a certified check or other evidence of
financial responsibility;
      (6)   The location and manner in which bidders must submit information
for pre-qualification, the deadline for submission of such information and the
deadline by which the Board will determine whether a bidder is pre-qualified;
      (7)   The location, including any website, at which the invitation to bid
may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained, including, if a third
party is conduction the reverse auction, the procedures to be used by the third
party to conduction the reverse auction;
      (8)   A statement as to whether a third party is conducting the reverse
auction on behalf of the city;
      (9)   A statement that offers submitted by pre-qualified bidders will
only be received through the city’s secure website; or if a third party is
conducting the reverse auction on behalf of the city, through the third party’s
secure website;
      (10)   The date and time at which the reverse auction bidding period will
commence and the approximate length of time for which the reverse auction will
be conducted, allowing automatic extensions based upon resulting competitive
activity;
      (11)   The deadline by which pre-qualified bidders must submit an initial
price to a secure website for the purposes of establishing a bidder’s
participation and initial ranking at the commencement of the reverse auction
bidding period;
      (12)   A statement explaining that the bidding period during which the
reverse auction is conducted may be extended based upon competitive activity,
at pre-determined periods determined by the purchasing agency;
      (13)   A statement identifying the circumstances under which the reverse
auction may be postponed, paused, rescheduled or cancelled;
      (14)   The place and approximate time at which, following the close of
the bidding period, offers will be reviewed publicly by an authorized
representative of the purchasing agency in the presence of one or more
witnesses;
      (15)   A statement that the third party conducting the auction on behalf
of the city, will collect a service charge from the successful bidder for its
participation in the reverse auction;
      (16)   The name, address and telephone number of a representative of the
purchasing agency who can provide additional information related to the reverse
auction;
      (17)   If a third party is conducting the auction on behalf of the city,
the name, address and telephone number of a representative of the third party
who can provide additional information related to the reverse auction,
including the mandatory training required of all pre-qualified bidders as a
condition of participating in the reverse auction; and
      (18)   The conditions under which the invitation to bid may be cancelled
or postponed in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-1 et seq.
   (E)   Receiving offers.
      (1)   The Board shall receive offers only from bidders who have been pre-
qualified, in accordance with the invitation to bid.
      (2)   If a third party conducts the reverse auction on behalf of the
city, all pre-qualified bidders must receive training provided by the third
party in order to participate in the reverse auction.
      (3)   Prior to receiving electronic offers, the Board must find that: The
invitation for bid for the reverse auction indicates the procedure for
transmitting the electronic offer; and the electronic system on which the offer
is received has a security feature that protects the content of an electronic
offer with the same degree of protection as the content of an offer that is not
transmitted by electronic means.
      (4)   In accordance with the invitation to bid, offers submitted by pre-
qualified bidders will only be received:
         (a)   Through the city’s secure website; or
         (b)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf of
the city, through the third party’s secure website.
   (F)   Reverse auction bidding period.
      (1)   For each reverse auction, the purchasing agent must establish an
initial bidding period during which bidders may submit prices for which the
supplies being offered may be purchased. The initial bidding period shall not
be less than one hour. The purchasing agent may automatically extend the
reverse auction bidding period for additional pre-determined periods based upon
competitive activity.
      (2)   During the bidding period for the reverse auction, information
available for public display is limited to the ranking, price and name of
bidders of each price bid relative to all other prices bid.
      (3)   The dollar amounts of the prices bid by bidders shall not be
disclosed to the bidders until the close of the bidding period.
      (4)   All information received, obtained or retained during a reverse
auction remains confidential and may not be disclosed until after the close of
the reverse auction bidding period.
   (G)   Opening offers.
      (1)   In accordance with the Act, offers will be deemed to be opened when
a computer generated record of the information contained in all bids received
from pre-qualified responsive and responsible bidders is reviewed publicly at
the close of the bidding period for the reverse auction in the presence of one
or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids
by the purchasing agency (or an authorized representative of the purchasing
agency, including the purchasing agent).
      (2)   The purchasing agency and any of its agents or employees are
prohibited from displaying for public viewing the amount of each initial bid
price until the close of the initial bidding period for the reverse auction.
The purchasing agency is required to protect the identity of a bidder and the
prices which have been submitted by each bidder until the initial bid has been
placed and until the reverse auction begins, at which time bids will be deemed
opened.
   (H)   Contract award.
      (1)   In accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-8, the purchasing agency must award
a contract for the purchase of supplies with reasonable promptness by written
notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.
      (2)   If the contract is not awarded to the lowest bidder, the purchasing
agent must indicate the reasons for the award in writing.
      (3)   As provided in the invitation to bid, the third party conducting
the reverse auction may impose a fee as a term of the contract for a purchase
made by means of a reverse auction.
   (I)   Purchase orders and payments.
      (1)   A fully executed purchase order must be filed with the City Clerk-
Treasurer within 30 days after the award of a contract of a purchase of
supplies through a reverse auction in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-5.
      (2)   Payments for supplies purchased in a reverse auction shall be made
only after receiving properly submitted claims in accordance with I.C. 36-4-8-
1 et seq.
   (J)   Documentation.
      (1)   The purchasing agency shall be required to maintain adequate
documentation regarding its reverse auctions so that the transactions may be
audited as provided by law.
      (2)   The purchasing agency shall maintain an indexed file of
specifications prepared by or under the authority of its purchasing agents for
each reverse auction in which the purchasing agency participates.
(Ord. 2004-OR-22, passed 10-21-2004)
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL TESTING POLICY
§ 33.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCIDENT. An incident that involves fatality, an injury requiring treatment
away from the scene or the towing of a vehicle from the scene.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. Percentage, by weight, of alcohol in the blood.
References to alcohol in blood (e.g., 0.08) mean ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION in the
blood of the employee.
   CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
   DOT. United States Department of Transportation.
   FHWA. Federal Highway Administration.
   FMLA. The Federal Family and Medical Leave Act, being 29 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et
seq.
   INTOXICATION. The state of being under the influence of alcohol, controlled
substances or any substance or a combination of substances, such that a
person’s ability to function is impaired to the degree that the person could,
while performing any responsibility which could be required as an employee of
the city, pose a danger to himself or herself, or any other person or any
property.
   SAP. Substance abuse professional.
   SAFETY DIRECTOR. The person appointed by the Mayor of the city as Safety
Director.
   SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITION.
      (1)   All current job positions in the city which include or which are
directly or indirectly is related to or which affect one or more of the
following:
         (a)   Law enforcement, including but not limited to law enforcement
officers, employees who dispatch, schedule or provide clerical or other
services for law enforcement officers;
         (b)   Utility services, including but not limited to connection to or
repair of these services;
         (c)   All positions which may require the operation of any power
equipment or which involve traffic safety or the placement, replacement or
repair of street signage;
         (d)   Any job position which may require the operation of any
electrical, diesel or gasoline powered appliances or equipment;
         (e)   Positions which require an employee to operate and or maintain a
commercial motor vehicle and/or hold a commercial driver’s license (CDL) or
which may require an employee to operate any motor vehicle; and
         (f)   Positions where an employee has supervisory responsibility.
      (2)   This term also means all employees hired or rehired or granted
raises in pay after the passage of the ordinance codified in this subchapter.
If an elected official or other employee voluntarily agrees to participate in
this program the city shall bear the expense to the elected official or
employee in taking the tests described herein.
   UTILITY SERVICES. Water, sanitary sewage or trash and rubbish removal.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.16 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to address the inappropriate use and
possession of alcohol, controlled substances, physician-prescribed medications
and over-the-counter medications and other mind altering substances by all new
city employees and all present city employees in positions that have been
classified as safety sensitive. It shall be the policy of this city to comply
with and abide by all laws and regulations that have been established by the
U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)
and state’s Department of Transportation (INDOT).
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.17 TESTS COVERED BY THIS POLICY.
   The city will require the following tests for all safety-sensitive
employees:
   (A)   Pre-employment controlled substance testing;
   (B)   Random controlled substance and alcohol testing;
   (C)   Post-accident controlled substance and alcohol testing;
   (D)   Reasonable suspicion controlled substance and alcohol testing;
   (E)   Return to duty/follow up controlled substance and alcohol testing; and
   (F)   Baseline testing of all employees covered by this subchapter and
policy.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.18 TYPES OF DRUGS TO BE TESTED.
   (A)   The city may test for any substance capable of causing intoxication of
an employee.
   (B)   In addition, this testing program will test for alcohol and at least
the five types of drugs listed below:
      (1)   Marijuana;
      (2)   Cocaine;
      (3)   Opiates;
      (4)   Amphetamines; and
      (5)   Phencyclidine (PCP).
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.19 EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO THIS POLICY.
   (A)   Safety sensitive positions. In compliance with DOT/FHWA regulations,
positions within the city that require employees to operate commercial motor
vehicles and/or hold a commercial driver’s license are automatically classified
as SAFETY SENSITIVE. In addition, all employees, who hold safety sensitive
positions, as defined above, are subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Applicability. In addition to complying with DOT/FHWA regulations,
city employees are subject to this subchapter and policy while:
      (1)   On-duty, while either on or off city property;
      (2)   In the workplace or on city property, while either on or off-duty;
      (3)   Acting as a representative of the city; or
      (4)   Operating city-owned vehicles or equipment.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.20 PARTICIPATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   This subchapter requires the cooperation of all employees. All
employees are required to abide by the terms of this subchapter as it affects
them, which ordinance shall be known as the city’s drug and alcohol policy.
   (B)   Participation in all aspects of this policy and testing program,
including preemployment, random, post accident, reasonable suspicion and return
to duty/follow-up testing are a condition of employment or continued employment
with the city.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.21 PROHIBITED BEHAVIOR.
   Any employees who take part in prohibited behavior shall be considered
“unfit for duty” and immediately removed from their jobs or duties and subject
to disciplinary action as specified in the section of the policy titled:
Section VIII: Consequences of Violating Policy, or as otherwise allowed.
   (A)   Possession. It is the policy of the city to strictly prohibit the
possession of alcohol or controlled substances by employees while on duty or as
described in §
33.19 of this code, unless legally prescribed by a physician. Alcohol may only
be in possession of such an employee if it is manifested and transported as
part of shipment authorized by the Mayor.
   (B)   Use of alcohol and/or controlled substance.
      (1)   Alcohol. It is the policy of the city to strictly prohibit the use
of alcohol by all employees while on duty. No employee shall report to duty,
remain on duty or perform any function while having an alcohol concentration of
0.02% or greater. No employee shall use alcohol within four hours of reporting
to duty.
      (2)   Illegal controlled substances.
         (a)   It is the policy of the city to strictly prohibit the use of
illegal controlled substances and legal controlled substances used in an
illegal manner. No employee shall report on duty or perform any function when
that employee:
            1.   Possesses illegal controlled substances;
            2.   Has used illegal controlled substances and is under the
influence of legal or illegal controlled substances; or
            3.   Has tested positive for illegal controlled substances or who
has been intoxicated, at work, by virtue of the use of legal controlled
substances, without first successfully completing the employee re-qualification
procedures, as outlined in §
33.26 of this code.
         (b)   Use of a prescription drug that has not been prescribed to the
employee, or in any way other than as prescribed will be regarded as illegal
use of a controlled substance and will be subject to the same provisions and
penalties as use of illegal controlled substances.
   (C)   Prescribed medication and over-the-counter medications.
      (1)   Physician-prescribed and over-the-counter medications can also
affect employee behavior, judgment and performance. It is the policy of the
city to require all employees, whether or not in safety sensitive positions to:
         (a)   Inform their supervisor when using physician-prescribed and/or
over-the-counter medications which can cause intoxication; and
         (b)   Secure documentation from a licensed physician, or pharmacist in
the case of over-the-counter medication, advising that the substance in use
does not adversely affect the employee’s ability to perform the functions of
his or her job as specified by his or her job description.
      (2)   An employee who is temporarily using medication that does not allow
him or her to safely perform his or her job and provides documentation stating
such from a licensed physician, will be reassigned to a safe duty, or if none
is available, then may be required to take leave using any available sick
leave, FMLA or other applicable programs. If use of medication extends beyond
sick leave, the FMLA and any other available leave options, then reasonable
accommodations will be made. If the city is unable to make reasonable
accommodation, the employee may be terminated or given leave without benefits
or pay.
      (3)   An employee who is required to use medication that does not allow
him or her to perform job functions for an indefinite period that exceeds
beyond all available time under sick leave, the FMLA and any other available
leave options must provide documentation stating such from a licensed
physician. That employee may be reassigned to safe duties, or, if none,
terminated or given leave without benefits or pay
      (4)   Using over-the-counter medication in a way other than as directed
so as to cause intoxication will be regarded as a substance abuse matter and
shall be subject to the same provisions and penalties as illegal use of
controlled substances.
   (D)   Post-accident use. No employee who is or may be required to submit a
post-accident alcohol test shall use alcohol for eight hours, or until tested
for alcohol content, whichever occurs first. No employee who is or may be
required to submit to a post-accident controlled substance test shall use any
controlled substances, except as prescribed by a licensed physician, for 32
hours or until tested for controlled substance use, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   Refusal to submit to a required alcohol or controlled substance test.
No employee shall refuse to submit to an alcohol or controlled substance test
if ordered to do so pursuant to this subchapter.
   (F)   Supervisor responsibility. No supervisor having knowledge that an
employee has violated any part of this subchapter (policy) shall permit the
employee to continue to perform any job and/or function until the violation is
cured. Failure of a supervisor to do so will be cause for employee discipline
which may include oral or written reprimand, suspension with or without pay or
termination of employment, as the case may warrant.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.22 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Pre-employment testing.
      (1)   No employee shall be hired without being subjected to and passing a
controlled substance test, by a testing agency selected by the city’s Board of
Public Works.
      (2)   At the discretion of the city, an applicant may not need to submit
to a controlled substance test if that applicant can verify that he or she has
participated in a valid DOT drug testing program within the proceeding 30 days
and while participating in that program, was either tested within the past 30
days. The city can require an applicant to submit to a pre-employment
controlled substance test even if that applicant can verify that he or she has
previously participated in a drug testing program.
      (3)   All individuals applying for a transfer or new position with the
city must sign a release of information as a condition of employment. This
release is intended to permit the city to contact previous employers and
receive a disclosure all information concerning the employee, including but not
limited to alcohol/controlled substance testing results and insurance and
employment records.
      (4)   The city will incur all costs of one pre-employment controlled
substance test.
   (B)   Post-accident testing.
      (1)   Any employee involved in an accident, which does or could result
in:
         (a)   The loss of human life;
         (b)   The issuance of a citation under state or local law for a
violation arising from the accident; or
         (c)   An injury to any person which could require medical treatment,
either at the scene or away from the scene of the accident shall be subject to
be given a post-accident alcohol and/or controlled substance tests. The city
can order an employee to submit to post-accident tests after any accident.
Post-accident testing for circumstances other than listed above can be ordered
on a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the Safety Director or his or her
designee. Employees must contact their immediate supervisor, the Safety
Director and/or any other designated city or department official as soon as
possible following any accident.
      (2)   Any employee who is involved in an accident and may be subject to a
post-accident test shall remain readily available for such testing. That
employee must make his or her whereabouts known to his or her immediate
supervisor and the Safety Director, for a period of eight hours following the
accident. Failure to do so will be regarded as a refusal to take a post-
accident test, if one may be required.
   (C)   Post-accident alcohol tests.
      (1)   In the case that an accident requires the ordering of a post-
accident alcohol test, the immediate supervisor and the Safety Director should
make every effort to arrange for the administration of an alcohol test within
two hours of the time of the accident. If the test is not administered within
two hours of the accident, then written record shall be made stating the type
of test, triggering event(s), reason(s) the test could not be completed and
where the test would have occurred if given.
      (2)   If the test is not administered within eight hours of the time of
the accident, then his or her immediate supervisor and the Safety Director
should cease attempts to have the alcohol test administered and make written
record stating the type of test, triggering event, reasons the tests could not
be complete and where the test would have occurred if given.
      (3)   An employee who is or may be required to take a post-accident
alcohol test shall not use alcohol for eight hours following the time of the
accident, or until after the post-accident alcohol test has been administered,
whichever is first.
   (D)   Post-accident controlled substance tests.
      (1)   In the case that an accident requires the ordering of a post-
accident controlled substance test, the employee’s immediate supervisor and the
Safety Director shall make every effort to arrange for the administration of a
controlled substance test within 32 hours of the time of the accident.
      (2)   If the test is not administered within 32 hours of the accident,
the immediate supervisor and the Safety Director should cease attempts to have
the controlled substance test administered and make written record stating the
type of test, triggering event, reasons the test could not be completed and
where the test would have occurred.
      (3)   An employee who is or may be required to take a post-accident
controlled substance test shall not use controlled substances for 32 hours
following the time of the accident, or until after the post accident controlled
substance test has been administered, unless medically necessary.
   (E)   Accidents resulting in serious injury/death of the employee. As a
condition of continuing employment, all employees of the city shall execute a
release authorizing the city to obtain/secure substances and/or information,
reports and documentation verifying the absence or presence of controlled
substances and/or alcohol in any situation where an employee involved in an
accident requiring a post-accident controlled substance and/or alcohol test has
sustained injuries that do not allow the employee to consent or submit to post
accident tests.
   (F)   Tests administered by other authorities. The results of alcohol or
controlled substance tests administered by federal, state or local officials
having independent authority to order such tests (i.e., law enforcement
agencies) shall meet the requirements of this section, provided such tests
conform to the applicable federal, state or local requirements and that the
results of the test are obtained by the employer.
   (G)   Section notes. Nothing in this section should be construed as to the
delay or deny any employee necessary medical treatment or to prohibit the
employee from leaving the scene of an accident:
      (1)   To obtain assistance in responding to the accident;
      (2)   At the direction of a law enforcement officer investigating the
accident; or
      (3)   To receive any required medical attention.
   (H)   Random testing.
      (1)   All safety-sensitive employees are subject to random controlled
substance and alcohol testing. Names of employees subject to random testing
will be entered into a pool and selected from that pool, at random, by a
scientifically valid method. Each employee has an equal chance of being tested
each time selections are made. Random selections may result in an employee
being selected more than once in a calendar year or not at all.
      (2)   Dates of future tests shall be unannounced and be treated as
confidential information.
   (I)   Random testing rate.
      (1)   The minimum annual rate at which the total employee population
safety sensitive positions (as defined) are randomly tested is 50% for
controlled substance use and the same as the DOT for alcohol use.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to determine whether controlled
substance and alcohol testing pools will be combined or chosen separately. If
testing pools are combined, then half of the individuals selected to be tested
for controlled substances will also be tested for alcohol. If testing pools are
chosen separately, then two random selections will occur. One selection will be
for those employees who are to be tested for alcohol and the other selection
will be for those who are to be tested for controlled substances. The random
nature of this selection process may cause an employee who is selected to be
tested for controlled substance to also be selected for an alcohol test.
      (3)   In accordance with DOT/FHWA regulations, the city will ensure that
an appropriate number of employees who operate commercial motor vehicles and
hold CDLs will be randomly tested for controlled substance and alcohol use.
   (J)   Employee notification.
      (1)   Employees will be tested just before, during or just after
performing job functions (i.e., sometime during their normally scheduled work
day.) If an employee who is selected for testing is on vacation or absent from
work either an alternate employee will be selected in his or her place or the
employee will be required to submit to the test when he or she returns.
      (2)   (a)   Employees will be notified that they have been selected to be
tested by the Safety Director or his or her designee. Employees selected to be
tested will not be notified until the day of the test, preferably immediately
before the test is to be administered. Once an employee is notified that he or
she has been selected for testing, he or she must immediately proceed to the
designated collection area and submit all required samples.
         (b)   Failure to proceed to the testing area or to submit required
samples will be deemed by the city as having refused to submit to testing and
will be cause for immediate termination of employment.
   (K)   Reasonable suspicion testing.
      (1)   All employees who hold supervisory positions within the city work
force shall attend a training course to become educated in recognizing the
circumstances which give rise to reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol testing.
      (2)   An employee must submit to an alcohol and/or controlled substance
test if a supervisor or the Safety Director has determined that reasonable
suspicion exists to believe the employee is under the influence of alcohol and/
or controlled substances.
      (3)   A supervisor or Safety Director must witness and document specific
observations relating to the appearance, body odor, speech or behavior of the
employee to determine that a test must be ordered.
      (4)   The city will bear the cost of a reasonable suspicion alcohol and/
or controlled substance test.
      (5)   While awaiting the results of a reasonable suspicion alcohol or
controlled substance test, the employee may be required to refrain from
performing any safety sensitive jobs and may be assigned to perform non-
sensitive duties until the results of the tests are received.
   (L)   Time for conducting reasonable suspicion alcohol tests.
      (1)   In the case that reasonable suspicion requires the ordering of an
alcohol test, the supervisor, Safety Director or his or her designee should
make every effort to arrange for the administration of the alcohol test within
two hours of determining that reasonable suspicion exists. If the test is not
administered within two hours, then written record should be made stating the
type of test, triggering event, reasons the test could not be completed and
where the test would have occurred.
      (2)   If the test is not administered within eight hours of the time of
determination, then the supervisor, Safety Director or his or her designee
shall cease attempts to have the alcohol test administered and make written
record stating the type of test, triggering event, reasons the test could not
be completed and where the test would have occurred.
      (3)   An employee who has been ordered to take a reasonable suspicion
alcohol test shall not use alcohol for eight hours following the time of
notification, or until after the alcohol test has been administered, whichever
is first.
   (M)   Time for conducting reasonable suspicion controlled substance tests.
      (1)   In the case that reasonable suspicion requires the ordering of a
controlled substance test, the supervisor, Safety Director or his or her
designee shall make every effort to arrange for the administration of a
controlled substance test within 32 hours determining that reasonable suspicion
exists.
      (2)   If the test is not administered within 32 hours that reasonable
suspicion exists, the supervisor, Safety Director or his or her designee shall
cease attempts to have the controlled substance test administered and make
written record stating the type of test, triggering event, reasons the test
could not be completed and where the test would have occurred.
      (3)   An employee who is ordered to take a post-accident controlled
substance test shall not use controlled substances for 32 hours following
notification, or until after the controlled substance test has been
administered, unless medically necessary.
   (N)   Return to duty/follow-up testing.
      (1)   Return to duty. An employee who has tested positive for controlled
substance or alcohol use shall test negative for controlled substances and
alcohol before being considered “re-qualified” for returning to duty. Both
alcohol and controlled substance return to duty test must be required, at the
recommendation and direction of a substance abuse professional (SAP).
      (2)   Follow-up.
         (a)   An employee who has tested positive will be subject to follow-up
controlled substance and alcohol testing upon returning to duty. Both alcohol
and controlled substance follow-up tests may be required, at the recommendation
and direction of a substance abuse professional (SAP). These tests shall be
unannounced and given at least six times in the first 12 months. The follow-up
testing may not continue beyond 60 months from the date of re-qualification for
duty and may be terminated at any time after the first six tests at the
recommendation of the SAP.
         (b)   The employee shall be subject to random selection testing in
addition to any follow-up testing.
         (c)   The employee must bear the cost of all evaluations, prescribed
treatments and return to duty/follow-up testing.
   (O)   Baseline testing. A baseline test is a one-time test performed on all
covered employees at the onset of random testing policy. All employees in
safety sensitive positions shall submit to a baseline controlled substance and/
or alcohol test. The city shall bear the cost of such testing.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.23 TEST AND COLLECTION.
   Care shall be used to protect the integrity of the testing process, ensure
the validity of test results and ensure test results are matched with correct
employee. These procedures will be established by the Board of Public Works, in
cooperation with the testing company. The Safety Director or his or her
designee and the employee will be contacted by a medical review officer of the
testing company as soon as possible in the case of a failed test.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.24 TEST REFUSAL.
   (A)   Refusal to submit. Refusal to submit to a controlled substance or
alcohol test permitted by this subchapter (policy) under any circumstance or
for any non-medical or non-emergency reason is strictly prohibited and is cause
for immediate termination of employment. Upon being ordered to submit a sample
for a test, all actions taken by the employee must contribute to the collection
of a sample. Upon notification, an employee may not continue to perform work
and must go directly to the collection site. Refusal to submit to a test
includes, but is not limited to the following acts:
      (1)   Failure to report to the collection site as directed;
      (2)   Failure to provide the required amount of specimen, i.e., urine or
breath (refer to division (B) below);
      (3)   Failure to remain readily available and notify supervisor of
whereabouts following an accident that requires or may require a controlled
substance and/or alcohol test;
      (4)   Any action that does not lead to the collection of a sample; or
      (5)   Any action or conduct that clearly obstructs the proper collection
of a sample.
   (B)   Inability to provide adequate sample.
      (1)   An employee who cannot provide an adequate sample for testing is
not “fit for duty” and shall not be allowed to continue working at any jobs
until an adequate sample can be provided.
      (2)   If an employee cannot or will not provide an adequate breath or
urine sample, the employee may be examined by a physician of the city’s choice
and a blood sample taken, at the expense of the city. If there is no medical
explanation for the inability to provide a sample, or if the employee refuses
to be examined by a physician, it will be considered a refusal to submit to a
test. If there is a medical explanation found by the physician for inability to
provide an adequate sample for testing, reasonable accommodation will be made,
at the direction of the physician, for collection of the sample.
      (3)   Until a cause for the employee’s inability to provide an adequate
sample is determined, the employee shall be removed from duties, without pay.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.25 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Disciplinary procedures in general.
      (1)   This subchapter describes and/or has classified disciplinary
procedures for violations of this subchapter. These descriptions/
classifications are provided only to illustrate the procedures that will
generally be followed in respect to such conduct and are not intended as an
exclusive remedy. Likewise, these disciplinary procedures should not be
construed, in any way, to limit the city’s discretion in exercising discipline,
as it finds appropriate, as is otherwise allowed by law, based on the conduct
of the employee and considering the totality of the circumstances.
      (2)   The city reserves the right to exercise authority independent of
Part 382 - Controlled Substances and Alcohol Use and Testing of the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, in administering disciplinary actions.
   (B)   Refusal to take test. Refusal to take an alcohol or controlled
substance test may result in:
      (1)   Immediate suspension without pay or termination of employment; or
      (2)   The withdraw of any conditional offer of employment and refusal to
hire an applicant.
   (C)   Positive test; pre-employment.
      (1)   A prospective employee who tests positive for alcohol or controlled
substances shall not be hired and any conditional offer of employment shall be
withdrawn.
      (2)   A prospective employee who tests positive during the pre-employment
screening process may re-apply for a position with the city no earlier than one
calendar year from the date that the initial positive test sample was
collected.
   (D)   Positive test; random/reasonable suspicion.
      (1)   Alcohol (0.02 to 0.0399). An employee who has a positive test for
alcohol registering from 0.02 to 0.0399 shall be:
         (a)   First offense. Immediately removed from duty and allowed to
return to work no sooner than 24 hours from the time that the positive test
sample was collected. An employee shall not receive pay for any worked missed
due to this disciplinary procedure.
         (b)   Second offense. Immediately removed from duty and suspended
without pay for ten days.
         (c)   Third offense. Immediately removed from duty and terminated.
      (2)   Alcohol (0.04 to 0.0799) and controlled substances. An employee who
has a positive test for alcohol registering from 0.04 to 0.0799 shall be
considered “unfit for duty” and:
         (a)   Immediately removed from duty;
         (b)   Placed on unpaid leave of absence; and
         (c)   Be subject to successful completion of the employee re-
qualification requirements as outlined in §
33.26 of this code before returning to duty.
      (3)   Alcohol (0.08 and over). An employee who has a positive test for
alcohol registering 0.08 or over may have his employment immediately
terminated.
   (E)   Positive test; return to duty/follow-up.
      (1)   Return to duty. Any employee who tests positive for controlled
substances or alcohol 0.02 and over when taking a return to duty test will be
subject to immediate termination.
      (2)   Follow-up. Any employee who tests positive for controlled
substances or alcohol 0.02 and over when taking a follow-up test will be
subject to immediate termination.
   (F)   Failure to remain available following an accident. Failure to remain
available following an accident shall be regarded as a refusal to take a test,
if it is determined that a test is appropriate under this subchapter. An
employee who fails to keep his or her supervisor and the Safety Director
informed of his or her whereabouts following an accident will be considered to
have refused a test.
   (G)   Prohibited alcohol and/or controlled substance use following an
accident. An employee who is asked to submit to a post accident controlled
substance and/or alcohol test and has used alcohol within eight hours and/or
non-physician prescribed controlled substances within 32 hours of that accident
may be immediately terminated.
   (H)   Failure to become re-qualified for duty within the prescribed time
limitations. Any employee who does not become re-qualified for duty within 90
days may be immediately terminated.
   (I)   Unreported use of over-the-counter or physician medication. Any
employee who is found to be using over-the-counter or prescription medication
which could cause intoxication, without properly reporting it to his or her
supervisor and/or receiving approval from a licensed physician or pharmacist,
if applicable, will be suspended without pay until proper documentation is
provided for use of the medication is stopped.
   (J)   Second positive test. It is the polity of this city to immediately
terminate an employee who receives a total of two positive tests for controlled
substance, alcohol (0.02 and over) or a combination of both.
   (K)   All other violations. Violations of the rules, regulations and
prohibitions of this policy not listed herein will be subject to disciplinary
measures based on the severity of the misconduct or the totality of the
circumstances at the discretion of the Mayor and/or Board of Public Works &
Safety.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 33.26 EMPLOYEE RE-QUALIFICATION.
   An employee who tests positive for controlled substances and/or alcohol, at
or above 0.04 shall remain on unpaid leave until becoming “re-qualified” for
duty.
   (A)   Re-qualification criteria. To become re-qualified for duty, the
employee must successfully complete the following steps within the prescribed
amount of time limitations.
      (1)   The employee must be evaluated by a substance abuse professional
(SAP), designated by the city (or selected jointly by the city and the
employee) to determine if the employee is in need of assistance in resolving an
alcohol and/or substance abuse problem. The cost of this evaluation will be
borne by the employee.
         (a)   If the employee is determined to have a substance abuse problem,
the employee must successfully complete any and all treatment prescribed by SAP
and approved by the city. The cost of any treatment prescribed by the SAP shall
be borne by the employee.
         (b)   If the employee is determined to not have a substance abuse
problem, the employee will still be subject to all other provisions of the re-
qualification criteria.
      (2)   The employee must pass a return to duty alcohol and/or controlled
substance test at the direction of the SAP.
      (3)   The employee must be cleared to return to duty by the SAP. If the
employee has been determined to have a substance abuse problem, then clearance
will be conditioned on successful completion and maintenance of the treatment
program that was prescribed by the SAP.
      (4)   Upon clearance to return to duty, the employee must successfully
complete all required follow-up controlled substance and/or alcohol tests, as
determined by SAP, to remain qualified for duty.
   (B)   Re-qualification time limitations. An employee must successfully
complete the re-qualification criteria and become re-qualified to perform
safety sensitive functions within 90 days of the date that the positive sample
was collected. Any employee who is not re-qualified to return duty within 90
days may be immediately terminated.
   (C)   Substance abuse professional (SAP). The Mayor or Board of Public Works
may rely upon the opinion of a substance abuse professional, who shall have
authority to advise:
      (1)   Whether or not a substance abuse problem exists;
      (2)   What, if any, treatment should be prescribed;
      (3)   Whether or not any prescribed treatment has been successfully
completed and maintained;
      (4)   Whether control substance tests, alcohol tests or both are
advisable for return to duty and follow-up testing;
      (5)   When and how many follow-up tests should be administered according
to §
33.25(E) of this code; and
      (6)   If the Mayor or Board of Public Works should grant the employee
clearance to return to duty.
   (D)   Re-qualification notes.
      (1)   Under no circumstances shall the employee return to duty less than
48 hours from the time that any positive sample is collected.
      (2)   The city does not guarantee that a job position will be left vacant
or that there will be a new position for an employee should the employee regain
qualified status. However, the former employee or employee may be considered
for immediate rehire after the employee regains qualified status.
      (3)   Copies of the Drug and Alcohol Policy and Procedures shall be
distributed to all city employees and shall be provided to all newly hired
employees at the time a provisional offer of employment is made. All present
and future city employees affected by this policy shall sign a letter of
acknowledgment pertaining to this subchapter upon passage.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000)
§ 33.27 CONVICTION OF CRIME.
   If any employee of the city is convicted, in a court of law, of a criminal
offense involving alcohol or controlled substances, the employee is subject to
immediate termination of employment. If any employee of the city is charged, in
a court of law, of a criminal offense involving alcohol or controlled
substances, the employee is subject to suspension, with or without pay, at the
discretion of the Board of Public Works.
(Ord. 2000-OR-02, passed 3-6-2000) Penalty, see §
10.99
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR EMPLOYMENT
§ 33.40 APPLICATION AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Employees affected by this subchapter. This subchapter shall apply to
all appointed city and municipal employees of the city, regardless of what
department or under what city board the employees may be working, but shall not
include the following listed work classifications:
      (1)   Sworn members of the city’s Police Department; and
      (2)   Persons or firms whose employment is based on contract/agreement
for professional services.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCRUED BENEFITS. Benefits, e.g., vacations and paid leaves which are
earned based on the number of days worked.
      CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
      DAY. Eight hours of work or more if approved by the appointing authority.
      INTERMITTENT/SEASONAL EMPLOYEE. An employee appointed to a position for a
specific period of time on a recurring, non-permanent basis to perform work or
an activity limited to a season or determined by the fluctuating demands of the
work and in generally not predictable.
      OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT. Additional employment (second job) while continuing
to draw salary from the city.
      PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE. Any hourly regular or temporary employee who has
not completed 90 days of service since the date of hire.
      REGULAR EMPLOYEE.
         (a)   Hourly. Full-time employee of the city for more than 90 days and
whose normal workweek consists of 40 hours
         (b)   Exempt employees. Salaried employees determined to be exempt
from the overtime requirements of the FLSA shall not be eligible for overtime
pay as defined herein. Such employees shall not receive a deduction in pay for
absences less than one day. However, absences of one full day or more shall be
deducted from the employee’s sick leave or vacation leave if the employee has
such leave accumulated. However, if the employee does not have any accumulated
sick or vacation leave, then one-fifth of his or her weekly salary shall be
deducted from his or her weekly pay.
      STUDENT EMPLOYEE. An employee who is a student of a school, college or
university in an internship/student-type relationship. The assigned position
need not be directly related to the content or level of the person’s education.
      TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. An employee whose anticipated work schedule is of a
comparatively short nature or definitely limited in duration, e.g., seasonal or
summer help.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.41 MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The appointing authorities (e.g., Mayor or Clerk-Treasurer) maintain
the ultimate right to manage their work forces, consistent with the policies
set forth in this subchapter and all applicable state and federal laws.
   (B)   The appointing authority rights and responsibilities include, but are
not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Determining methods and procedures;
      (2)   Determining number of the work force;
      (3)   Determining assignment of duties;
      (4)   Determining hours of employment;
      (5)   Determining compensation of personnel;
      (6)   Hiring employees;
      (7)   Disciplining employees;
      (8)   Discharging employees;
      (9)   Promoting employees;
      (10)   Transferring employees; and
      (11)   Laying off employees for lack of work, lack of funds or due to job
abolishment.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.42 EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY.
   City employees shall have the responsibilities including, but not limited to
the following:
   (A)   Reporting to the scheduled work site at the assigned time;
   (B)   Performing his or her duties in a manner contributing to the overall
efficiency of the public operations and improvement of services to the public,
as directed by his or her department directors; and
   (C)   Consulting with his or her department director for approval when
outside employment is contemplated. After department director consults the
appointing authority, approval may be given or denied. However, even after
receiving such approval, outside employment shall, in no case, be permitted to
interfere with the assigned duties, either in terms of “conflict of interest”
or in “physical capabilities,” while employed by the city.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.43 HIRING AND PROMOTION.
   (A)   Hiring policy.
      (1)   The city shall recruit and hire without regard to race, color,
creed, religion, age, sex or national origin. When vacancies occur, the
preference may be given to current employees who possess qualifications needed
to fill the position.
      (2)   If, in the judgment of management, a job cannot be filled from
within, the appointing authority will handle recruitment.
   (B)   Probationary period. A trial working period and part of the selection
process whereby an employee’s work and conduct is under close observation for
the purpose of determining suitability and qualifications for regular
appointment to the position. Exempt employees are not included. The
probationary period shall be:
      (1)   For a normal duration of 90 days, however, may be extended up to an
additional 90 days if deemed appropriate by the appointing authority;
      (2)   A time during which the employee’s supervisor shall observe the
performance record and, upon request or need, shall report such observations to
the appointing authority;
      (3)   A time during which the appointing authority may remove from
payroll when satisfied that the employee:
         (a)   Is unable or unwilling to perform the required duties of the
position in a satisfactory manner;
         (b)   Work habits and dependability do not merit continuance of
employment; or
         (c)   Has erred or misrepresented the information asked in the
application for employment.
      (4)   Probationary employees may be entitled to bereavement leave and
leave without pay as defined in §§
33.49 and
33.52 of this code, however, sections in this subchapter covering vacations,
excused (paid) leave, military leave, maternity leave and court and jury duty
leave shall apply to regular full-time employees only.
   (C)   Temporary employees. The sections of this subchapter covering
vacations, excused (paid) leave, military leave, maternity leave, funeral
leave, court and jury duty leave and holiday pay shall not apply to temporary
employees. Temporary employees may, however, be granted leave without pay due
to extraordinary reasons sufficient in the opinion of the appointing authority
to warrant such leave of absence.
   (D)   Hiring requirements.
      (1)   New full-time employees of the Sanitation, Street, Sewer, Parks and
Water Departments of the city may be required to have a state commercial
driver’s license within six months of the date of hire and have a high school
diploma or GED.
      (2)   All new employees must be able to perform all physical labors
associated with their assignment and must have all licenses required by law or
regulation to perform tasks to which they are assigned, unless the new employee
submits a statement from a city appointed physician.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.44 REGULAR WORK SCHEDULES.
   (A)   Hours. The various department directors shall establish and keep
accurate records of times the employees report to work, number of hours worked
during the day and the number of days the employees work during the week.
   (B)   Overtime. Any regular hourly employee who accumulates over 40 hours
within a seven day work period (including holidays, vacation, personal or sick
time) shall be paid or compensated with compensatory time at a rate of one and
one-half times his or her normal rate of pay.
   (C)   Rest periods. Employees may be authorized to take break periods each
full working day, subject to the discretion of the employer. Such breaks shall
not interfere with the proper performance of the employee’s work
responsibilities, will be set by the appointing authority and are subject to
change.
   (D)   Lunch breaks. Lunch periods shall be one hour in duration and shall be
unpaid periods of time unless specifically excused by the appointing authority.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.45 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All employees shall receive regular rate of pay for eight hours on the
following recognized holidays:
New Year’s Day                  January 1
Martin Luther King Jr.’s BirthdaThird Monday in January
President’s Day                 Third Monday in February
Good Friday                       Friday before Easter
Memorial Day                      Last Monday in May
Independence Day                  July 4
Labor Day                         First Monday in September
Veteran’s Day                   November 11
Thanksgiving Day                  Fourth Thursday in November
Friday after Thanksgiving         Fourth Friday in November
Christmas Eve Day                 December 24
Christmas Day                     December 25
Floating Holiday                  Requires supervisor approval
 
   (B)   If the date falls on a regular day off, time may be taken on the
workday immediately before or immediately following that day.
   (C)   Holiday pay shall be conditioned on the employee working the day
immediately prior to and following the holiday unless excused by the appointing
authority.
   (D)   Temporary/probationary employees will not be eligible for holiday pay
other than defined in §
33.43(B) and (C) of this code.
   (E)   When necessary to provide uninterrupted services to the public,
holiday time shall be scheduled on a split-personnel basis. Employees scheduled
to work hours on the actual holiday and, provided equal time off is not taken,
shall be paid at the overtime rate for those hours worked as well as eight
hours of holiday pay.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.46 ANNUAL LEAVE.
   (A)   A full-time employee shall be entitled to annual leave with pay
according to the following method:
 
Length of Service            Annual Leave Earned
After 1 full year of service 40 hours
2 to 9 years                 80 hours
10 to 14 years               120 hours
15 years and over            160 hours
 
   (B)   New employees hired after July 1, 2006 are not entitled to annual
leave until they have worked at least one full year. Annual leave accrues on an
individual employee’s hire date. All city employees hired prior to July 1, 2006
shall have an anniversary (hire) date of January 1.
   (C)   Annual leave requests shall be made at least one week in advance of
the proposed starting date and approved by the department director in
accordance with the needs of the department. Employees will make every effort
to respect all annual leave requests consistent with those needs. Seniority
shall prevail in the determination of annual leave requests.
   (D)   In case of emergencies, when an employee has been unable to schedule
his or her annual leave, this time may be paid or carried over upon approval by
the appointing authority.
   (E)   Annual leave is not earned while an employee is in a non-paid status.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.47 EXCUSED DAYS WITH PAY; PERSONAL LEAVE; SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Each regular full-time city employee is entitled to 40 hours paid
personal leave each year after one year of employment. New employees hired
after July 1, 2006 are not entitled to personal leave until they have worked at
least one full year. Personal leave accrues on an individual employees hire
date. All city employees hired before July 1, 2006 have an anniversary (hire)
date of January 1. Under no circumstances shall paid personal leave be carried
over from year to year.
   (B)   Each regular full-time city employee is entitled to 40 hours paid sick
leave each year after one year of employment. New employees hired after July 1,
2006 are not entitled to personal leave until they have worked at least one
full year. Sick leave accrues on an individual employees hire date. All city
employees hired before July 1, 2006 have an anniversary (hire) date of January
1.
   (C)   Sick days may be carried over into the following year. A maximum of 30
sick days may be accumulated, but no more than a total of 30 sick days may be
maintained at any time.
   (D)   Sufficient written notice shall be given the department director not
less than 24 hours prior to the scheduled appointment when an employee knows in
advance of a need to use the excused day(s). Sick leave shall be charged in
minimum amounts of two hours, unless otherwise approved by the appointing
authority.
   (E)   Other paid absences:
      (1)   On-the-job injury. Should an employee experience a work related
injury, he or she shall be entitled to seven days of compensation from the
city, after which workers’ compensation insurance will compensate the employee.
      (2)   Serious illness. In the event an employee should become ill and
require hospital confinement, he or she may be paid the regular salary for a
period of one week, after which the disability group insurance carrier shall
compensate the employee. Elective surgery is not considered a serious illness.
      (3)   Other paid absences. Other paid absences are defined in §§
33.48 through
33.51 of this code.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.48 MILITARY LEAVE.
   (A)   Any city employee who is a member of a reserve component of the Armed
Forces of the United States shall be entitled to excused leave while engaged in
the performance of his or her official duty or training. While on such leave,
employee will be paid at the regular rate of pay for a maximum of 15 working
days in any one calendar year.
   (B)   Along with requests for such leave, employees are required to submit
the published order authorizing the military duty or a written statement from
the appropriate military commander authorizing such duty.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.49 FUNERAL LEAVE.
   (A)   In cases of death in the immediate family: Spouse; child; other
dependent; brother; sister; parents; grandparents; parents of the spouse; or
any other person who is living in the employee’s household at the time of the
dependent death for which the employee provided financial support. Any eligible
employee may be granted funeral leave, upon the approval of the appointing
authority. Funeral leave will be granted for attendance to funeral matters and
will be paid absences; however, this leave shall not exceed three days.
   (B)   Additional absences in connection with the funeral of a non-immediate
family member or friend may be excused without pay and shall be at the
discretion of the appointing authority or may be charged against vacation or
personal leave.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.50 MATERNITY LEAVE.
   Any employee unable to work due to pregnancy, recent confinement (delivery)
or other pregnancy related causes may request and may be granted leave without
pay for a period of time up to 26 weeks. All accrued leave and vacation time
may be applied to maternity leave for pay purposes.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.51 COURT AND JURY DUTY LEAVE.
   (A)   An employee who is called for court, jury duty or subpoenaed to
testify in a court of law during any portion of the employee’s regularly
scheduled working day will be excused from work for the days on which service
is required. The employee may choose to receive his or her regular salary or
wage in full for such time from the city in which all compensation received for
court services shall be turned over to the Clerk-Treasurer in full or the
employee may choose to retain all compensation received for court service and
waive his or her regular salary/wage in full for such time from the city. The
employee will be required to present proof of service (e.g., subpoena) and the
amount of payment received from the clerk of court.
   (B)   If the employee is released from jury duty or court and a reasonable
amount of time remains during his or her scheduled workday, two hours or more,
he or she shall be expected to report to work with the city after having been
released by the court.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.52 EXCUSED LEAVE WITHOUT PAY.
   (A)   Upon application in writing and approval of the appointing authority,
any employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay. Such leave of
absence will be granted for a minimum of seven days, but may not exceed 30 days
in duration.
   (B)   Unpaid leave may be granted, but not limited, the following reasons:
      (1)   For educational purposes where the education will be beneficial to
both the employee and the city;
      (2)   For personal reasons, such as illness in the family, personal
problems and legal difficulties, where there is such urgency that no other
alternatives are available; and
      (3)   For personal reasons when the granting of the leave will not be
disruptive to department operations, such as for travel or for highly unusual
personal circumstances.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.53 TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT.
   Any city employee performing city-necessitated travel and using his or her
own automobile will be reimbursed for mileage at the maximum rate authorized by
the Internal Revenue Service. Where overnight stay is necessitated, a city
employee on city-related business would be reimbursed for lodging costs. All
travel arrangements must have the approval of the appointing authority. All
travel reimbursements shall be conditioned upon the submission of proper
documentation, such as lodging receipts or other common carrier tickets.
Documentation is to be submitted in the month the expenses were incurred
whenever possible.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.54 DISCIPLINARY AND DISMISSAL ACTIONS.
   Discipline and/or discharge of a regular employee shall be at the discretion
of the appointing authority. All city employees are at-will employees.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 33.55 RESIGNATIONS; LAYOFFS; REDUCTION IN FORCE.
   (A)   Resignations. To resign in good standing, an employee must submit his
or her written notice through the appointing authority at least two weeks prior
to the planned date of termination. Employees who resign in good standing are
entitled to all accrued but unused vacation pay at their current rate of pay as
defined in §
33.46 of this code and upon the date of termination. An employee absent for
three consecutive scheduled workdays without due notification of valid reason,
and has no legitimate reason for failure to notify, shall be considered as
having resigned his or her employment. Employees who resign, but do not resign
in good standing, will be liable to forfeiture of accrued vacation benefits.
   (B)   Layoffs; reduction in force. Employees may be placed on layoff status
or may be demoted for reason(s) of lack of work, lack of funds or projected
lack of funds, abolishment of positions and/or reorganization. The order in
which employees shall be places on layoff status or demoted shall be determined
in accordance with the interest of efficiency of public operations. Employees
placed on layoff status shall be entitled to all accrued but unused vacation
pay at their current rate of pay as defined in §
33.46 of this code. A laid off employee shall be eligible for recall for a
period of one year following the date of layoff. Each recalled employee shall
be allowed ten calendar days from the date of receipt of the certified letter
to return to work. In the event of extenuating circumstances, the employee
shall submit to the appointing authority in writing the reason for not
returning to work.
(Ord. 2006-OR-10, passed 7-10-2006; Ord. 2009-OR-04, passed 3-2-2009)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Planning review and development fees
   
34.02   Electronic funds transfers and online banking policy
Fixed Assets
   
34.15   Definitions and provisions
   
34.16   Recording and accounting
   
34.17   Safeguarding of assets
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 PLANNING REVIEW AND DEVELOPMENT FEES.
   The review and development fees as outlined in the schedule attached to the
ordinance codified in this section are approved and implemented by the Common
Council. All such fees collected shall be deposited into the non-reverting
Planning and Zoning Review and Development Fees Fund for the exclusive purpose
of carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the Advisory Plan Commission
and Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 2004-OR-04, passed 5-20-2004; Ord. 2004-OR-20, passed 10-4-2004; Ord.
2016-OR-03, passed 1-1-2016)
§ 34.02 ELECTRONIC FUNDS TRANSFERS AND ONLINE BANKING POLICY.
   (A)   Automatic clearing house (ACH) transactions. ACH transactions are
hereby authorized for the Clerk Treasurer to make certain payments via ACH.
Authorized payments are payroll, bond payments and payments for monthly bills.
Also authorized are funds received via ACH.
   (B)   Electronic funds transfers (EFT) including online transfers. The City
Council of the City of Charlestown authorizes the Clerk Treasurer use of online
transfers for the purpose of transferring funds to the account payable checking
account from the general, wastewater, sanitation, wire transfers, direct
deposits, on-line banking transactions, telephone transfers, and credit card
checking accounts in the process of paying claims/invoices that are in the best
interests of the City of Charlestown.
   (C)   Documentation. The Clerk Treasurer is required to maintain adequate
documentation of the above referenced transactions for future audits, and
follow the existing internal controls ordinance that is place with regard to
the Clerk Treasurer and her agents in the administration of their financial
duties for the City of Charlestown, as provided by law.
(Ord. 2022-OR-14, passed 8-1-2022)
FIXED ASSETS
§ 34.15 DEFINITIONS AND PROVISIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDINGS.
      (1)   A department will capitalize buildings at full cost with no
subcategories for the cost of attachments. Examples of attachments are roofs,
heating, cooling, plumbing, lighting or sprinkler systems or any part of the
basic building. The department will include the cost of items designed or
purchased exclusively for the building.
      (2)   A department’s new building will be capitalized only if it meets
the following conditions:
         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
         (b)   The useful life is greater than two years.
      (3)   A department improving or renovating an existing building will
capitalize the cost only if the result meets all the following conditions:
         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000;
         (b)   The useful life is extended two or more years; and
         (c)   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and
less than fair market value.
      (4)   Capital building cost will include preparation of land for the
building architectural and engineering fees, bond issuance fees, interest cost,
(while under construction), accounting cost if material and any costs directly
attributable to the construction of a building.
      (5)   A department will record donated buildings at fair market value on
the date of transfer with any associated costs.
      (6)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will follow the
source funding policies and above procedures.
   CAPITAL OUTLAYS. Expenditures which benefit both the current and future
fiscal periods. This includes costs of acquiring land or structures;
construction or improvement of buildings, structures or other fixed assets and
equipment purchases having an appreciable and calculable period of usefulness.
These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of or addition to the
government’s general fixed assets.
   ENTERPRISE FUNDS. Funds used to account for operations that are financed and
operated in a manner similar to private business enterprise where the intent of
the governing body is that the costs (expenses, including depreciation) of
providing goods or services to the general public on a continuing basis or
recovered primarily through user charges; or where the governing body has
decided that periodic determination of revenues earned, expenses incurred and/
or net income is appropriate for capital maintenance, public policy, management
control, accountability and other purposes. The ENTERPRISE FUNDS of the city
shall include the municipally-owned water and sewage utilities. Operation of
these utilities shall require ENTERPRISE FUND accounting and reporting.
   FIXED ASSET. Tangible assets of a durable nature employed in the operating
activities of the unit and that relatively permanent and are needed for the
production or sale of goods or services are termed property, plant and
equipment or fixed assets. These assets are not held for sale in the ordinary
course of business. This broad group is usually separated into classes
according to the physical characteristics of the items (e.g., land, building,
improvements other than buildings, machinery and equipment, furniture and
fixtures).
   HISTORICAL COST. The cash equivalent price exchanged for goods or services
at the date of acquisition. Land, buildings, equipment and most inventories are
common examples of items recognized under the historical cost attribute.
   IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN BUILDINGS.
      (1)   Improvements to land for better enjoyment, attached or not easily
removed and have a life expectancy greater than two years.
      (2)   Examples are walks, parking areas and drives, golf cart paths,
fencing, retaining walls, pools, outside fountains, planter underground
sprinkler systems and other similar items.
      (3)   Improvements do not include roads, streets or assets that are of
value only to the public. For example, Main Street is a public street with
greatest value to the public. Roads or drives upon city-owned land that provide
support to our facilities are assets. A sidewalk down the road for public
enjoyment is an infrastructure improvement and is not capitalized. However,
sidewalks installed upon city-owned land for use by the public and for the
support of our facility are capital assets.
      (4)   The city will capitalize new improvements other than buildings only
if it meets the following conditions:
         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000; and
         (b)   The useful life is greater than two years.
      (5)   A department will capitalize improvements or renovations to
existing improvements other than buildings only if the result meets the
following conditions:
         (a)   The total cost exceeds $5,000;
         (b)   The assets life is extended two or more years; and
         (c)   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and
less than the fair market value.
      (6)   A department’s donated improvements other than buildings will be
recorded at fair market value on the date of transfer with any associated costs
      (7)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will follow the
source funding policies and above procedures.
   LAND. This city will capitalize all land purchases, regardless of cost.
Exceptions to land capitalizations are land purchased outright, as easements or
right-of-way for infrastructure. Examples of infrastructures are roads and
streets, street-lighting systems, bridges, overpasses, side-walks, curbs,
parking meters, street signs, viaducts, wharfs and stormwater collection.
      (1)   Original cost of land will include the full value given to the
seller, including relocation, legal services incidental to the purchase
(including title work and opinion), appraisal and negotiations fees, surveying
and costs for preparing the land for its intended purpose (including
contractors) and/or city workers (salary and benefits), such as demolishing
buildings, excavating, clean up and/or inspection.
      (2)   A department will record donated land at fair market value on the
date of transfer plus any associated costs.
      (3)   Purchases made using federal or state funding will follow the
source-finding policies and the above procedures.
   MACHINERY and EQUIPMENT. An apparatus, tool or conglomeration of pieces to
form a tool. The tool will stand alone and not become a part of a basic
structure or building.
      (1)   The city will capitalize and tag items will an individual value
equal to or greater than $5,000. Machinery combined with other machinery to
form one unit with a total value greater than the above mentioned limit will be
one unit.
      (2)   Shipping charges, consultant fees and any other cost directly
associated with the purchase, delivery or set up, (including contractors) and/
or city workers (salary and benefits), which makes such equipment operable for
its intended purpose, will be capitalized.
      (3)   Improvements and renovations to existing machinery and equipment
will be capitalized only if the result of the change meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   Total costs exceeds $5,000;
         (b)   The useful life is extended two or more years; and
         (c)   The total cost will be greater than the current book value and
less than the fair market value.
      (4)   Example includes:
         (a)   A work truck being equipped with screens, lights or radios for
use as a single unit throughout its life expectancy is considered one unit;
         (b)   If police cars are constantly changing light bars or radios to
other vehicles, the city will capitalize each piece of equipment separately, if
it meets the required dollar amount;
         (c)   A department’s computer (CPU, monitor, keyboard and printer) is
considered one unit;
         (d)   A department will record donated machinery and equipment at fair
market value on the date of transfer with any associated costs; and
         (e)   A purchase made using federal or state funding will follow the
source funding policies and above procedures.
   TANGIBLE ASSETS. Assets that can be observed by one or more of the physical
senses. They may be seen and touched and in some environments, heard and
smelled.
(Ord. 2003-OR-32, passed 12-22-2003; Ord. 2006-OR-06, passed 4-7-2006; Ord.
2011-OR-13, passed 8-1-2011)
§ 34.16 RECORDING AND ACCOUNTING.
   (A)   The city and its various departments shall classify capital
expenditures as capital outlays within the fund from which the expenditure was
made in accordance with the Chart of Accounts of the Cities and Towns
Accounting Manual. The cost of property, plant and equipment includes all
expenditures necessary to put the asset into position and ready for use. For
purposes of recording fixed assets of the city and its departments, the
valuation of assets shall be based on historical cost or where the historical
cost is indeterminable, by estimation for those assets in existence.
   (B)   The city’s municipally-owned utilities shall record acquisition of
fixed assets in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. When
an asset is purchased for cash, the acquisition is simply recorded at the
amount of cash paid, including all outlays relating to its purchase and
preparation for intended use. Assets may be acquired under a number of other
arrangements including:
      (1)   Assets acquired of a lump-sum price;
      (2)   Purchase on deferred payment contract;
      (3)   Acquisition under capital lease;
      (4)   Acquisition by exchange of non-monetary assets;
      (5)   Acquisition by issuance of securities;
      (6)   Acquisition by self-construction; and
      (7)   Acquisition by donation or discovery.
   (C)   Some of these arrangements present special problems relating to the
cost to be recorded, for example, in utility accounting, interest during a
period of construction has been long been recognized as a part of the asset
cost. Reference to an intermediate accounting manual will illustrate the
recording of acquisition of assets under the aforementioned acquisition
arrangements. For purposes of recording fixed assets of the utilities the
valuation of assets shall be based on historical cost.
   (D)   In addition, an asset register (prescribed form 211) shall be
maintained to provide a detailed record of the capital assets of the
governmental unit.
(Ord. 2003-OR-32, passed 12-22-2003; Ord. 2006-OR-06, passed 4-7-2006; Ord.
2011-OR-13, passed 8-1-2011)
§ 34.17 SAFEGUARDING OF ASSETS.
   Accounting controls be designed and implemented to provide reasonable
assurances that:
   (A)   Capital expenditures made by the city, its various departments and
utilities be in accordance with management’s authorization as documented in the
minutes;
   (B)   Transactions of the utilities be recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted
principles;
   (C)   Adequate detailed record be maintained to assure accountability for
city- and utility-owned assets;
   (D)   Access to assets be permitted in accordance with managements,
authorization; and
   (E)   The recorded accountability for assets compared with the existing
assets at least every two years and appropriate action be taken with respect to
any differences.
(Ord. 2003-OR-32, passed 12-22-2003; Ord. 2006-OR-06, passed 4-7-2006; Ord.
2011-OR-13, passed 8-1-2011)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SOLID WASTE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWERS AND WASTEWATER
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Solid waste collection
   
50.03   Yard waste
   
50.04   Relocation waste
   
50.05   Construction waste
   
50.06   Prohibited items
   
50.07   Appeals
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLIANCES. Washers, dryers, dishwashers, cooking units, or any other
mechanical apparatus containing electronic circuitry. This does not include
refrigeration units or any other item no longer accepted for disposal at the
landfill.
   APPROVED CONTAINER. A container for solid waste which is approved by the
Board of Public Works and Safety for use by a customer of the Sanitation
Department for containing and disposal of solid waste.
   ASHES. Residue from burning, whether produced by fires used for cooking,
heating, fireplaces, or any other fire.
   CONSTRUCTION WASTE. New or used construction materials remaining or
resulting from construction or demolition activities, intended to be discarded.
This definition shall include such materials generated by new residential
construction as well as such materials generated by the remodel or renovation
of an existing structure.
   CUSTOMER. A person utilizing the services of the Sanitation Department. All
single-family, duplex, and three-plex residential facilities are entitled to be
customers of the Sanitation Department. All other persons or entities desiring
to be customers of the Sanitation Department must obtain approval from the
Board of Public Works and Safety.
   LANDFILL. The Clark-Floyd Sanitary Landfill or any other such landfill/solid
waste disposal facility as may be utilized by the Sanitation Department for the
disposal of solid waste.
   REFRIGERATION UNIT. Any device containing or previously designed to use
Freon or any other gaseous refrigerant to cool or heat.
   RELOCATION WASTE. Solid waste exceeding the amount that can be placed in an
approved container, generated as the result of a change in occupancy of a
residential property.
   SOLID WASTE. Ashes, garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish and/or debris having
little or no value of which the owner intends to dispose, not including yard
waste, which shall be disposed of separately.
   YARD WASTE. Cut or dead organic materials such as grass clippings, plant
material, shrubs, leaves, and similar materials. Limbs are not included in the
definition of yard waste.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022)
§ 50.02 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The Sanitation Department is not responsible for picking up any item
unless it is properly presented for pickup in the manner required by this
chapter.
   (B)   The Sanitation Department will not normally operate on any day
observed by the city as a holiday. Pickup for those days shall be scheduled by
the Sanitation Department on an alternate pickup day.
   (C)   Customers shall be entitled to the collection of solid waste on the
terms provided herein. Any individual or entity producing solid waste in the
city that is not a customer of the Sanitation Department must provide their own
removal of garbage/refuse, or make arrangements for the removal of garbage and/
or refuse with a private contractor.
   (D)   Each customer shall be entitled to one weekly curbside collection of
solid waste. The monthly fee for such service shall be $20.52.
   (E)   Solid waste disposed of by weekly collection shall be placed in an
approved, 96-gallon container, which container must be leased from the city for
a one-time fee. The cost of the container fee to the user shall be the cost
paid by the city for each container. The removal of all solid waste placed in
such container each weekshall be included in the base monthly fee of $20.52.
   (F)   Ashes, refuse, trash and debris sliall bagged before being placed in
an approved container.
   (G)   Sanitation Department customers who regularly find themselves with
more solid waste than one approved container will accommodate may lease an
additional approved container for a separate, one-time fee. The cost of the
container fee to the user shall be the cost paid by the city for each
container. The monthly fee for the weekly collection of garbage/refuse shall
increase by $5.70 for customers who have rented an additional container.
   (H)   To ensure collection of approved container(s), such container(s) must:
      (1)   Be placed on the curb of the customer’s property no later than 5:00
a.m. on the day scheduled for pick-up. Customers may place approved container
(s) on the curb after 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection;
      (2)   Be removed from the curb no later than 5:00 a.m. on the day
following the day scheduled for pick-up;
      (3)   Be at least four feet from any obstacles overhead or beside the
container;
      (4)   Be at least ten feet from vehicles;
      (5)   Be closed completely;
      (6)   Be situated with the front of the container facing the street.
   (I)   In addition to the removal of the solid waste placed in an approved
container(s), the base monthly rate for customers shall include the removal of
one bulk item (i.e. an item which cannot be reasonably placed in the approved
container) each month. This bulk item may include furniture, mattresses,
grills, playground, or exercise equipment.
   (J)   Bulk items to be removed, over and above one per month, shall be
removed with a fee of $10 per item. These items shall be placed at the curb at
the same time and upon the same terms as an approved container, and shall be
collected the same day or the day following regular waste collection or
collection of a work order.
   (K)   Sanitation Department customers in need of a periodic additional solid
waste collection may initiate a work order with the Sanitation Department. Such
additional collection shall take place on Friday following the placement of the
work order, and shall result in a per occurrence fee of $10.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022)
§ 50.03 YARD WASTE.
   (A)   Customers shall be entitled to removal of yard waste twice per month
in the months of March through November, with such service included in the base
monthly rate for Sanitation Department customers.
   (B)   Yard waste shall be placed in an approved container or a biodegradable
bag.
   (C)   In addition to yard waste, customers shall be entitled to the
collection of limbs once per month in the months of March through November,
with such collection included in the base monthly rate for customers of the
Sanitation Department. In order to ensure collection, limbs must be cut to
lengths not to exceed three feet and shall be bundled or stacked neatly;
   (D)   To ensure collection yard waste and/or limbs must be placed for
collection upon the day scheduled for collection upon the same terms as those
provided for solid waste.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022)
§ 50.04 RELOCATION WASTE.
   Customers shall be entitled to dispose of relocation waste by purchasing a
dumpster bag from a home goods store. This dumpster bag, containing up to 3,300
lbs of waste, shall be collected and disposed of by the Sanitation Department
upon a customer placing a work order and making payment of a $75 work order
fee. Bulk items which cannot be placed in the dumpster bag shall be subject to
the same $10/item fee provided for bulk items collected in the regular
collection of solid waste.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022)
§ 50.05 CONSTRUCTION WASTE.
   Customers shall be entitled to dispose of construction waste by purchasing a
dumpster bag from a home goods store. This dumpster bag, containing up to 3,300
lbs of waste, shall be collected and disposed of by the Sanitation Department
upon a customer placing a work order and making payment of a $75 work order
fee. Bulk items which cannot be placed in the dumpster bag shall be subject to
the same $10/item fee provided for bulk items collected in the regular
collection of solid waste.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022)
§ 50.06 PROHIBITED ITEMS.
   (A)   The following items shall not be placed in approved containers or
otherwise placed for collection or be the subject of a special collection,
construction waste, or relocation waste work order:
      (1)   Appliances;
      (2)   Refrigeration units;
      (3)   Tires;
      (4)   Electronics, including televisions and computers;
      (5)   Chemicals, including used oil. solvents, and paint; and
      (6)   Batteries.
   (B)   A customer who places a prohibited item in an approved container or
dumpster bag or places a prohibited item on the curb for collection commits an
ordinance violation and shall be subject to a fine of $100 per prohibited item
so placed for collection.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any party aggrieved by any action taken by a city official pursuant to
this chapter may appeal that action or determination by delivering a notice of
appeal within ten business days of the time that the appellant did or should
have become aware of the action complained of.
   (B)   A notice of appeal shall be delivered to the City Clerk/Treasurer at
304 Main Cross. Charlestown, IN 47111.
   (C)   Contents of the notice of appeal. A notice of appeal must be in
writing and shall be presented in type or legible printing, stating, at
minimum, the following:
      (1)   The name of the aggrieved party;
      (2)   The property address of the aggrieved party;
      (3)   The mailing address of the aggrieved party:
      (4)   The specific action or inaction from which an appeal is being
taken;
      (5)   The date(s) that the action or inaction described above occurred:
      (6)   The location where the action or inaction occurred, or is alleged
to have occurred;
      (7)   The date(s) that any notices were provided to the aggrieved party
by a city official:
      (8)   Each reason the aggrieved party disagrees with the action,
inaction, or determination of the city official; and
      (9)   The name and address of all persons the aggrieved party is aware of
that have information or personal knowledge to support the aggrieved party’s
appeal.
   (D)   Appeal hearing. An appeal of any action taken by the Sanitation
Department or a city official taken under this chapter should be heard by the
city's Board of Public Works and Safety as soon as practical, ideally within 30
calendar days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The issues on appeal
arc limited to:
      (1)   Whether there was a preponderance of evidence proving that a
violation of this chapter occurred;
      (2)   Whether the person who was fined or otherwise sanctioned has
violated, or aided another person in violating this chapter;
      (3)   Whether or not a citation or other notice was sent or provided to
the aggrieved party;
      (4)   Such other issues as may be necessary to conduct a just appeal.
   (E)   Appeal decisions of the city's Board of Public Works and Safety may be
appealed to the Clark Circuit Court within 30 calendar days of notice of a
decision being made by the Board.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or aiding, or
causing another person to violate this chapter, shall be subject to a fine in
an amount of not less than $25 nor more than $100. Each violation is considered
a separate offense. Each day any violation continues shall also constitute a
separate offense. It is the intent of the city that persons committing repeated
or multiple violations should be fined more severely.
   (B)   In addition to any other civil or criminal penalties which may be
imposed for violation of this chapter, a person littering shall be responsible
for the costs of cleaning up any solid waste dumped on any public or private
property, as well as all costs incurred in enforcing this provision of this
chapter.
   (C)   A citation or notice showing a violation of this chapter and a fine
can be issued by the Director of the Sanitation Department, Sanitation
Department employees, the Building Commissioner, City Police Officers, or any
other city official authorized by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
   (D)   A citation or notice showing a violation of this section can be served
upon the owner of real property where a violation has or is occurring by
mailing or delivering a copy to the address listed at the office of the Auditor
of Clark County, Indiana, as the owner's address, as well as personally, or by
posting a citation or notice at the location of an ongoing violation.
(Ord. 2016-OR-14, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 2020-OR-12, passed 8-17-2020; Ord.
2022-OR-09, passed 8-1-2022)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
   
51.01   Water rates and charges
   
51.02   Water utility sale credits
§ 51.01 WATER RATES AND CHARGES.
   The “City of Charlestown, Indiana Municipal Waterworks Utility Schedule of
Waterworks Rates and Charges” attached to the ordinance codified in this
section is hereby adopted and approved as the new schedule of rates and charges
to be billed to customers by the city’s municipal water utility.
(Ord. 2006-OR-5, passed 4-7-2006)
§ 51.02 WATER UTILITY SALE CREDITS.
   A one-time water utility sale credit will be provided to all customers of
the city’s water utility for use in satisfying ongoing bills for city sanitary
sewer and/or city sanitation bills received by those water utility customers,
under the following conditions.
   (A)   The water utility sale credit is only available to persons and legal
entities that had accounts as customers of the city’s water utility on March 5,
2018 (the “customers”). Water utility customers with accounts opened after that
date will not be eligible for the water utility sale credit.
   (B)   The water utility sale credit is only available to customers who
receive uninterrupted water utility service from IAWC.
   (C)   The water utility sale credit will automatically be used to reduce the
amount owed by customers for monthly city sanitary sewage and sanitation
charges. If the amount of the water utility sale credit exceeds the city
sanitary sewage and sanitation charges owed by the customer, the excess amount
of the monthly water utility sale credit is forfeited.
   (D)   The amount of the monthly water utility sale credit available to each
customer is depicted in division (E) below.
   (E)   The water utility sale credit shall be available for a period of four
years, in the monthly amounts as follows:
Monthly Water Credit (Water and Sewer Customers)
Usage (in gallons) Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
Monthly Water Credit (Water and Sewer Customers)
Usage (in gallons) Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
Less than 1,000    $17    $13.60 $10.20 $8.50
1,000 to 1,900     $20    $16    $12    $10
2,000 to 2,900     $21.50 $17.20 $12.90 $10.75
3,000 to 3,900     $22    $17.60 $13.20 $11
4,000 to 4,900     $22.50 $18    $13.50 $11.25
5,000 to 14,900    $23    $18.40 $13.80 $11.50
 
 
Monthly Water Credit (Water and Sanitation Only Customers)
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4
$18    $14.80 $11.10 $9.25
 
(Ord. 2018-OR-13, passed 4-2-2018; Ord. 2019-OR-11, passed 8-19-2019)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS AND WASTEWATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Purpose and policy
   
52.002   Administration
   
52.003   Abbreviations
   
52.004   Definitions
   
52.005   Discharge to public sewers
   
52.006   Confidential information
   
52.007   Publication of users in significant noncompliance
   
52.008   Waste received from other jurisdictions
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
52.020   Prohibited discharge standards
   
52.021   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.022   State pretreatment standards
   
52.023   Local limits
   
52.024   Best Management Practices (BMPs)
   
52.025   More stringent standards or requirements
   
52.026   Dilution
   
52.027   Reference concentrations
   
52.028   City’s right of revision
   
52.029   Special agreements
   
52.030   Mass limits
   
52.031   Connection to sewer required
Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
52.040   Pretreatment facilities
   
52.041   Additional pretreatment measures
   
52.042   Accidental discharge; slug control plans
   
52.043   Duty to mitigate
   
52.044   Compliance schedules
   
52.045   Hauled wastewater
   
52.046   Grease traps and grease interceptors
   
52.047   Dental dischargers
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
   
52.055   Wastewater analysis
   
52.056   Wastewater discharge permit
   
52.057   Control mechanism contents
   
52.058   Waiver of pollutant not present
   
52.059   Wastewater discharge permit appeals
   
52.060   Wastewater discharge permit modifications
   
52.061   Wastewater discharge permit transfer
   
52.062   Wastewater discharge permit revocation or termination
Reporting Requirements
   
52.070   Submittal requirements
   
52.071   NSCIU annual reporting
   
52.072   Baseline Monitoring Report (BMR)
   
52.073   Initial report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.074   Periodic reports on compliance or self-monitoring report (SMR)
   
52.075   Reports of changed conditions
   
52.076   Reports of potential problems
   
52.077   Reports of effluent limit exceedances
   
52.078   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
52.079   Reports from unpermitted users
   
52.080   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
   
52.081   Certification statements
 
Compliance Monitoring
   
52.090   Wastewater survey
   
52.091   Analytical requirements
   
52.092   Sample collection
   
52.093   Right of entry; inspection and sampling
   
52.094   Inspection warrants
   
52.095   Timing
   
52.096   Recordkeeping
Administration and Enforcement
   
52.110   Authorization to implement enforcement remedies and an enforcement
response plan
   
52.111   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
52.112   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
52.113   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
Rates and Charges
   
52.125   Pretreatment charges and fees
   
52.126   Wastewater service rates and charges
 
   
52.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to
comply with all applicable state and federal regulations, statutes, and
ordinances, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), the
general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403), and the Code of State
Regulations (327 I.A.C. 5).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or
atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
      (3)   To protect POTW and both its personnel who may be affected by
wastewater, biosolids, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment
and the general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater, biosolids,
sludge, or any other products identified for beneficial reuse from the POTW;
      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
conveyance, operation, treatment, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state regulations, statutes, and
ordinances to which the POTW is subject.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter:
      (1)   Authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
      (2)   Provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
      (3)   Establishes administrative review procedures;
      (4)   Requires user reporting; and
      (5)   Provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of
costs resulting from the program established herein.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.002 ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the City of Charlestown, Indiana,
Sanitary Sewer Board (the “Board”) shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the
Board may be delegated by the Board to other city personnel.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
Abbreviation Meaning
Abbreviation Meaning
ASTM         American Society for Testing Materials
BOD          Biochemical oxygen demand
BMP          Best Management Practice
BMR          Baseline Monitoring Report
C.F.R.       Code of Federal Regulations
CIU          Categorical industrial user
COD          Chemical oxygen demand
CROMERR      Cross media electronic reporting rule
EPA          U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG          Fats, oil and grease
FSE          Food service establishment
GPD          Gallons per day
HEM          Hexane extractable material
ISBH         Indiana State Board of Health
IU           Industrial user
IWEA         Indiana Wastewater Environmental Association
L            Liter
Lb(s)        Pound(s)
MGD          Million gallons per day
mg/L         Milligrams per liter
MAHL         Maximum allowable headworks load
MAIL         Maximum allowable industrial load
NPDES        National pollutant discharge elimination system
NSCIU        Non-significant categorical industrial user
O&M          Operation and maintenance
PFAS         Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
PFOA         Perfluorooctanoic acide
PFOS         Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid
POC          Pollutant of concern
POTW         Publicly-owned treatment works
RCRA         Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Pub. Law No. 94-580
SDCP         Slug discharge control plan
SIC          Standard industrial classification
SIU          Significant industrial user
SMR          Self monitoring report or periodic report on compliance
SNC          Significant noncompliance
SU           Standard units
SWDA         Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
TSS          Total suspended solids
USB          Utility Service Board
U.S.C.       United States Code
WOTUS        Waters of the United States
 
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The use
of the word “shall” indicates a mandatory condition. The use of the word “may”
indicated a discretionary condition.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Regional Administrator of the U.S. EPA or IDEM.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.
      (1)   If the user is a corporation, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall
mean:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
has been delegated, in accordance with corporate procedures, to perform similar
policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures; or
         (c)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permits or other
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: A general
partner or proprietor, respectively;
      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: A
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility; or their
designee; and
      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3) of this
definition may designate another authorized representative if:
         (a)   The authorization is in writing; the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and the written authorization is
submitted to the city; or
         (b)   The authorization is submitted to the Board. The authorization
shall specify the individual or position responsible for the overall operation
of the facility from which the discharge originates or that has overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the user.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). The implementation of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to ensure proper operation of treatment systems or elimination of
pollutants from entering the treatment system.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).
Testing shall be performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter
D, part 136.
     BOARD. The City of Charlestown, Indiana Sanitary Sewer Board, or their
designated representative.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of building drainage
system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to a point approximately five feet
outside the foundation wall of the building.
   BUILDING OR HOUSE LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the building drain to
the sewerage system or other place of disposal.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category
of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405
through 471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). An indirect measure of the amount of oxygen
used by inorganic and organic matter in water. The measure is a laboratory test
based on a chemical oxidant and therefore does not necessarily correlate with
biochemical oxygen demand. Testing shall be performed in accordance with 40
C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter D, part 136.
   CITY.
      (1)   The City of Charlestown, Indiana or the Common Council of the city;
or
      (2)   Depending on context, may mean:
         (a)   The Board or its designee;
         (b)   Administrator or designee;
         (c)   Delegation of authority;
         (d)   Publicly owned treatment works (POTW);
         (e)   Wastewater Superintendent, Manager, Director, or designee; or
         (f)   Control authority.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.
      (1)   Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform
bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city’s National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems (NPDES) permit, if the treatment works
was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants
to a “substantial degree.” The term SUBSTANTIAL DEGREE is not subject to
precise definition, but generally contemplates removals in the order of 80% or
greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not
considered substantial.
   (2)   Examples of the additional pollutants which may be compatible include:
      (a)   Chemical oxygen demand;
      (b)   Total organic carbon;
      (c)   Phosphorous and phosphorous compounds;
      (d)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and
      (e)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin (except as
prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the
treatment works).
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A composite sample should contain a minimum of eight
discrete samples taken at equal time intervals or volume of flow proportional
to the flow rate over the composting period. More than the minimum number of
discrete samples will be required where the wastewater loading is highly
variable.
   CONTROL MECHANISM. A document issued by the Board to regulate discharges of
nondomestic wastewater to the POTW for the purpose of meeting the objectives in
§ 52.001 of this code. CONTROL MECHANISMS include wastewater discharge permits
(permits), BMPs, letters or discharge authorization, non-significant
categorical industrial user (NSCIU) authorizations, or any document designated
by the Board as a method of controlling or prohibiting discharges to the POTW.
   CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. The act of pursuing punitive measures against an
individual and/or organization through a court of law.
   CROMERR. The legal framework for electronically reporting under EPA’s
regulatory programs authorized under 40 CFR 3. The CROMERR program ensures the
enforceability of regulatory information collected electronically by EPA and
EPA’s state, tribal, and local government partners.
   DAILY DISCHARGE. Discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or
any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar for purposes of
sampling.
   DILUTION. Increasing the use of process water, or in any other way,
attempting to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitution for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement.
   DISRUPTION. A discharge that, either alone or in combination with other
discharges, has a deleterious impact on the structure, function, operation or
maintenance of the POTW (including increased maintenance requirements or risk
of harm to persons), or on the ability to beneficially reuse biosolids,
recycled water, or any product produced by the POTW. The POTW uses resources
(staff, contractors, etc.) to prevent or recover from a disruption; the
disruption may or may not result in a Clean Water Act Violation such as
interference or pass through.
   DOMESTIC. Domestic sewage, sometimes referred to as wastewater. Wastewater
originating from bodily processes (excluding septic tank waste) and from normal
household activities such as bathing, laundering, washing, and residential food
preparation.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. From typical residential users and having pollutant
characteristics of not greater than 200 mg/L BOD and 200 mg/L suspended solids.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right of the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT. Water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing out
of a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge that is not a new source, or the
construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of
proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such
source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of
the Act.
   FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources as detectable in cooking oils, food scraps containing
grease, butter or oil, lard or tallow, meat fat, grease and juices, gravies,
sauces, shortening and dairy products.
   FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract
of humans and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of
pollution. Testing shall be performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter D, part 136.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS (FSE). Facilities maintained, used, or operated
for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packaging, or
otherwise handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the
public, its members, residents, students or employees, and which has any
process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease, vapors, steam, fumes,
smoke or odors, including any real property on which the FSE is located. FSEs
include, but are not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, hotel kitchens,
hospitals, nursing homes, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, churches,
clubs, daycare centers and mobile food establishments.
   GARBAGE. Solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.
   GREASE and OIL. A group of substances including hydrocarbons, fatty acids,
soaps, fats, waxes, oils or any other material that is extracted by a solvent
from an acidified sample and that is not volatilized during the laboratory test
procedures. GREASES and OILS are defined by the method of the determination in
accordance with standard methods.
      (1)   GREASE AND OIL OF ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE ORIGIN. Substances of
biodegradable nature such as are discharged by meat-packing, vegetable oil and
fat industries, food processors, canneries and restaurants.
      (2)   GREASE AND OIL OF MINERAL ORIGIN. Substances that are less readily
biodegradable than grease and oil of animal or vegetable origin, and are
derived from a petroleum source. Such substances include machinery lubricating
oils, gasoline station wastes, petroleum refinery wastes and storage depot
wastes.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, such as campers, trailers,
septic tanks, vacuum pump trucks and the like.
   IDEM. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
Act. See definition of NONDOMESTIC WASTEWATER.
   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU) or USER. A source of indirect discharge to the POTW.
The source may be a person, firm, corporation, partnership, governmental
entity, or customer from piped or hauled sources.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy
discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business process or from  the development, recovery or processing
of any natural resource carried on by a person and this term shall further mean
any waste from an industrial user.
   INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system including building drains
and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to,
defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.
   INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including building drains
and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof drains, cellars,
yard and area drains, foundations drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges,
drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from
storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins, storm sewers, surface run-off,
street wash waters or drainage.
   INFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be present, flowing
into a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.
   INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the Board.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge use or
disposal methods; and does one of the following:
      (1)   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation; or
      (2)   Prevents the use of POTW’s sewage sludge or its sludge disposal
method selected in compliance with the following statutory provisions,
regulations, or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state or local
regulations:
         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345);
         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. § 6901),
including:
            1.   Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and
            2.   The rules contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. § 6941);
         (c)   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7401); and
         (d)   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. § 2601).
   LOCAL LIMIT. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the Board
upon users that discharge nondomestic wastewater in order to implement the
general and specific discharge limitations in § 52.020 of this code.
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HEADWORKS LOADING (MAHL). The estimated maximum loading of
a pollutant that can be received at a POTW’s headworks (at the point at the
wastewater enters the wastewater treatment plant) based on a technical
evaluation without causing pass-through, interference, or disturbance.
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL LOAD (MAIL). The estimated maximum loading of a
pollutant that can be received at a POTW’s headworks from all permitted
nondomestic discharges without causing pass-through, interference, or
disturbance.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, lake or other body of
surface or groundwater.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (1)(b) or (1)(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of NEW SOURCE facilities
or equipment.
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this paragraph.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
   NONDOMESTIC WASTEWATER or NONDOMESTIC WASTE. Any waste other than domestic
waste. See definition of DOMESTIC.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT). A
permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system for
discharge of wastewaters to navigable waters of the United States (WOTUS).
   NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to health or offensive to the senses
or an obstruction of the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfort or enjoyment of life or property.
   OIL AND/OR SAND INTERCEPTORS or SEPARATORS. A device designed and installed
to separate and retain pollutants from normal wastes and permit normal sewage
or liquid wastes to discharge into the disposal terminal by gravity.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST. All expenditures during the useful life of
the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the POTW to achieve the capacity and
performance for which such works are designed and constructed.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
   PER or POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES (PFAS). A subgroup of fluorosurfactants or
fluorinated surfactants, which have a fluorinated “tail” and a hydrophilic
“head.” There are thousands of PFAS compounds, including perfluorosulfonic
acids such as the perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) and the
perfluorocarboxylic acids such as the perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). PFOS and
PFOA are examples of specific PFAS compounds which are persistent organic
pollutants and are detected in humans, wildlife, and the environment.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTION. An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste
to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial uses or
facilities which serve such beneficial uses. The human-made or human-induced
alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of
water.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, PFAS substances, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, sediment or solids, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). This term also
applies to emerging pollutants which are substances that have recently been
identified as potential threats to the environment and human health but are not
yet widely regulated. References to pollutants in this chapter shall be as
defined in 40 CFR 136 unless otherwise defined by the Board.
   POLLUTANT OF CONCERN (POC). A substance present in a discharge from a user
to the POTW that has been identified by the Board as being a pollutant which
impacts or may impact POTW operations and the ability to comply with federal,
state, and local regulations, statutes, or ordinances.
   PREMISES. A parcel of real estate including any single improvement there on
which is determined by the Board to be a single user for purpose of receiving,
using and payment for service.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, BMPs, local limits, and any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial discharges.
   PROCESS WASTEWATER. Any water, unless otherwise specified in a categorical
standard, that, during manufacturing or processing, comes into contact with or
results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product,
finished product, byproduct, or waste product.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
52.020 of this code.
   PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Procedures executed in a prudent, cost-
effective and workmanlike manner which achieve the highest and/or required
effluent quality of industrial discharge attainable in conformance with the
best available technology and practices. Proper operation and maintenance
requirements include avoidance of operational error, adherence to manual
instructions, preventive maintenance, avoidance of careless or improper
operation, neat accurate sampling, analysis and records retention, storage of
process chemicals, lubricants, solvents and the like, in a safe and organized
manner, avoidance of accidental spillage, keeping operating logs and other
activities which produce the desired effluent quality.
   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A “treatment works,” as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned or operated by the city. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant in
addition to the treatment plant itself.
   RECEIVING STREAM. The watercourse, stream or body of water receiving the
waters finally discharged from the wastewater treatment plant.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations and the like). See definition of DOMESTIC and DOMESTIC SEWAGE.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit laid for carrying wastewater or other liquids.
      (1)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect
wastewater from individual point source discharges.
      (2)   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which carries both storm, surface,
groundwater runoff and wastewater.
      (3)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure.
      (4)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport
wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.
      (5)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights and which is controlled by public authority, including the
following elements:
         (a)   PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewerage
system at which wastewater is pumped to higher level.
         (b)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries wastewater and to which
storm, surface and groundwaters and unpolluted industrial wastewater are not
intentionally admitted.
         (c)   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm, surface and
groundwater drainage but excludes wastewater.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).
      (1)   Except as provided in divisions (2) and (3) of this definition, a
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means:
         (a)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards
per §
52.021 of this code; or
         (b)   An industrial user that:
            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 GPD or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
            2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant;
            3.   Contributes a nondomestic wastestream which has a discharge
with a POC above the reference concentration and makes up 5% or more of the
Maximum Allowable Industrial Load (MAIL) for a particular pollutant as
specified in §
52.023(A)(4) of this code; or
            4.   Is designated as such by the Board on the basis that the
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (2)   The Board may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial
user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial
user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The industrial user, prior to the Board’s finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements;
         (b)   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in § 52.081(D) of this code, together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
         (c)   The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (1)(b)
of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Board may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to an appeal
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
   SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a municipal,
commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment
plant or air pollution control facility or any other waste having similar
characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under §§ 402 and 405
of the Act and in the applicable requirements under §§ 3001, 3004 and 4004 of
the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Pub. Law No. 94-580.
   SLUG, SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in §
52.020 of this code or does not comply with the Best Management Practices in §
52.024 of this code. A SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge of a non-routine,
uncontrolled, or episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
discharge or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential
to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition,
at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation
of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic service charge.
   TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). The suspended solids as determined by testing
using the EPA methods.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. One of the pollutants, or combination of those pollutants,
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of §
307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to sanitary sewers
and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT or PERMIT. See CONTROL MECHANISM.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW which
is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. Any water, surface or underground, within the
boundaries of the state, except confined waters in sewers, tanks and the like.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.005 DISCHARGE TO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a public
sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No person discharging domestic sewage shall discharge or cause to be
discharged to any sanitary sewer, whether directly or indirectly, stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, noncontact
cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial process water. The
Board may require the removal of unpolluted water from any wastewater
collection or treatment facility.
   (C)   No person discharging domestic sewage shall place, deposit or permit
to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within
the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of
this chapter and the NPDES permit.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Board, domestic sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with provisions of this chapter and the NPDES permit.
   (E)   Except as hereinafter provided, or with specific authorization from
the Board, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy
vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of domestic sewage where a collection system is readily available.
   (F)   It is unlawful for the owner, tenant, occupant or any person in a
building or place where cooking is done, to discharge any grease into the city
sewer system. All commercial cooking facility shall install a grease trap
interceptor of the size and type approved by the city and in accordance with §
52.046 of this code and shall provide the city with proof of proper cleaning
and disposal of said interceptor upon request. Grease-trap interceptors are not
required for private living quarters or residential dwellings.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.006 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from the Board’s inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Board, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data.
   (B)   When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
“effluent data” as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.007 PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The Superintendent may publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
division (c), (d), or (h) below) unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-
month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (one
and four tenths (1.4) for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and one and two
tenths (1.2) for all other pollutants except pH);
         (c)   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the Board believes has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
         (d)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Board’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
         (e)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance;
         (f)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of Best Management Practices (BMPs), which the Board determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.008 WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   If another municipality or user located within another sanitary sewer
service provider (“service”) contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Board
shall enter into an interlocal municipal agreement with the contributing
municipality. In no case will an interlocal municipal agreement waive required
compliance with federal, state, or local regulations, statutes, or ordinances.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of the interlocal municipal agreement
by such municipality shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A) above,
the Board shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Board may deem necessary.
   (C)   An interlocal municipal agreement, as required by division (A) above,
shall contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those set out in §§
52.020 through 52.031 of this code. The requirement shall specify that such
ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary, and in a timely manner, to
reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or local limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis. The Board may require reports
detailing monitoring results on the discharge including flow and pollutant
characteristics and treatment upstream of the connection of the POTW, if deemed
necessary;
      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including identification of users, development and issuance of
control mechanisms, inspections, sampling and enforcement, will be conducted by
the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by
the Board; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the
contributing municipality and the Board;
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Board with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains
as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality’s
discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the Board access to the facilities of users
located within the contributing municipality’s jurisdictional boundaries for
the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary by
the Board; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the interlocal municipal agreement.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.020 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions.
      (1)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through, interference, or disruption.
      (2)   These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW, directly or indirectly, the following pollutants,
substances or nondomestic wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21
and any discharge that creates two consecutive readings on an explosive hazard
meter at any point in the POTW to exceed 5%, or any single reading to exceed
10% of the lower explosive limit;
      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than five and five tenths (5.5) or more
than ten and five tenths (10.5), or otherwise causing corrosive structural
damage to the POTW and equipment, or endangering human health;
      (3)   Any particulates, solids, organic, or inorganic material including
but not limited to food waste, microplastics, resins, or viscous substances in
a quantity sufficient to cause, potentially cause, or contribute to
interference or disruption to the POTW or collection system;
      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference or disruption to the POTW, sludge process, reuse and recovery, or
which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 120°F (49°C), or which
will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference, pass through, or
disruption;
      (7)   Any substance that, alone or in combination with other substances,
will or may through the creation of toxic, malodorous, or noxious gases, vapors
or fumes, solids, liquids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes create a public nuisance, create a hazard to
human or animal life, create a hazard to worker health or safety, or prevent
safe entry into any portion of the POTW for inspection, maintenance, or repair;
      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants or wastewater in accordance with §
52.045 of this code;
      (9)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, inks, dye wastes, paints, and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment
plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit;
      (10)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable federal or state regulations, statutes, and
ordinances and authorized by the Board;
      (11)   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, pond overflows, sumps,
condensate, de-ionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Board;
      (12)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes, unless specifically authorized by the Board;
      (13)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Board in
a wastewater discharge permit;
      (14)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (15)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW or receiving stream;
      (16)   Total Hexane Extractable Material (HEM), including components of
FOG derived from animal or vegetable fats, in concentrations greater than 100
mg/L as a maximum daily result or more stringent concentrations otherwise
determined to disrupt or interfere with normal operations of the POTW or
collection system;
      (17)   The discharge of pollutants that contribute more than 5% of the
MAIL is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the Board; and
      (18)   Any substance that would be a hazardous waste pursuant to 40
C.F.R. 261, if otherwise disposed.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW by overflows, leaks, or other operational or maintenance activity. No
wastewater or pollutant shall be directly introduced into a manhole or other
opening of the POTW, other than through an approved building sewer, unless
authorized by the Board.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.021 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Categorical pretreatment standards refers to any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with §§ 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of
industrial users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471. Any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is considered a
categorical industrial user (CIU) and shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
control authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with divisions (A)(5) and (6) of this section; reference 40 CFR
403.6(c).
      (2)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
control authority may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
industrial users; reference 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2).
      (3)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control authority
shall implement the combined waste stream formula imposed as an alternative
discharge limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (4)   A categorical industrial user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to
a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with divisions (A)(4)(a) and
(b) of this section; reference 40 CFR 403.15.
         (a)   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect
the presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in accordance
with this chapter. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake
pollutants must make application to the control authority. Upon request of the
industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a "net" basis
(i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the
requirements of division (b) of this section are met.
         (b)   Criteria.
            1.   Either: (i) the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
contained in 40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be
applied on a net basis; or (ii) the industrial user demonstrates that the
control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment
standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
            2.   Credit for generic or regulated pollutants such as BOD, TSS,
ammonia, phosphorus, or FOG should not be granted unless the industrial user
demonstrates that the constituents of the generic pollutant in the user's
effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of the generic pollutant
in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on
process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
            3.   Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value
equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to
determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted
under this chapter.
            4.   Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW
discharges. The Board may waive this requirement if it finds that no
environmental degradation will result.
      (5)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the Board
convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert the
limits to either a mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for the purpose of calculating effluent limit is within the
discretion of the Board. The Board may establish equivalent mass limits only if
the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in the items below.
         (a)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user
must:
            1.   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of
its control mechanism;
            2.   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
            3.   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's
actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
            4.   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
            5.   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the compliance period prior to the industrial
user's request for equivalent mass limits.
         (b)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
            1.   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
            2.   Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use
of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
            3.   Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify
the Board whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20% from
its baseline production rates determined in division (A)(5)(a)3. Upon
notification of a revised production rate, the Board will reassess the
equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed
conditions at the facility; and
            4.   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to division (A)(5)(a)l.
so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
         (c)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Board:
            1.   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial
user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
            2.   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
            3.   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
wastewater discharge permit terms if the industrial user's actual average daily
flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water
conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates
used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on
the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to § 52.026. The
industrial user must also be in compliance with § 52.113(C)(4)(a) regarding the
prohibition of bypass.
      (6)   The Board may convert the mass limits of the categorical
pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration
limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual
industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Board. When
converting such limits to concentration limits, the Board will use the
concentrations listed in the applicable subparts of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and
455 and document that dilution is not being substituted for treatment as
prohibited by § 52.026 (reference 40 CFR 403.6(d)). In addition, the Board will
document how the equivalent limits were derived for any changes from
concentration to mass limits, or vice versa, and make this information publicly
available, (reference 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)).
      (7)   Once included in its control mechanism, the industrial user must
comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were
derived, (reference 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)).
      (8)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitation,
reference 40 CFR 403.6(c)(8).
      (9)   Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based
standard shall notify the Board within two business days after the user has a
reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Board of such
anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in
its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average
production rate; reference 40 CFR 403.6(c)(9).
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.022 STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Users must comply with 327 I.A.C. 5 codified in Title 327 of the
Indiana Administrative Code.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.023 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   Where specific prohibitions or limits on pollutants or pollutant
parameters are developed by the Board in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c) such
limits shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of § 307(d) of
the Act and shall apply to significant industrial users on an individual
pollutant basis.
      (1)   The Board is authorized to establish, develop new, and revise local
limits pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.5(c) through regulation or by inclusion in
control mechanisms as long as the local limits are not less stringent than any
set forth in the pretreatment requirements of 327 I.A.C. 5 or other
requirements or prohibitions established by federal or state regulations,
statutes, or ordinances (see 327 I.A.C. 5).
      (2)   The Board may require implementation of BMPs by regulation, rule,
or by inclusion in control mechanisms to implement local limits, control of
pollutants discharged to the POTW, and the requirements of §
52.020 of this code.
      (3)   Local limits are incorporated as Maximum Allowable Industrial Loads
(MAILs).
      (4)   MAILs represent the total mass loading allowed from all significant
industrial users for a particular POC.
      (5)   Loadings of pollutants will be evaluated at the point representing
where wastewater is discharged to the POTW.
      (6)   The Board may issue a control mechanism for users which contribute
POCs higher than reference concentrations or more than 5% of the MAIL.
      (7)   Allocations shall be implemented as a maximum daily limitation
(concentration or mass). Alternative effluent limit types may also be specified
at the discretion of the Board per § 52.057(A)(1)(c).
      (8)   MAILs shall be located in Table 52.023-1 and may be updated by the
Board based on technical evaluations of local limits.
   Table 52.023-1
Pollutant MAILS (lbs/day)
Pollutant        MAILS (lbs/day)
Arsenic          5.39
Cadmium          0.03
Chromium (total) 21.24
Copper           7.75
Cyanide (total)  0.46
Lead             0.34
Mercury          0.00
Molybdenum       286.54
Nickel           4.72
Selenium         0.17
Silver           0.59
Zinc             27.14
 
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.024 BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).
   (A)   BMPs may be required by the Board to implement the prohibitions listed
in § 52.020 [See 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)].
   (B)   BMPs may also be required as an alternative means (i.e., management
plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and effluent limits to minimize the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
   (C)   BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, pollution
reduction practices, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage, or
otherwise minimize the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.025 MORE STRINGENT STANDARDS OR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Board may establish by regulation, or by inclusion in control
mechanisms more stringent standards or requirements on discharges of
nondomestic waste into the POTW, consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.026 DILUTION.
   (A)   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Board may
impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution in an attempt to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.027 REFERENCE CONCENTRATIONS.
   (A)   The Board shall maintain a list of Pollutants of Concern (POCs) and
corresponding reference concentrations which shall be used as screening
criteria to determine if a user may require a control mechanism to monitor,
limit, or control discharges.
      (1)   The list of POCs and their corresponding references concentrations
as specified shall be located in Table 52.027-1.
   Table 52.027-1
Pollutant Reference Concentration (mg/L)
Pollutant        Reference Concentration (mg/L)
Arsenic          0.32
Cadmium          0.002
Chromium (Total) 1.26
Copper           0.46
Cyanide (Total)  0.027
Lead             0.02
Mercury          0.00
Molybdenum       17.00
Nickel           0.28
Selenium         0.01
Silver           0.035
Zinc             1.61
 
      (2)   This list may be updated as determined by the Board to include
additional POCs or to update the reference concentrations.
   (B)   Monitoring data representative of the user's discharge shall be
collected and submitted as required by the Board meeting the requirements of §§
52.090 and 52.091 in this code.
   (C)   Representative data shall be used to document POCs including if the
user meets the requirements of a significant industrial user per §
52.004.
   (D)   The reference concentrations apply at a point that is representative
of the wastewater that is discharged into the POTW.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.028 CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.029 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Board and any industrial user.
Furthermore, no special agreement or arrangement shall allow any industrial
user to discharge POCs in excess of the maximum allowable headworks loading
(MAHL) of the POTW or conventional pollutants, which will exceed the POTW’s
treatment capacity.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.030 MASS LIMITS.
   The Board may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, any
local limit established by this chapter. The mass limits shall not allow an
industrial user to discharge POCs in excess of the maximum allowable headworks
loading (MAHL) of the POTW or conventional pollutants, which will exceed the
POTW’s treatment capacity. Furthermore, the mass limit shall not be less
stringent than federal or state requirements, statutes, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.031 CONNECTION TO SEWER REQUIRED.
   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-9-23-30, all parcels of property located within
the Highview Subdivision (Sections I and II) and Lakeview Subdivision (Sections
I, II, III and IV) in the city (as recorded in the office of the County
Recorder), where sewage or similar waste is produced and which are located
within 300 feet of an available municipal sanitary sewer collection line shall
be required to discontinue the use of privies, cesspools, septic tanks and
similar structures and shall be required to make a connection to an available
municipal sanitary sewer collection line.
   (B)   (1)   Should a property owner fail to comply with the requirements of
this section, the city may seek and obtain and order from the County Circuit
Court requiring the discontinuance of use of all privies, cesspools, septic
tanks and similar structures and requiring the compliance with this section.
      (2)   In addition, if such an order is granted requiring the
discontinuance of the use of all privies, cesspools, septic tanks and similar
structures, the city may also request that the order require that the potable
water supplied to the property by the city’s Water Department be shut off,
until the requirements of this section are complied with.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties that can be imposed, any person
that is found to have violated this section shall be required to reimburse the
city for all reasonable costs incurred in enforcing this section, including but
not limited to attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the enforcement of this
section.
(Ord. 2012-OR-12, passed 10-1-2012; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 52.040 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §§
52.020 through
52.023 of this code, within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or
the Board, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. The Board may
require minimum standards for pretreatment facilities including, but not
limited to, flow monitoring and compliance monitoring station(s).
   (B)   Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Board for review and shall be acceptable to the Board
before such facilities are constructed.
   (C)   The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.041 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Board may require users to restrict
their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate nondomestic wastewater from other sources of wastewater,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Board may require any user discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on his, her or their property and at his, her or their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow or a
control manhole for monitoring purposes. A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued solely for equalization of flow, strength or temperature.
   (C)   Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) discharges and sediment shall comply with
§ 52.046 of this code and FOG management plans.
      (1)   The Board may develop and implement a FOG management plan or other
management plan to regulate interceptors.
      (2)   No use of chemicals, enzymes, or other substances that dissolve
fat, oil, and grease shall be introduced into the grease, oil, and sand
interceptors, sewers, or POTW.
   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter at
a location designated by the Board.
   (E)   Users with the potential to discharge hydrogen sulfide gas, sulfides,
or other substances that cause odors in the sewers or at the wastewater
treatment plant shall be required to neutralize them using liquid or treatment
system and may be required to install and maintain H2O atmospheric gas
detectors at a location designated by the Board.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.042 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE; SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   All users shall adequately protect against slug discharges to sewers
or POTW.
   (B)   The Board, at its discretion, may evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs to develop an accidental discharge/slug control plan
including specific BMPs to control slug discharges. The Board may require any
user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan or take other
action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the
Board may develop such a plan for any user.
   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for notifying the Board of any accidental or slug
discharge no more than four hours from discovery. An initial notification
report is required under § 52.076(B) of this code;
      (4)   Procedures for follow-up written notification within five days
after an accidental discharge with the components required under § 52.076(C) of
this code; and
      (5)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, equalization
measures, management of periodic operational of maintenance activities,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of and discharging from containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic or other pollutants, including
solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
   (D)   Significant industrial users, or any other users with a slug discharge
control plan (SDCP) requirement in a control mechanism, are required to notify
the Board immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a slug discharge.
   (E)   The accidental discharge/slug control plan shall be updated to
adequately document BMPs in place to minimize the risk of incidents requiring
reporting per § 52.076 of this code.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.043 DUTY TO MITIGATE.
   (A)   Users shall take all reasonable steps to mitigate noncompliance with
any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   (B)   Upon identification of an impact to the POTW or the environment
including events such as loss or failure of all or part of the treatment
facility, the user shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
its permit, control its production or discharges (or both) until operation of
the treatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided.
   (C)   Response from the user may require accelerated or additional
monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the
noncompliance.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.044 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.
   (A)   In the event that a user does not adequately comply with pretreatment
standards and requirements including categorical pretreatment standards, a
compliance schedule may be proposed by the industrial user or required by the
Board.
   (B)   For compliance with categorical pretreatment standards, a compliance
schedule may be required by §
52.056(G)(1)(h) of this code.
   (C)   The following requirements shall be met when implementing compliance
schedules:
      (1)   The schedule shall contain compliance milestones in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.);
      (2)   No compliance milestone increment referred to in §
52.044(C)(1) of this code shall exceed nine months; in no event shall more than
nine months elapse between compliance milestone progress reports to the Board;
      (3)   Compliance milestone progress reports shall be submitted to the
Board by the user no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, if not, the date on which it expects
to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and
      (4)   The Board may modify the timeline, the required corrective actions,
or both based on the following:
         (a)   Interim measures identified and implemented;
         (b)   Consideration for capital expenditures;
         (c)   New instances of noncompliance; and
         (d)   Other considerations deemed by the Board to warrant a
modification to the compliance schedule.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.045 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Hauled wastewater shall not be introduced into the treatment plant or
anywhere in the POTW.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.046 GREASE TRAPS AND GREASE INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease traps or grease interceptors shall be provided as required by
§§ 52.005 and 52.041 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Charlestown,
Indiana (referenced and incorporated herein) (the “Code”) and in accordance
with the Indiana Plumbing Code (675 IAC 16-1.4), as it may be amended from time
to time (the “Indiana Plumbing Code”). Grease traps and grease interceptors
shall also be provided for all food handling establishments or any other
establishments where grease, fats, or oils may be introduced into the drainage
sewerage system in quantities that can affect line stoppages or hinder sewage
treatment. These establishments include but are not limited to restaurants,
cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotels, hospitals,
sanitariums, factories, churches, retirement homes, school kitchens, grocery
stores, gas stations, car washes, and auto maintenance shops (collectively,
“establishments” and “establishment” in the singular).
   (B)   Design of grease traps or grease interceptors shall be determined by
Indiana Plumbing Code requirements.
   (C)   Discharge with a temperature exceeding 120°F (49°C) shall be
prohibited from entering a grease trap or grease interceptor.
   (D)   Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be located outside of an
establishment for ease of access and inspection unless another location is
approved in writing by the Board.
   (E)   Grease trap and grease interceptor inspection and acceptance by the
Board for new establishments shall be required prior to issuing approval to
open.
   (F)   Frequency of cleaning and maintenance for grease traps and grease
interceptors shall be at a minimum of every 180 days or sooner if deemed
necessary by the Board or by volume of collected material.
   (G)   Records of cleaning and maintenance shall include but not be limited
to:
      (1)   Date of service;
      (2)   Description of service;
      (3)   A minimum of three years of records shall be maintained and
available for review;
      (4)   Identity of person performing the service; and
      (5)   Method and location of grease disposal.
   (H)   Any establishment found in violation of this section may be fined as
detailed below:
      (1)   First offense: Fine of $250.
      (2)   Second offense: Fine of $250.
      (3)   Third offense: Fine of up to $1,000 per day until the violation is
addressed and remedied.
      (4)   If additional violations occur, the Board may, in its discretion,
disconnect the establishment from the City of Charlestown's sanitary sewer
system.
   (I)   Modifications or exceptions to this section must have the approval of
the Board, and must not be in conflict with the Indiana Plumbing Code.
   (J)   Establishments shall be in compliance with the requirements herein by
January 1, 2025.
   (K)   Any terms not defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in the
Indiana Plumbing Code or Chapter 52 of the Code.
(Ord. 2024-OR-07, passed 8-5-2024; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.047 DENTAL DISCHARGERS.
   (A)   Dental dischargers must comply with 40 CFR part 441- Dental Office
Point Source Category.
   (B)   The Board requires dental dischargers to submit a one-time compliance
report as required in 40 CFR 441.50(a).
   (C)   The Board may periodically survey or inspect dental dischargers to
ensure compliance with the code.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
§ 52.055 WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the Board, a user must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of his, her or their wastewater within ten days of the
request. The Board is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.056 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (A)   Requirement. The Board has the authority to issue a wastewater
discharge permit or other control mechanism. SIUs shall have a wastewater
discharge permit with the requirements in § 52.057 of this code. The Board may
issue other control mechanisms to users that are not SIUs if needed to comply
with the requirements of the code. Control mechanisms may have specific
requirements that define monitoring, site-specific limits, special conditions,
prohibited discharges, or BMPs. No SIU shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining a permit or other control mechanism from IDEM and/or
the Board, except that a SIU that has filed a timely renewal pursuant to §
52.056(E) of this code. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a control
mechanism shall be deemed a violation of the code and subjects the user to the
enforcement remedies set out in this chapter. Obtaining a control mechanism
does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all federal, state,
and local regulations, statutes, and ordinances.
   (B)   Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a control mechanism
who was discharging nondomestic wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective
date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future,
shall, within ten days after said date, apply to IDEM for a wastewater
discharge permit.
   (C)   New connections. Any user required to obtain a control mechanism
permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must apply
for such permit from IDEM prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. The user must also have prior approval from the Board before
discharging to the POTW.
   (D)   Duration. A permit for any significant industrial user as defined in §
52.004 of this code must be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five years from the effective date of the permit. Control mechanisms for other
industrial users may be issued for any duration including no expiration date,
at the discretion of the Board.
   (E)   Reissuance. A user with an expiring control mechanism shall apply for
reissuance by submitting a complete application or renewal application on a
form provided by the Board, in accordance with § 52.056(G) of this code, a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing control
mechanism. The Board may authorize a user to update a previous application or
otherwise provide changes and other requested information since the last
application submission in lieu of completing and submitting a new application,
at the Board's discretion.
   (F)   Decisions.
      (1)   The Board will evaluate the data and reports provided by the user
as part of the application, renewal, or changed condition request and may
require additional information.
      (2)   Information submitted will be used to make control mechanism
decisions.
      (3)   The requested discharge or changed discharge shall be deemed to be
denied if the control mechanism is not issued or otherwise communicated by the
date of the expiration of the current control mechanism or within 90 days of
submittal of a control mechanism application.
      (4)   The Board may deny a control mechanism or limit discharges from
users.
   (G)   Contents.
      (1)   All significant industrial users required to obtain a control
mechanism must submit an application with information related to the user's
discharges. The Board may require users to submit all or some of the following
information as part of an application:
         (a)   Identifying information.
            1.   The name and address of the facility, including the name of
the operator and owner.
            2.   Contact information, description of activities, facilities,
and plant production processes on the premises.
         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
         (c)   Description of operations.
            1.   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, process, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic or
process flow diagram, which indicates points of discharge into the POTW from
the regulated processes;
            2.   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged into the POTW;
            3.   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
            4.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day); and
            5.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge.
         (d)   Time and duration of discharges.
         (e)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the discharge.
         (f)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in GPD, to the POTW from regulated process streams and
other streams, as necessary, to allow alternative discharge limits set out in §
52.021(A)(3) of the code and 40 CFR 403.6(e)).
         (g)   Measurement of pollutants.
            1.   New sources or new discharges may estimate the nature and
concentration of pollutants reported based on knowledge from facilities with
similar operations and planned pretreatment.
            2.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such facilities exist or immediately downstream from
the regulated process if no pretreatment facilities are present.
            3.   The information submitted shall reflect categorical
pretreatment standards (if applicable) for each regulated process and shall
also reflect the nature and concentration of pollutants for all nondomestic
discharges from the facility.
               i.   For users subject to categorical standards: if other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the
user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards.
               ii.   Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Board.
            4.   Where the applicable categorical standard requires compliance
with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the Board or the applicable standards to determine
compliance with the standard.
            5.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 52.090 and § 52.091 of this code.
            6.   The Board may allow submittal of data which utilizes only
historical data so long as the data includes adequate and representative data
for the Pollutants and monitoring locations being requested.
            7.   The Board may require a minimum of four grab samples for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds
for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist.
            8.   The report shall include documentation of the time, date and
place of sampling and methods of analysis.
         (h)   Compliance schedule.
            1.   If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment or operation and
maintenance must be provided by the user.
            2.   For new sources subject to categorical standards the
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
            3.   A compliance schedule pursuant to this code must meet the
requirements set out in §
52.044(C).
         (i)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Board to evaluate
the discharge request.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.057 CONTROL MECHANISM CONTENTS.
   (A)   Control mechanisms shall include conditions to control discharges
consistent with the purpose of this code.
      (1)   All wastewater discharge permits (permit) must contain and control
mechanisms may contain:
         (a)   A statement that indicates the permit issuance date, expiration
date and effective date.
         (b)   A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior
notification to the Board in accordance with §
52.061 of this code, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator
with a copy of the existing permit or control mechanism.
         (c)   Effluent limits necessary to ensure discharges are controlled.
The following effluent limit types and corresponding limits shall be defined:
            1.   Instantaneous. The results of discrete samples taken at any
time (composite or grab) are compared against the instantaneous limit.
            2.   Daily maximum. The arithmetic mean of all valid sample results
collected for a calendar day shall be compared against the daily maximum limit.
            3.   Weekly average. The arithmetic mean of all valid sample
results collected for a week shall be compared against the weekly average
limit. Multiple samples collected on a calendar day shall be averaged prior to
calculating the weekly average.
         
            4.   Monthly average. The arithmetic mean of all valid sample
results collected for a calendar month shall be compared against the monthly
average limit. Multiple samples collected on a calendar day shall be averaged
prior to calculating the monthly average.
            5.   Additional effluent limit types may be applied but must be
defined in the individual control mechanism for which they are relevant.
            6.   Averages that are mass limits are to be the arithmetic mean of
individual mass calculations per sample event (concentration and corresponding
flow during the sample event) collected during the time period specified by the
limit type.
         (d)   BMPs if required by the applicable categorical pretreatment
standard(s).
         (e)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants (or BMP) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency,
and sample type based on federal, state, and local regulations, statutes,
ordinances.
         (f)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such a schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local regulations,
statutes, or ordinances.
         (g)   Requirements to control slug discharges per §
52.042 of this code.
         (h)   Notification that users may apply for a waiver from monitoring
for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in
accordance with §
52.058 of this code.
         (i)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Board in accordance
with §
52.058 of this code must be included as a condition in the user's permit or
other control mechanism.
      (2)   In addition to the above requirements, any permit or other control
mechanism may also contain the following requirements:
         (a)   Limits on the average and maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of POCs.
         (c)   Requirements for the installation, operation, calibration, and
maintenance of suitable flow and compliance monitoring.
         (d)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
         (e)   Requirements for the development and implementation of a SDCP or
other special conditions including BMPs or management plans necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges and
otherwise minimize pollutants introduced into the POTW. Documentation of the
BMP implementation may be required to be submitted.
         (f)   Requirements to comply with the unit charge or schedule of user
charges and fees associated with this code.
         (g)   A statement that compliance with the control mechanism does not
relieve the user of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal,
state, and local regulations, statutes, and ordinances, including those which
become effective after issuance of the control mechanism.
      (3)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Board to ensure
compliance with this code, and other federal, state, and local regulations,
statutes, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.058 WAIVER OF POLLUTANT NOT PRESENT.
   (A)   The Board may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be
present solely due to domestic wastewater discharged from the facility provided
that the domestic wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical
standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
      (2)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the control mechanism, but in no case longer than five
years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can
be granted for each subsequent control mechanism.
      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
      (4)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed as required in §
52.081(E) of this code.
      (5)   Non-detectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
      (6)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Board must be included as
a condition in the user's control mechanism. The reasons supporting the waiver
and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Board for three years after expiration of the waiver.
      (7)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's
control mechanism by the Board, the industrial user must certify on each report
with the statement required in, that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user.
      (8)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present based on changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of § 52.074
(A) of this code or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the
Board and notify the Board in accordance with § 52.075 of this code.
      (9)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.059 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person, including the user, may petition the Board to reconsider
the terms of a control mechanism within 30 days of its issuance.
      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to
be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the control
mechanism provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in control mechanism.
      (3)   All conditions of the control mechanism shall be in effect pending
the appeal.
      (4)   If the Board fails to act within 60 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions to deny the appeal
shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial
review.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.060 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The Board may modify a control mechanism for good cause, including,
but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any changes to federal, state, or local regulations,
statutes, or ordinances;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of control mechanism issuance;
      (3)   To incorporate changed or more representative wastewater
characteristics such as identification of additional POC or different
concentrations than otherwise provided to the Board;
      (4)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (5)   Information indicating that the nondomestic discharge poses a
threat to the Board's POTW, the Board personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (6)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the control mechanism;
      (7)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the application or other information provided to the Board, including any
required reporting;
      (8)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (9)   To correct typographical or other errors in the control mechanism;
or
      (10)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator in accordance with § 52.061 of this code.
   (B)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a control mechanism
modification does not stay any condition required by the control mechanism.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.061 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Control mechanisms may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the existing user provides a notice of transfer to the Board
at least 30 days in advance of the transfer and the Board approves the
transfer. The notice to the Board must include a written certification
statement with the below minimum components signed by an authorized
representative of the new owner or operator per § 52.004 of this code which
certifies the following:
      (1)   States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes.
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
control mechanism.
   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of transfer renders the control
mechanism voided on the date of the facility transfer. Other control mechanisms
may not be transferred; the new owner shall provide survey or permit
application information as requested by the Board.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.062 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION OR TERMINATION.
   (A)   The Board may revoke a control mechanism for good cause, including,
but not limited to the following reasons:
      (1)   Violation of the control mechanism;
      (2)   Failure to notify the Board of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge pursuant to § 52.075 of this code;
      (3)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
      (4)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (5)   Refusing to allow the Board timely access to the facility premises
and records for the purposes of inspection or monitoring;
      (6)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (7)   Failure to pay fines;
      (8)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (9)   Failure to meet compliance schedules or other requirements of
enforcement remedies;
      (10)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or permit application or
failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of
the discharge;
      (11)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the control mechanism or this chapter; and
      (12)   Ceasing operations or failure to notify of a transfer of ownership
without prior Board approval per § 52.061 of this code.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 52.070 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Certification of the following reports is required by an authorized or
duly authorized representative of the user and contain the certification
statement in § 52.081(B) of this code:
      (1)   All baseline monitoring reports;
      (2)   Control mechanism applications;
      (3)   Control mechanism renewals;
      (4)   Periodic compliance reports;
      (5)   Reports on compliance with categorical standards; and
      (6)   Requests for waivers for pollutants not present must be signed by
an authorized representative or duly authorized representative of the user and
contain the certification statement in § 52.081 of this code.
   (B)   Changes in designation of signatory authority.
      (1)   If the designation of an authorized representative or duly
authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual
or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written
authorization satisfying the requirements of this chapter must be submitted to
the Board prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
   (C)   Electronic reporting.
      (1)   Users may be required to electronically submit reports to satisfy
reporting requirements.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.071 NSCIU ANNUAL REPORTING.
   (A)   A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial
user (NSCIU) by the Board pursuant to §
52.004 of this code, must annually submit the signed certification statement in
§ 52.081(D) of this code.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.072 BASELINE MONITORING REPORT (BMR).
   (A)   A baseline monitoring report is required for:
      (1)   Users subject to new or updated categorical pretreatment standards.
Users shall submit a BMR within 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later;
      (2)   Existing significant industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards and currently discharging to the POTW. Users shall have
a BMR on file or in instances where a BMR is not on file, a BMR shall be
submitted by the user in the timeframe requested by the Board; and
      (3)   New sources subject to categorical pretreatment standards. Users
shall submit a BMR at least 90 days prior to commencement of the discharge. The
BMR shall include the report components specified below as well as the method
of pretreatment it intends to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.
      (4)   Report components. A report which contains the information listed
in §
52.072(B) of this code and any other information required by the Board.
   (B)   Compliance certification.
      (1)   In addition to the report certification required in §
52.070(A) of this code by an authorized representative, a compliance
certification is required to be signed by a professional engineer or the
authorized industrial pretreatment compliance manager.
      (2)   The compliance certification shall document whether or not
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are
being met on a consistent basis; and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance, or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
      (3)   The compliance certification shall include a statement documenting
that a professional engineer or the authorized industrial pretreatment
compliance manager has reviewed the BMR including the facility operations and
resulting discharge characteristics.
   (C)   The report components shall be completed as requested by the Board
including the following information:
      (1)   All information required in §
52.056(G) of this code;
      (2)   Compliance certification per this division (B) of this section for
users subject to divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.073 INITIAL REPORT ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   An initial report on compliance is required for the following users:
      (1)   Existing Sources subject to categorical pretreatment standards:
within 90 days following the date for final compliance; and
      (2)   New sources subject to categorical pretreatment standards: within
90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW.
   (B)   The report components shall be completed as requested by the Board
including the following information:
      (1)   All information required in §
52.056(G)(1)(f) and (g) of this code; and
      (2)   Compliance certification per §
52.072(B) of this code for users subject to §
52.072(A)(3) of this code.
   (C)   For industrial users subject to equivalent mass of concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c) the
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production
rate.
   (D)   For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period.
   (E)   All sampling shall be done in conformance with § 52.090 and § 52.091
of this code.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.074 PERIODIC REPORT ON COMPLIANCE OR SELF-MONITORING REPORT (SMR).
   (A)   Industrial users with control mechanisms may be required to
periodically submit compliance reports to the Board to document compliance with
the relevant pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (B)   Requirements for significant industrial users as defined per §
52.004 of this code:
      (1)   The minimum reporting frequency is semi-annually; a more frequent
reporting frequency may be required.
      (2)   Report contents.
         (a)   Nature and concentration of Pollutants in the effluent including
date and monitoring location.
         (b)   Measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows. If
required by the Board, more detailed flow reporting.
         (c)   If required, management plans for reduction or control of
pollutants.
         (d)   Documentation of BMPs as required by the pretreatment standard
or as otherwise required by the Board to determine compliance.
      (3)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 52.081(B) of this code.
   (C)   Requirements for NSCIU defined per §
52.004 of this code:
      (1)   The reporting frequency is annual.
      (2)   Report contents.
         (a)   Statements or documentation as required such as manifests,
maintenance logs, monitoring results, flow monitoring results, or other
information as required by the Board to document compliance with best
management practices (BMPs) required for the reduced reporting.
         (b)   Signed certification in accordance with § 52.081(B) of this
code.
   (D)   Requirements for other control mechanisms.
      (1)   Users with a control mechanism other than a permit may be required
to submit reports at a specified frequency or upon request by the Board.
      (2)   If required, report components may include the following:
         (a)   Flow measurement and analytical results.
         (b)   Statements or other documentation as required such as manifests,
maintenance logs, monitoring results, flow monitoring results, or other
information as required by the Board to document compliance with BMPs required
for the reduced reporting.
         (c)   Management plans and corresponding documentation for reduction
or control of pollutants.
         (d)   Signed certification in accordance with § 52.081(B) of this
code.
   (E)   The Board monitoring in lieu of the user.
      (1)   Where the Board performs the required sampling and analysis in lieu
of the user, the user may not be required to submit the report certification.
      (2)   Where the Board collects all the information required for the
report, including flow data, the industrial user may not be required to submit
the report.
   (F)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this chapter
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Board, using the procedures prescribed in §
52.090 and § 52.091 of this code, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.075 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   All industrial users are required to notify the Board of any planned
changes to manufacturing operations or wastewater management which may
significantly alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30
days prior to the commencement of the changed condition.
      (1)   The Board may require the industrial user to submit information as
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a control mechanism application under § 52.056(G) of this code.
      (2)   The Board may issue a control mechanism under § 52.056(A) of this
code or modify an existing control mechanism under § 52.060 in response to
changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
      (3)   The Board may deny the changed discharge or modify the control
mechanism to incorporate the changed conditions.
   (B)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, changes in flow and chemicals both in quantity and type.
Changes in production shall be reported when production-based limits are
utilized.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.076 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   Immediate notification within four hours of discovery to the Board and
Wastewater Department is required for:
      (1)   Accidental and slug discharges.
      (2)   Internal or operational monitoring data or observations indicating
that a pretreatment standard is or is likely to be violated.
   (B)   The initial notification of the event shall include at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   Location of the discharge;
      (2)   Date, time, and duration of discharge;
      (3)   Description (type) of event resulting in the discharge;
      (4)   The substance discharged;
      (5)   Concentration or strength of discharge;
      (6)   Volume of discharge;
      (7)   The cause of discharge; and
      (8)   Corrective actions taken by the user.
         (a)   If any of the required information is not available when the
incident is initially communicated, then the missing information shall be
acknowledged and provided by the user as soon as it is available.
   (C)   Follow-up report.
      (1)   A written follow-up report is required to be submitted five days
following identification of the discharge unless waived by the Board.
      (2)   The report shall contain:
         (a)   A description of the investigation;
         (b)   Amendments to the initial report;
         (c)   Corrective actions to prevent future similar occurrences
including updated procedures such as the SDPC; and
         (d)   Timeframes to implement corrective actions.
   (D)   The Board may issue an enforcement remedy as authorized in §§ 52.110
through 52.113 of this code which may contain additional corrective actions or
required responses.
   (E)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which might be incurred because of damage or
disruption to the POTW or the environment.
   (F)   Such notification does not relieve user of any fines, penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this code, or other federal,
state, or local regulations, statutes, and ordinances.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see § 52.999
§ 52.077 REPORTS OF EFFLUENT LIMIT EXCEEDANCES.
   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates exceedance of an effluent
limit, the user must notify the Board within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
exceedance.
   (B)   A resampling event shall be performed and submitted to the Board
within 30 days after the user becomes aware of the violation.
      (1)   Where the Board performs sampling in lieu of the user, the Board
shall repeat the sampling event unless the user is notified to perform the
resampling event.
   (C)   Resampling is not required for the following situations:
      (1)   If the Board or industrial user performs monitoring at the user's
facility at least once a month; or
      (2)   If the Board or industrial user performs sampling at the user's
facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time
when the user or the Board receives the results.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.078 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   Discharge of any substance that would be a hazardous waste pursuant to
40 CFR 261, if otherwise disposed of, is prohibited, in accordance with §
52.020(A) of this code. Should a user discharge hazardous waste in violation of
§
52.020(A) of this code, said user must comply with the following provisions:
   (B)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the Board, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month into the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes and an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month.
   (C)   Notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under §
52.075 of this code. The notification requirement does not apply to pollutants
already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
the self-monitoring requirements of §
52.070, §
52.073, and §
52.074 of this code or other reporting requirements as required by the Board.
   (D)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days before the
discharge commences. Any notification under this division need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
   (E)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the Board, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations.
   (F)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise authorized to be discharged by this code, a control mechanism issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal, state, or local regulations, statutes,
or ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.079 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   (A)   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Board as the Board may require.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.080 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Board within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the Board within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.081 CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Reports required under this code shall be submitted in a format as
required by the Board which may be in an electronic format compliant with the
EPA approved Cross Media Electronic Reporting Regulation (CROMERR) per the Code
of Federal Regulations Title 40, Part 3.
   (B)   Certification statements as required in this section shall be provided
by an authorized or duly authorized representative as defined in §
52.004 of this code.
   (C)   Standard report certification is required for the following reports:
      (1)   Applications in accordance with §
52.056(C) of this code;
      (2)   Baseline monitoring reports under §
52.072 of this code;
      (3)   Reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines under §
52.073 of this code;
      (4)   Periodic compliance reports required by §
52.074 of this code; and
      (5)   Initial request for a monitoring waiver to forego sampling of a
pollutant on the basis of §
52.058 of this code.
      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
   (D)   Annual certification is required for NSCIUs. Users determined by the
Board to be a NSCIU pursuant to §
52.004 and § 52.071 of this code must annually submit the following
certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in
§ 52.004 of this code. This certification shall accompany a report in a format
as required by the Board:
      Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
          , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during
the period from                   ,               to                ,
                     [months, days, year]:
      (a)   The facility described as                        [facility name]
met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as
described in 40 CFR 403.3(v)[2);
      (b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements during this reporting period; and
      (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
Categorical Wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
      This compliance certification is based on the following information:
                                                                      
                                                                      
   (E)   Certification of pollutants not present. The following certification
is required for users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on §
52.058 of this code to certify on each report that there has been no increase
in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the user.
      Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR              
[specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of
                      [list Pollutant(s)] in the Wastewaters due to the
activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under 40
CFR 403.12(e).
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 52.090 WASTEWATER SURVEY.
   (A)   The Board is authorized to identify and locate all possible users
which might be subject to the Board's approved pretreatment program, any other
federal, state, or local regulations, statutes, or ordinances, or may be
sources of emerging POCs.
   (B)   The Board is authorized to prepare forms for this purpose and may
periodically require users to respond to the requested information.
   (C)   When requested by the Board and at least once every two years, all
users must submit information on the nature, volume, and characteristics of
their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their
discharge or at an alternative timeframe specified by the Board.
   (D)   The Board may require the User to complete specific analysis of
representative discharges associated with the survey request.
   (E)   Failure to return the survey as requested by the Board is considered a
violation of this chapter and shall be reasonable grounds for enforcement
action pursuant to § 52.110 through § 52.113 of this code including termination
of service.
(Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.091 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136,
and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (B)   If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the
Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant
in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures,
including procedures suggested by the Board or other parties approved by the
EPA.
   (C)   Analyses performed shall be sufficiently sensitive as compared to
federal, state, and local regulations, statutes, and ordinances, such as
pollutants with established MAILs, reference concentrations, pretreatment
standards, and emerging pollutant water quality criteria.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.092 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Samples collected to satisfy the requirements of this code including
the required reports must be based on data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report.
   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge
for the associated reporting period.
   (C)   Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (D)   Sample collection types.
      (1)   Grab sample is a sample that is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed
15 minutes.
      (2)   Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals on an increment of
either flow or time.
      (3)   Composite wastewater samples shall be collected using 24-hour flow
proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Board.
   (E)   Except as indicated in division (G) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In
the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Board may authorize the
use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the
user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (F)   Sample collection shall follow procedures (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance.
   (G)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (H)   The Board may require the industrial user to install flow and sample
monitoring equipment accessible by the Board. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense.
   (I)   All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated as required by the analysis or as otherwise necessary to ensure
their accuracy.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.093 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   (A)   (1)   The Board or control authority shall have the right to enter the
premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this code and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder.
      (2)   Users shall allow the Board or control authority ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the Board or control authority will be permitted to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (C)   The Board or control authority shall have the right to set up on the
user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
   (D)   The Board or control authority may require the user to pay for and
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their
accuracy.
   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Board or control authority and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Board or control authority access
to the user's premises shall be a violation of this code.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.094 INSPECTION WARRANTS.
   (A)   If the Board has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this code, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of
the city designed to verify compliance with this code or any permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the Board may seek issuance of a inspection warrant from
the court of the appropriate jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.095 TIMING.
   (A)   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
   (B)   In the event that electronic reports from CROMERR approved programs
are required by the Board, the date of receipt of the report shall be the date
that the report is electronically transmitted.
   (C)   Incomplete reports may be considered late for not including the
required reporting compontents in §
52.074 of this code.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.096 RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this code shall retain
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
   (B)   Records shall include: Documentation associated with BMPs established
under § 52.024 of this code, the date, exact place, method and time of sampling
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of such analyses.
   (C)   These records shall remain available to the Board for a period of at
least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration
of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Board, state, or EPA.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.110 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. When the Superintendent finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that
user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions
or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The Board may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to divisions (D) and (E)
below and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Board may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the Board and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action,
the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on
any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a
bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (D)   Compliance orders.
      (1)   When the Board finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Board
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come
into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
are installed and properly operated.
      (2)   Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the Board
may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (F)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s discharge,
after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge,
after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to
the environment.
         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings in division (G) below are initiated
against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the date
of any show cause or termination hearing under divisions (C) or (G) of this
section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (G)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in this chapter, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
52.020 through
52.026 of this code.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (B) above
why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
Board shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.111 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Informal review meeting. Informal call or meeting to discuss the
noncompliance either before or after the enforcement action is issued.
   (B)   Informal communication. Informal communication is used to identify and
document minor instances of noncompliance with the user to avoid further
noncompliance and escalation of enforcement.
   (C)   Warning letter. Warning letters communicate instances of noncompliance
of pretreatment standards or requirements. The Board may require the user to
complete corrective actions including a written response to the violation.
   (D)   Notification of violation. When the Board finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Board may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Board.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Board to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
   (E)   Standards meeting. A meeting to discuss noncompliance and subsequent
enforcement including discussion of corrective actions.
   (F)   Consent orders. The Board may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with
any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and
effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to divisions (I) and (J)
below and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (G)   Significant noncompliance documentation. Provided by the Board to a
user to document significant noncompliance status per § 52.007 of this code and
the associated public notice requirement.
   (H)   Show cause hearing. The Board may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
to appear before the Board and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (I)   Compliance orders.
      (1)   When the Board finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Board
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come
into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances
are installed and properly operated.
      (2)   Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (J)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the Board finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Board may issue an order to
the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
user to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (K)   Administrative fines.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this code, any user may be
assessed a monetary penalty on a per violation, per day basis in accordance
with I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B) of the Indiana Code.
         (a)   For a first violation, a fine of not more than $2,500 per day,
per violation shall be imposed.
         (b)   For subsequent violations, a fine of not more than $7,500 per
day, per violation shall be imposed.
         (c)   For any violation, a fine of no less than $1,000 per day, per
violation shall be imposed.
      (2)   In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits,
fines may be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
      (3)   Failure to pay administrative fines shall result in late fees or
interest fees consistent with the Board's policy for unpaid utility bills.
   (L)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The Board may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
Board may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Board
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Board may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Board that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in division (N) below are initiated against the user.
         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Board prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under divisions (H) or (N) of this section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (M)   Water supply severance. When a User has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this code, control mechanism, order issued herein, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may
be severed. Service may recommence, at the user's expense, only after the user
has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply and has paid all
outstanding fees, fines, or penalties incurred as a result of noncompliance
with this code.
   (N)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to the provisions in this chapter, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 52.020 through §
52.031 of this code.
      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (H) above
why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
Board shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
   (O)   Appeals.
      (1)   Users desiring to dispute enforcement remedies including penalties,
fines, and charges must file a written request for the Board to reconsider the
remedy within 30 days of being notified.
      (2)   The Board shall respond within 30 days with approval or denial of
the appeal or notify the user that a show cause hearing shall take place per
division (H) of this section.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see § 52.999
§ 52.112 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the Board finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Board may petition the court of the appropriate jurisdiction
through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance
of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the user. The Board may also seek such other action as
is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
   (B)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter are
not exclusive. The Board may take any, all or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However,
the Board may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the Board is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
   (C)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, permit, other control mechanism, order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the Board for a
civil penalty of at least $1,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a
monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties may accrue for
each day during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The Board may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Board.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (D)   Criminal prosecution.
      (1)   The Board is authorized to refer violations of this code to the
proper authorities for the investigation and enforcement of criminal matters.
      (2)   Criminal penalties shall be a minimum of $1,000 per day for each
violation of this code or as authorized by state statutes.
      (3)   Criminal prosecution applies to the following users:
         (a)   Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this code, permit, other control mechanism, order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement.
         (b)   Any user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage. The fine shall
be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
         (c)   Any user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this code,
permit, other control mechanism, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025) Penalty,
see §
52.999
§ 52.113 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (A)(3) below are met.
      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the Board
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (5)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
      (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions in §
52.020(A) of this code or the specific prohibitions in §
52.020(B)(3) through (B)(19) of this code if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and
that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through
or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
      (3)   Compliance with a local limit shall be based on:
         (a)   Concentrations at the time of the noncompliance are below the
reference concentrations established in this code; or
         (b)   The loading (instantaneous) is below 5% of the MAIL.
   (C)   Bypass.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
a user’s treatment facility.
         SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of division (C)(3) and (C)(4) below.
      (3)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the Board, at least ten days before the date of the
bypass, if possible. A user shall submit written notice to the Board of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Board may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury or severe property damage;
            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
            3.   The user submitted notices as required under this division
(C).
         (b)   The Board may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Board determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in division (C)(4)(a) above.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.125 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   (A)   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may include:
      (1)   Fees for investigations, user determinations, plan review, and/or
evaluating new or expanded nondomestic discharges;
      (2)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the
cost of reviewing and processing such applications;
      (3)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
      (4)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;
      (5)   Fees for filing appeals; and
      (6)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties
chargeable by the city.
   (B)   The Board is authorized to develop alternative fees based on other
models such as hydraulic or pollutant capacity; and
   (C)   The fees associated with this code shall be documented as part of the
user charge fee schedule:
      (1)   The user charge fee schedule is located in Table 52.125-1.
   Table 52.123-1
User Charge Fee Schedule
Fee Description Per Regulation Proposed Rate
User Charge Fee Schedule
Fee Description Per Regulation          Proposed Rate
UI Permit Application Fee (new users or $1,500
renewals)
Plan Review & User Determinations       $800
Annual Base Activities Fee              SIUs: $3,000; $4,000 if PFAS testing is
Annual inspection, review of periodic   being performed by the Board
monitoring reports, annual cross-check, NSCIUs or zero dischargers: $1,500
software subscription, minor permit     Other control mechanism (e.g., FSEs):
modifications                           $250
                                        Permit Renewals: $1,500
Additional Administrative Services      Enforcement activities: $200/hr (Board
Permit modifications, enforcement       or contracted services) for time to
administrative fees, additional         administer
monitoring events, mitigation from IU   User monitoring by the Board: $150 for
discharges; may include fees from       sampler set-up and collection plus
contract services such as laboratories  actual cost from contract lab
or consultants                          Mitigation or recovery from user
                                        discharges: actual cost incurred
FOG Program Implementation              $250/yr
                                        Surcharge fees shall be based on
                                        representative User data and based on
                                        monthly average concentrations and the
                                        total actual or estimated flow
Fees for strength greater than normal   discharged unless specified otherwise
domestic sewage (surcharges)            in the control mechanism.
                                        Fees shall be based on the surcharge
                                        table (Table 52.128-1) with its
                                        calculations based on a cost per pound
                                        of pollutant above the surcharge
                                        strength indicated.
Other fees, rates and charges           Technically developed as-needed
Alternative fees based on other models  Technically developed as-needed
such as hydraulic or pollutant capacity
 
      (2)   In instances where redundant fee types are listed in other
chapters, this chapter shall take precedence; and
      (3)   This list may be updated as determined by the Board to update, add,
or remove user fees or rates.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2025-OR-19, passed - -2025)
§ 52.126 WASTEWATER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.
   Table 52.126-1
High Strength/Surcharge Table
          Current              2026                 2027
Pollutant Surcharge            Surcharge            Surcharge
          Strength  Cost/Pound Strength  Cost/Pound Strength (mg/ Cost/Pound
          (mg/L)               (mg/L)               L)
High Strength/Surcharge Table
            Current              2026                 2027
Pollutant   Surcharge            Surcharge            Surcharge
            Strength  Cost/Pound Strength  Cost/Pound Strength (mg/ Cost/Pound
            (mg/L)               (mg/L)               L)
BOD         250       $0.50      250       $0.50      250           $0.50
COD         500       $0.25      500       $0.25      500           $0.25
TSS         275       $0.32      275       $0.32      275           $0.32
HEM         20        $1.00      20        $1.00      20            $1.00
Ammonia- N  50        $1.50      50        $1.50      50            $1.50
Phosphorus  7         $5.00      7         $5.00      7             $5.00
(Total)
 
(Ord. 2001-OR-09, passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2005-OR-12, passed 6-27-2005; Ord.
2010-OR-09, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2021-OR-15, passed 7-8-2021; Ord. 2025-OR-19,
passed - -2025) Penalty, see § 52.999
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   When the Board finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Board
may fine such user in an amount not less than $1,000 per violation, per day and
not to exceed $2,500 per violation, per day for the first violation or $7,500
per violation, per day for subsequent violations in accordance with I.C. 36-1-8
(a)(10)(b). Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In
the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.
      (2)   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days,
be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and interest
shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 10% per month. A lien against the user’s
property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.
      (3)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request
for the Board to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within 15 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the
Board may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user’s appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be
returned to the user. The Board may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
      (4)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (B)   (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for
a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 per violation, per day and a maximum civil
penalty of $2,500 per violation, per day for the first violation or $7,500 per
violation per day for subsequent violations in accordance with I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)
(10)(B) (or the maximum amount allowed by state law). In the case of a monthly
or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day
during the period of the violation.
      (2)   The Board may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as
justice requires.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   (C)   (1)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of
a misdemeanor or imprisonment, or both.
      (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a penalty up to $2,500 (or the maximum amount allowed
by state law), or be subject to imprisonment, or both. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law.
      (3)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$2,500 per violation (or the maximum amount allowed by state law), per day, or
imprisonment, or both.
      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $2,500 per violation (or the maximum amount allowed by
state law), per day, or imprisonment, or both.
   (D)   Any person, firm, business or entity violating any provision of §
52.031 of this code shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,500 for
each violation or offense. Each day a violation occurs is considered to be a
separate offense.
   (E)   A person who fails to pay any fee when required by §§ 52.125 through
52.126 of this code, or who violates any other provision of this chapter, shall
be subject to fines. The minimum fine for any violation of this chapter shall
be $25, with the maximum fine for a violation of this chapter being $1,500.
Each day a violation continues is considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 2009-OR-06, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 2012-OR-12, passed 10-1-2012; Ord.
2018-OR-11, passed 4-2-2018; Ord. 2020-OR-18, passed 8-3-2020; Ord. 2025-OR-19,
passed - -2025)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING
      
71.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC AND PARKING
Section
   
70.01   Vehicle tow-in fee
   
70.02   Special parking zones
   
70.03   Skateboards and other similar devices
   
70.04   Golf carts, low speed vehicles, and utility task vehicles
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 VEHICLE TOW-IN FEE.
   (A)   Tow-in fee. The Police Department shall assess a $45 tow-in fee for
each vehicle the Department orders towed, except in those instances where a
vehicle must be towed as a result of circumstances outside of the owner/
operator’s control (e.g., a vehicular accident for which the owner/operator
bears no criminal fault).
   (B)   Fee collection. Each and every entity that provides tow-in services
for the Department shall collect the Department’s tow-in fee along with any
other fees or charges assessed by the towing entity prior to releasing the
towed vehicle to its owner and shall forward all such collected fees to the
Department no less frequently than monthly.
   (C)   Fee direction. Effective upon the adoption of this section, all tow-in
fees collected pursuant to this section shall be directed to a non-reverting
Police Department Fund which shall be administered by the Chief of the
Department and which may be applied to training, equipment or any other expense
deemed reasonably necessary by the Chief for the performance of the functions
of the Department.
(Ord. 2000-OR-11, passed 9-18-2000; Ord. 2020-OR-10, passed 5-4-2020)
§ 70.02 SPECIAL PARKING ZONES.
   (A)   Upon application to and approval of the city’s Board of Public Works
and Safety, as specified below, a special parking zone may be created for
residents living in areas zoned nonresidential.
   (B)   In order to have a special parking zone designation granted, an
applicant must have a residential dwelling located in a zoning classification
of the city other than residential zoning. The owner of the residential
dwelling must join in the application for a special parking zone designation.
   (C)   All businesses located within 100 feet of the area sought to be
classified as a special parking zone must be notified of the application to the
Board of Public Works and Safety and of the date, time and place when the Board
of Public Works and Safety will consider the application. If the Board of
Public Works and Safety elects to grant a special parking zone for the
applicant, that designation shall be indicated by the erection of a sign
indicating “resident parking only” and by the adjacent curb (if there is a
curb) being painted white for a distance of 20 feet.
   (D)   No person other than the applicant or the applicant’s designee may
park in the special parking zone without authorization of the applicant.
   (E)   No owner of a motor vehicle shall permit a motor vehicle to be parked
in a special parking zone in violation of this section.
   (F)   In addition to any fines described in §
70.99 of this code, a vehicle which is illegally parked in a special parking
zone may be ordered to be towed to an impoundment lot by the applicant who is
granted a special parking zone.
(Ord. 2010-OR-10, passed 7-6-2010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES.
   Users of skateboards and other similar devices within the corporate limits
of the city shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed by this
section.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES. Includes any non-motorized object
which contains wheels and is propelled by an individual for purposes of
transporting that individual any distance. Such a description shall include,
but not be limited to: Skateboards; roller-skates; cross-country skies with
wheels; and roller blades. This definition shall specifically exclude
wheelchairs when used as intended.
   (B)   Rules and regulations of skateboards and other similar device users.
No person shall ride a skateboard or other similar device in any public place
within the city, except where specifically authorized by this section, or in
any public place within the city without complying with the rules and
regulations of this section.
      (1)   Prohibited use of skateboards and other similar devices on all city
streets.
         (a)   No person shall ride a skateboard or other similar device on any
street except when crossing a street.
         (b)   The laws governing pedestrians crossing streets shall apply to
any person crossing the street riding a skateboard or other similar device.
         (c)   Any person crossing a street while riding a skateboard or other
similar device shall come to a complete stop and give the right-of-way to all
vehicular traffic before crossing said street.
         (d)   Any person crossing a street while riding a skateboard or other
similar device shall exercise due care for his, her or their own safety and the
safety of other persons.
         (e)   Any person crossing a street while riding a skateboard or other
similar device shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians at all crosswalks.
         (f)   No person crossing a street while riding a skateboard or other
similar device shall travel too fast for the existing conditions, including
weather, lighting and the presence of construction or repair work.
      (2)   Skateboards and other similar devices on sidewalks.
         (a)   No person shall ride a skateboard or other similar device on any
city sidewalk in the following areas of the city:
            1.   Areas zoned for business designation, including shopping
centers, roadside and their respective parking lots;
            2.   Properties of hospitals, nursing homes, fire stations,
churches, synagogues and schools, including their respective parking lots;
            3.   Areas zoned for industrial designation, including
manufacturing facilities and their respective parking lots;
            4.   Areas zoned for multi-family residential, including apartment
complexes and buildings; and
            5.   Sidewalks and public access areas where specifically posted,
including certain areas of parks such as on or around gazebos and structures
designated for specific other uses.
         (b)   Persons may ride skateboards and other similar devices on
sidewalks in the following areas of the city:
            1.   Areas zoned for residential designation, except multi-family
apartment complexes and buildings;
            2.   Areas zoned for planned unit development and used as single-
and two-family residential, excluding multi-family, commercial and industrial;
and
            3.   Areas zoned for agricultural designation.
         (c)   Persons who ride a skateboard or other similar device on
sidewalks where permitted must at all times exercise due care for the safety of
other persons using the sidewalks.
         (d)   Persons who ride a skateboard or other similar device on
sidewalks where permitted must at all times yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and give pedestrians audible warnings before overtaking and passing
them.
   (C)   Warning notices, citations and penalties.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall be enforced by officers of the
Police Department, as agents of and for the city.
      (2)   Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be asked to
abide by the governing rules and regulations. If the individual refuses to do
so, he or she will be issued a written warning notice.
      (3)   The written warning notice issued in accordance with this section
shall contain the date, time, name, age, and address of the violator, the name
of the violator’s parent(s) or guardian if the violator is a minor, this
section number, nature of the violation, location of the violation, the name of
the police officer issuing the written warning notice and the telephone number
of the office to contact for information.
      (4)   The citation issued in accordance with this section shall contain
the date, time, name, age and address of the violator, the name of the
violator’s parent(s) or guardian if the violator is a minor, this section
number, nature of the violation, location of the violation, the name of the
police officer issuing the citation, a court name, address and telephone number
and court date.
      (5)   The Police Department shall maintain records of all skateboards and
other similar devices impounded by date, time, name and address of the
violator, the ordinance number of violation and a brief description of the item
impounded. All such items impounded shall be tagged for purposes of proper
identification and secured at the Police Department.
      (6)   The impounded skateboard or other similar device, if belonging to a
person under 18 years of age, shall be given to the parent or guardian of the
minor upon request after a full explanation of the reason for impounding the
skateboard or other similar device is given to such parent or guardian and
after payment is received for all outstanding citations issued.
      (7)   The impounded skateboard or other similar device, if belonging to a
person 18 years of age or older shall be given to him or her upon request and
payment is received for all outstanding citations issued.
      (8)   Each subsequent day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense for which a citation may be issued thereafter.
      (9)   Anyone who recklessly, knowingly or intentionally obstructs
vehicular or pedestrian traffic while on a skateboard or other similar device
commits disorderly conduct and/or obstruction of vehicle traffic and shall be
subject to the provision of the applicable state statute.
      (10)   Penalty fines collected by the city court for the violation of
this section shall be forwarded to a city non-reverting fund for the repair and
maintenance or parks and recreational areas within the city.
(Ord. 2005-OR-09, passed 6-6-2005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY TASK VEHICLES.
   (A)   The operation of golf carts, low speed vehicles (LSVs), and utility
task vehicles (UTVs) within the City of Charlestown is strictly prohibited
unless the vehicle is operated and equipped in full compliance with this
section.
   (B)   Title. This section shall be known as the “Golf Cart and UTV Policy”
for the Town of Charleston, Indiana.
   (C)   Authority. Pursuant to I.C. § 9-21-1-3.3, this Council desires to
allow and regulate the use of golf carts/UTVs on certain Charlestown streets in
a manner not in conflict with Indiana law.
   (D)   Permitted streets. Golf carts/UTVs that meet the standards for the
general requirements of a motor vehicle, as defined herein below, shall be
permitted to be operated by a person with a valid driver's license or a person
holding learner's permit accompanied by an adult, on the following types of
roads:
      (1)   Local roads. Those roads that serve primarily to provide access to
the traffic originating from the properties and discharge them onto collector
roads. They serve a minor role in the classification system and usually have
low traffic. On local roads, speed is usually kept low due to the frequent
movements of children and adults both in the residential area.
   (E)   Prohibited areas. Golf carts/UTVs are prohibited from being operated
on the following areas:
      (1)   (a)   All city parks;
         (b)   Grass areas;
         (c)   Park sidewalks;
         (d)   Park walking paths; and
      (2)   Golf carts shall not be operated on city sidewalks or city walking
paths.
   (F)   Permitted times. Golf carts/UTVs may only be operated from sunrise to
sunset unless equipped with headlights, taillights, electronic turn signals,
and break lights which are visible from a distance of 500 feet.
   (G)   Required golf cart equipment and documents. Operators of the golf
carts/UTVs shall be required to have the following equipment on each golf cart/
UTV and shall also provide the following documents:
      (1)   Headlights;
      (2)   Brake lights;
      (3)   Rear view mirror;
      (4)   Seat belt(s);
      (5)   Tail lamps;
      (6)   Turn signals;
         (a)   If electronic signals are not available, applicants must display
proper understanding of hand signals;
      (7)   Appropriate tires;
      (8)   Verification of residency;
      (9)   Proof of financial responsibility (Homeowners insurance); and
      (10)   High visibility reflective sign affixed to the rear of golf cart/
UTVs to be visible at all times. If the UTV can travel at the posted speed
limit no high visibility placard will be required.
   (H)   Permitting process. A person wishing to operate a golf cart on the
local roads not otherwise prohibited herein, shall register the golf cart/UTV
with the Charlestown Police Department to have his or her golf cart inspected.
      (1)   The cost of the application is $25 and upon the successful
inspection of the golf cart by the Police Department, he or she will be issued
a sticker, which will serve the function of a permit, to be placed in an
unobstructed manner on the front half of the golf cart.
      (2)   The Charlestown Police Department retains the right to revoke the
permit at any time, at the sole discretion of the Police Department, if it is
determined that the golf cart no longer meets the requirements of this section.
      (3)   Applicants must be 16 years of age or older.
      (4)   Applicants must display an understanding of how to operate their
golf cart/UTV safely and properly and have all items properly mounted and
available for inspection as listed above in division (G).
      (5)   The permit shall be renewed yearly by the owner of the golf cart/
UTV.
   (I)   Operation.
      (1)   No one under the age of 16 may operate golf carts or off-road
vehicles on public roadways at any time in the city.
      (2)   The number of occupants in a golfcart/UTV shall be limited to the
number of people for whom the factory seating is installed and provided on the
golf cart/UTV.
      (3)   All factory seating and safety equipment must be properly installed
and utilized while operating golf cart/UTV.
      (4)   Golf carts and any UTV shall yield to faster moving traffic and may
not impede the regular flow of traffic.
      (5)   Golf carts and UTVs must only be operated on permitted roadways but
may cross a prohibited street at a traffic light.
   (J)   Penalties and fines. There shall be a fine of $250 for any violations
of the provisions of this section.
   (K)   Application funds. All proceeds from golf cart/UTV applications and/or
fines shall be placed into the Charlestown Police Department non-reverting fund
account to be used for Police Department training, equipment, and supplies.
(Ord. 2025-OR-06, passed 7-7-2025; Ord. 2025-OR-13, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   A person who violates §
70.02 of this code by parking in a special parking zone without the
authorization of the applicant, or by allowing his or her car to be parked
therein, may be fined up to $250 for each occurrence. Each time a vehicle
leaves and returns, or each day a vehicle remains illegally parked in a special
parking zone shall be considered a separate offense.
   (C)   Anyone violating the provisions of §
70.03 of this code may be subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   Issuance of a written warning notice to a violator, subsequent to a
verbal notice, stating that he or she is in violation and that failure to
comply may result in impoundment of his or her skateboard or other similar
device and a citation being issued for the violation. If the individual
continues to refuse to abide by the provisions of §
70.03 of this code, he or she will be issued a citation and be subject to
impoundment of the skateboard or other similar device of the violator; and
      (2)   Issuance of a citation shall be subsequent of the issuance of a
written warning notice for the violation of the provisions of §
70.03 of this code within the same calendar year. The issuance of a citation
shall impose a fine of $50, as well as the impoundment of the violator’s
skateboard or other similar device.
   (D)   The minimum fine for violation of any of the maximum speed limits on
city roadways shall be $1, and the maximum fine shall be $250.
(Ord. 2005-OR-08, passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 2005-OR-09, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2010-
OR-10, passed 7-6-2010)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   No parking areas
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The maximum permissible speed limits on city roadways are as follows.
Street Name Speed Limit Ord. Date
Street Name              Speed Limit     Ord.       Date
Abby Court               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Aberdeen Lane            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Anna Louise Drive        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Anthem Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
April Court              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Arlington Avenue         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Ash Street               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Audubon Court            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Autumn Ridge Court       20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Balmer Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Balmer Lane              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Barringer Avenue         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Basham Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bates Court              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bates Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bay Tree Lane            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Beechwood Drive          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Berkley Road             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bethany Road             30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Birch Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bohart Lane              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bolly Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Bonniebell Drive         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Boyer Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Brentview Court          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Broadmoor Avenue         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Brock Road               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Brodie Court             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Brook Hollow Court       20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Burdette Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Butler Avenue            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Cardinal Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Carl Ross Drive          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Carriage Way             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Chapel Hill Court        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Charles Place            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Charlestown Landing Road 20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Charlestown-Memphis Road 30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Chestnut Hill Court      20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Chris Court              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Church Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Clark Road               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Covington Court          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Crawford Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Crestview Court          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Cypress Drive            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Danny Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Delta Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Denham Lane              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Depot Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Dillion Road             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Dodge Boulevard          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Dundee Court             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Eagle Trail              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Edgewood Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Egan Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Fairfield Avenue         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Falcon Road              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Farmington Way           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Fifth Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
First Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Fourth Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Fulkerson Drive          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Gagnon Lane              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Glencoe Court            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Glendale Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Gleneagle Court          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Glenmore Court           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Goldrush Boulevard       20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Gospel Road              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Green Valley Drive       20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Greenbrier Court         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Guilford Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Halcyon Drive            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hampton Court            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Harrison Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Heather Court            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Henson Court             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Herbert Drive            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Heritage Court           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Heritage Lane            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hester Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hickory Road             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hidden River Trace       20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
High Jackson Road        30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
High Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Highland Avenue          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hillcrest Road           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hillside Crossing        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hillside Circle          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Hodge Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Horton Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Indiana Caves Court      20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Industrial Way           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Jefferson Street         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Jennings Court           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Jennings Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Jordan Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Kenwood Avenue           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
LaFawn Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Lakewood Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
LaRue Court              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Level Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Liberty Drive            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Lindsey Street           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Lisa Lane                20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Locust Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Locust Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Lost Creek Trail         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Lowell Avenue            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Lynn Drive               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Madison Street           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Main Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Main Cross Street        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Maple Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Marcy                    20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Market Street            * State Highway 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Marshall Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
McCampbell Street        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Melaine Lane             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Miners Pointe            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Monroe Street            30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Morningside Drive        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Morrow Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
New Street               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
North Dogwood Drive      20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Oak Street               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Old Bethany Road         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Olive Drive              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Omega Boulevard          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Orchard Walk             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Oriole Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Park Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Parkland Court           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Pheasant Run             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Pike Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Pine Drive               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Pirate Place             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Pleasant Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Poplar Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Principle Lane           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Quail Chase              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Quality Court            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Randolph Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Raylee Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Red Clover-Drive         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Redbud Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Reynolds Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Ridge Point Way          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Ridge Road               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Ridgefield Drive         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Riley Avenue             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Rosewood Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Saddle Ridge Drive       20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Schindler Street         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Second Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Shelby Court             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Short Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Silverglade Court        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Skyline Drive            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
South Dogwood Drive      20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Spring Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
St. Michael Drive        20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Stacy Court              30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Stacy Road               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
State Road 62            * State Highway 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
State Road 160           * State Highway 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
State Road 403           * State Highway 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Steel Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Steve Hamilton Drive     20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Stonebridge Boulevard    20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Stonemour Way            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Sunny Side Drive         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Sunset Loop              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Sycamore Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Taff Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Talina Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Third Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Thompson Street          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Tower Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Tunnel Mill Road         30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Valley Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Vienna Road              30              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Villa Court              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Walnut Street            20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Water Street             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
West Dogwood             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
West Drive               20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Whitsett Way             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Wilhemina Street         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Winthrop Avenue          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Witten Drive             20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Wood Street              20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Woodland Drive           20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Woodridge Drive          20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
Woodthrush Drive         20              2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
 
   (B)   All residential streets are considered to be designated for a speed
limit of 20 mph, unless otherwise posted and passed by ordinance.
   (C)   State highway road speed limits are set by State Highway Department,
but are as follows within the city limits.
State Highway Speed Limit Ord. Date
State Highway                 Speed Limit                   Ord.       Date
State Route 3 (Market Street) 30 mph: State Route 62 to 100 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              block
                             30 mph: 300 block to 900      2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              block
                             35 mph: 900 block to 1100     2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              block
                             40 mph: 1100 block to 2200    2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              block
State Route 62                45 mph: Monroe Street to      2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              State Route 3 (Market Street)
State Route 160               45 mph: State Route 403 - 600 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              block
State Route 403               45 mph: Market Street to 9100 2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              block
                             50 mph: 9100 block to Witten  2005-OR-08 5-2-2005
                              Drive
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING AREAS.
   No parking signs shall be placed on the following streets, and parking will
be permitted only on the southeast side.
 
Street                                                Ord.       Date
Industrial Way                                        2000-OR-12 10-2-2000
Northwest side of Main Street between Wood Street and 2000-OR-10 9-18-2000
Jennings Street
Pike Street south of Market Street                    2000-OR-12 10-2-2000
Quality Court                                         2000-OR-12 10-2-2000
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   FAIR HOUSING
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   General regulations
   
90.03   Animal control
   
90.04   Disturbing the peace
   
90.05   Undomesticated or wild animals
   
90.06   Animal waste
   
90.07   Care of animals
   
90.08   Exceptions
   
90.09   Grace periods
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal not kept for a commercial or business purpose.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department owning,
possessing, harboring or having the care or custody of a domestic animal in the
city.
   RUN AT LARGE. Straying beyond the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer
without the exercise of reasonable control over such domestic or vicious
animal.
   UNCONFINED VICIOUS ANIMAL. A vicious animal is unconfined if the animal is
not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked
pen, cage or structure upon the premises of the owner, keeper or harborer of
the animal. The pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top and
bottom attached to the sides, and the sides must be embedded into the ground no
less than one foot if outside and sitting on the ground. All such pens or
structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any animal with a known vicious propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to or otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;
      (2)   Any animal which because of its vicious propensity is capable of
inflicting serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute
a danger to human life or property if it were not kept in the manner required
by this chapter;
      (3)   Any animal which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has
attacked or bitten a human being or domestic animal; or
      (4)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose
of animal fighting, or any animal trained for animal fighting.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 90.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Confinement.
      (1)   No domestic or vicious animal may be kept on a porch, patio or in
any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to exit such
building on its own volition. In addition, no such domestic or vicious animal
may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen
windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from
exiting the structure.
      (2)   The owner of a domestic or vicious animal shall not suffer or
permit the animal to go unconfined.
   (B)   Leash and muzzle.
      (1)   The owner of a domestic or vicious animal shall not suffer or
permit the animal to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the animal is
securely muzzled, restrained by a secure cage, chained or leashed and under the
physical restraint of a person.
      (2)   The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to
the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it
from biting any human or other animal.
   (C)   Signs. The owner of a vicious animal shall display in a prominent
place on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign (“dangerous
animal”) indicating that there is a vicious animal on the premises. A similar
sign is required to be posted on the pen or kennel of the animal. The lettering
on the sign shall be in all capital letters, a minimum of six inches tall and
red on a white background.
   (D)   Animal fighting. No person, firm, corporation, organization or
department shall possess, harbor or maintain the care or custody of any animal
for the purpose of animal fighting, nor train, torment, badger, bait or use any
animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human
beings or domestic animals in the city.
   (E)   Insurance. Owners of vicious animals must within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter provide proof to the Clerk-Treasurer of
liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000, insuring the owner,
keeper or harborer for any personal injuries inflicted by his or her vicious
animal.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 ANIMAL CONTROL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
association who owns, keeps or harbors a domestic or vicious animal to permit
such domestic or vicious animal to run at large within the city at any time.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
association who owns, keeps or harbors a domestic or vicious animal to permit
such domestic or vicious animal to disturb the peace and quiet of a
neighborhood by barking or making any other loud or unusual noises; by
overturning garbage cans; by running through or across cultivated gardens or
fields; by chasing pedestrians, bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds or motor
vehicles; or any defecating or urinating on the property of another, including
public property.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 UNDOMESTICATED OR WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
association to permit any domestic or vicious animal of any kind to run at
large within the city. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are feral
(undomesticated or wild) in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon
securing a permit from the Chief of Police.
   (B)   (a)   No such permit shall be granted by the Chief of Police to any
person, partnership, corporation or other association without first obtaining a
written list of reasonable precautions to be taken by such person, partnership,
corporation or other association for the safety and well-being of the residents
or other persons within the city.
      (b)   Furthermore, no such permit shall be granted by the Chief of Police
to any person, partnership, corporation or other association without first
obtaining a written statement releasing the city from liability and holding the
city harmless for any injury, damage or other loss caused by such animal or
animals.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 ANIMAL WASTE.
   Every owner of an animal shall not allow his, her or their animal to create
any animal waste outside of the owner’s premises; however, if such waste is
deposited on the property of another, then the owner shall be responsible for
the immediate removal of any excrete deposited by his, her or its animals on
public property or on the private property of others.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 CARE OF ANIMALS.
   Every owner of an animal shall provide such animal with adequate food, water
and shelter.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 90.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Veterinarians. It shall not be unlawful for a person, partnership,
corporation or other association which is licensed in the practice of
veterinarian medicine to keep animals for such periods necessary for
observation and treatment.
   (B)   Dogs and cats. The keeping of dogs and cats shall not be unlawful
under this chapter as long as every such dog or cat is kept as a pet and is
controlled pursuant to all laws of the city, county or state as applicable.
   (C)   Indoor small domesticated pets. The keeping of other small
domesticated pets, including but not limited to parakeets, gerbils, snakes and
other small animals, shall not be unlawful under this chapter as long as such
pet is kept indoors 24 hours per day and does not pose a health risk to human
beings.
   (D)   Owners who have special licenses. An owner may keep an animal
otherwise prohibited under this chapter if the person acquires and maintains a
special federal or state license which allows the keeping of such animal for
purposes of scientific research or other state or federal sanctioned reasons.
   (E)   Law enforcement officers. It shall not be unlawful for a law
enforcement officer to own, keep or harbor police dogs in order to aid and
maintain the city’s canine unit.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 90.09 GRACE PERIOD.
   Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which keeps,
maintains, trades in or which has in his, her or its possession or under his,
her or its control any of the prohibited animals at the time this chapter is
adopted, shall have a period of 90 days to bring themselves within compliance
without penalty.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity which violates
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $1,000 for each separate offense. Each day that such
offense continues to occur shall be a separate violation.
(Ord. 2005-OR-20, passed 11-7-2005)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Offenses
   
91.03   Abatement
   
91.04   Defenses
   
91.05   Notices
   
91.06   Close and vacate orders
   
91.07   Appeals
Unlawful Noises
   
91.20   Public policy
   
91.21   Unlawful noises
   
91.22   Noise permit
Mosquitoes
   
91.35   Eliminating conditions favorable to mosquito growth
   
91.36   Proliferation of mosquitoes; duty to prevent; responsibility for
property conditions
   
91.37   Right of entry
   
91.38   Prescribed methods of treatment
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety.
   CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
   CITY OFFICIAL. Any person representing the city in an employment or
appointive capacity, who has any legal authority to investigate, inspect,
record, install utilities, disconnect utilities, order the disconnection of
utilities, or who has arrest powers, or that person’s designee.
   CONTRABAND. Any substance or item that is illegal for a person to possess,
under the circumstances, including but not limited to controlled substances,
illegal drugs or legal drugs possessed in an illegal manner.
   COUNCIL. The Common Council of the City of Charlestown, Indiana.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any city official or his or her appointee, whose
responsibility it is to conduct inspections or report nuisance behavior deemed
illegal by this chapter, or who has been assigned the responsibility to levy
fines or other enforcement action by a city official.
   HABITUALLY. A frequency of an action that occurs at least three times within
any 12-month period.
   NOTICE. A written advisement that a condition or event has occurred, may
have occurred, will occur or could occur. Notices described herein are deemed
delivered as follows:
      (1)   NOTICE TO OCCUPANTS. Notice is deemed given to the occupant of any
premises when provided by any of the following means:
         (a)   When personally delivered to any adult occupant of the premises;
         (b)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, addressed to
“occupant” to the street or mailing address of the premises; or
         (c)   By posting a notice in a conspicuous location on the exterior of
the premises after unsuccessfully attempting to deliver a notice personally.
      (2)   NOTICE TO OTHERS. Notice is deemed given to persons other than
owners or occupants by any of the following means:
         (a)   When personally delivered to the person or to the person’s legal
representative;
         (b)   If the person is a corporation, LLC, partnership or other legal
entity, by delivery or mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, to any
representative or agent authorized to receive service of process on behalf of
the owner or entity;
         (c)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, addressed to
the business address, residential mailing address or other address provided by
the person to a city official or enforcement officer; or
         (d)   By legal publication at least two times in the News and Tribune,
at least 30 days apart, after unsuccessfully attempting to deliver a notice
another way.
      (3)   NOTICE TO OWNERS. Notice is deemed given to the owner of any
premises when provided by any one of the following means:
         (a)   When personally delivered to any owner or the owner’s legal
representative;
         (b)   If the owner is a corporation, LLC, partnership or other legal
entity, by delivery or mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, to any
representative or agent authorized to receive service of process on behalf of
the owner or entity;
         (c)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, to the
owner’s tax mailing address for the premises in question on file at the office
of the County Auditor;
         (d)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, to the
owner’s address provided to the city in writing by the owner; or
         (e)   If no address for mailing (as described above) is readily
apparent, or for other good cause, then notice is provided by posting a written
notice in a conspicuous location on the exterior of the premises in question
owned by the owner.
   NUISANCE BEHAVIOR. The following circumstances or behavior, when it occurs
at premises within the municipal limits of the city:
      (1)   Disturbances of the peace occur to the extent that the Police
Department or another city official is dispatched to the premises at the
request of owners, occupants or others;
      (2)   Criminal activity takes place at the premises, whether or not a
disturbance of the peace occurs, and whether or not police or other city
officials are dispatched;
      (3)   Premises are not maintained in accordance with the requirements of
the city’s Property Maintenance Code (see
Ch. 150 of this code), with each separate violation of that ordinance being a
different instance of nuisance behavior;
      (4)   A violation of any other city ordinance takes place at the
premises, with each separate violation of an ordinance being a different
instance of nuisance behavior;
      (5)   Dogs or cats that habitually run at large are owned, housed,
harbored or fed at the premises;
      (6)   Dogs routinely barking in violation of city ordinances are owned,
housed, harbored or fed at the premises;
      (7)   Contraband is manufactured, possessed, stored, found, sold or
purchased at the premises;
      (8)   City-owned utility services are received and/or consumed at the
premises, but are not paid for in a timely manner; and/or
      (9)   Utility services to the premises that have been discontinued by a
utility provider are reconnected without the knowledge or authorization of the
utility provider.
   OCCUPANT. A person that lives in, occupies, is routinely found at or has
quarters or space in or at any premises within the city.
   OWNER. A person having legal or equitable title to premises within the city.
   PERSON. An individual, tenants by the entireties, a corporation,
partnership, trustee, lessee, agent or assignee, or any other legal entity, or
any other group acting as a legal entity.
   PREMISES. Any building, structure, parking lot, parcel of land, common area,
driveway, open space or any portion thereof or the ground itself.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Premises within the city where nuisance behavior habitually
occurs. Each time a separate incidence of nuisance behavior subsequently occurs
on the premises in a 12-month period after the premises are initially deemed a
PUBLIC NUISANCE is considered a separate public nuisance and can be punished as
set out herein.
      (1)   If nuisance behavior occurs on a premises on January 1, 2016, then
again on April 1, 2016, then for a third time on December 31, 2016, the
premises can be deemed a PUBLIC NUISANCE. Fines can be imposed and other
authorized enforcement action set out herein can be undertaken.
      (2)   If nuisance behavior occurs on a premises on January 1, 2016, then
again on April 1, 2016 and a third incidence of nuisance behavior occurs on
December 31, 2016 (with the person that is the owner and/or occupant of the
premises being fined and/or other enforcement action taken), then afterwards, a
fourth incidence of nuisance behavior occurs on March 31, 2017, the premises
can be deemed a PUBLIC NUISANCE a second time, in which case additional fines
and enforcement action can be imposed.
      (3)   If nuisance behavior occurs on a premises on January 1, 2016, then
again on April 1, 2016, a third incidence of nuisance behavior occurs on
December 31, 2016 (with the person that is the owner and/or occupant of the
premises being fined and/or other enforcement action taken), then afterwards a
fourth incidence of nuisance behavior occurs on April 2, 2017, the premises
will not be deemed a PUBLIC NUISANCE again, unless a fifth incidence of
nuisance behavior occurs by December 31, 2017.
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall allow any premises within the city to become or remain
a public nuisance.
   (B)   A person who is the owner or occupant of premises where nuisance
behavior habitually occurs is deemed to have engaged in maintaining a public
nuisance, which is punishable by fines and/or other remedies set out herein.
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 ABATEMENT.
   All nuisance behavior at the premises must be abated within 30 calendar days
of the provision of the initial notice that the premises is a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016)
§ 91.04 DEFENSES.
   The following may be defenses to the charge of maintaining a public
nuisance.
   (A)   It shall be a defense to the allegation that a person has maintained a
public nuisance if the owner or occupant of the premises can prove that when a
call for police assistance was made, and police were dispatched to the
premises, that a criminal offense was committed but that all of the occupants
of the premises were acting lawfully.
   (B)   It shall be a defense to the allegation that a person has maintained a
public nuisance if the owner or occupant of the premises can prove that when a
call for police assistance was made, and police were dispatched to the
premises, that the particular occupant of the premises was acting lawfully and
is the victim of a criminal offense.
   (C)   It may be a defense to the owner of premises if, within 15 calendar
days after nuisance behavior that is a violation of this section occurs, the
owner has instituted an eviction proceeding against the offending occupants of
the subject premises and the owner completes the eviction process of those
occupants within 75 calendar days of commencement.
   (D)   It may be a defense to an occupant (but not owner) if, in the case of
multi-unit dwellings, apartment buildings or mixed use buildings, there is
clear and convincing evidence that the only parties participating in the
nuisance behavior were not occupants of the premises where the nuisance
behavior actually occurred. However, this defense shall not apply if dwellings
are different structures.
   (E)   It may be a defense to an owner of premises if reasonable steps were
immediately taken to abate all nuisance behavior, including but not limited to,
removing the offending occupant, notifying police of violation(s) of criminal
laws and/or securing vacant property.
   (F)   No person shall be deemed to have maintained a public nuisance unless
at least one incident of nuisance behavior occurs after this chapter takes
effect.
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016)
§ 91.05 NOTICES.
   (A)   Notice of nuisance behavior.
      (1)   Whenever a city official or enforcement officer becomes aware of
information that causes the city official or enforcement officer to reasonably
believe that a public nuisance exists on any premises in the city, the owner or
occupant of that property should be notified at the first convenience, with a
request that all nuisance behavior be immediately abated.
      (2)   However, failure of a city official or enforcement officer to
provide such a notice shall not be a defense against a finding that nuisance
behavior has occurred or is occurring, or that a public nuisance exists.
   (B)   Removal of notices. It is a violation of this chapter to destroy,
remove or deface any order or notice relating to a public nuisance that is
posted by a city official or enforcement officer prior to the time the
activity, event or hearing described on the notice has occurred.
   (C)   Notice of determination. Upon a determination made by the city’s
enforcement officer that premises located within the city is a public nuisance,
a notice of that determination may be provided to the owner and/or occupant of
the premises. The owner and/or occupant shall have ten business days from being
provided with such a notice to initiate an appeal of that determination to the
city’s Board of Public Works and Safety (the “Board”).
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 CLOSE AND VACATE ORDERS.
   (A)   Close and vacate order. Should no appeal be initiated as set out in §
91.07 of this code, and if all of the conditions which have caused premises
deemed to be a public nuisance have not be fully abated within 30 calendar days
of service of the initial notice that the premises has been deemed public
nuisance, a city official shall be authorized to issue an close and vacate
order revoking any certificate of occupancy for the premises, thereby deeming
the premises unfit for habitation and further ordering discontinuation of
utility services to the premises. In such a case, the cost of utility service
disconnection/reconnection shall be borne by the owner and/or occupant of the
premises and not the city. These actions shall be for such period as the
enforcement officer reasonably directs, but in no event shall the action be in
effect for a period of more than one year from the original date a close and
vacate order goes into effect, unless further nuisance behavior continues.
   (B)   Rescinding close and vacate orders. A close and vacate order issued by
the enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter is not an act of possession,
ownership or control by city. A close and vacate order of the enforcement
officer should be rescinded within ten business days, or as soon thereafter as
practical, after reliable proof is provided to the enforcement officer showing
complete abatement of all of the nuisance behavior at the premises has been
accomplished, unless such premises is the site of further nuisance behavior.
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016)
§ 91.07 APPEALS.
   (A)   Parties who may appeal. Any party aggrieved by any action taken by a
city official or nuisance ordinance enforcement officer under this chapter may
appeal that action by delivering a written notice of an appeal within ten
business days of the time that the person is provided with notice of the action
by a city official or enforcement officer. The notice of an appeal shall be
delivered to the City Clerk-Treasurer at 304 Main Cross, Charlestown, Indiana
47111 during regular business hours, whereupon the Board shall set a hearing to
consider evidence presented by the aggrieved party. Decisions of the Board may
be appealed to the County Circuit Court within 30 calendar days of notice of a
decision being provided by the Board to the aggrieved party.
   (B)   Contents of notice of appeal. The notice of an appeal provided for in
division (A) above must be in writing and shall be written in type or legible
printing, stating, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The name of the aggrieved party;
      (2)   The relationship of the aggrieved party to premises deemed a public
nuisance (e.g., owner, occupant, mortgagee and the like);
      (3)   The mailing address of the aggrieved party;
      (4)   The specific action or inaction of the city official or enforcement
officer from which an appeal is being taken;
      (5)   The date(s) that the action or inaction of the city official or
enforcement officer described above occurred;
      (6)   The location of the premises deemed a public nuisance;
      (7)   The date(s) that any notices were provided to the aggrieved party
by a city official or enforcement officer;
      (8)   Each reason the aggrieved party disagrees with the determination of
the city official or enforcement officer; and
      (9)   The name and address of all persons the aggrieved party is aware of
that have information or personal knowledge to support the aggrieved party’s
appeal.
   (C)   Appeal hearing. An appeal of any action taken by the enforcement
officer or city official taken under this chapter should be heard by the Board
within 30 calendar days after the filing of the notice of an aggrieved party’s
intent to appeal such action(s), or as soon thereafter as practical under the
circumstances. The issues on appeal are limited to:
      (1)   Whether the aggrieved party is the owner or occupant of premises
deemed to be a public nuisance;
      (2)   Whether there was a preponderance of evidence that nuisance
behavior habitually took place on premises within the city;
      (3)   Whether or not notice was served or provided to the owner and/or
occupant of the premises that was deemed public nuisance;
      (4)   Whether the owner and occupant of the premises abated all of the
nuisance behavior at the premises;
      (5)   Whether fines or other enforcement action that were imposed were
reasonable under the circumstances;
      (6)   Whether a preponderance of evidence exists to justify a close and
vacate order and/or order requiring disconnection from utility services to the
premises deemed a public nuisance; and
      (7)   Such other issues as may be necessary to conduct a just appeal.
   (D)   Appeal of Board action.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Board concerning any
appeal made to the Board may appeal the Board’s final decision to the County
Circuit Court.
      (2)   Such appeals are to determine if the Board’s record contained
sufficient evidence to support the Board’s determinations and are not in the
nature of a trial de novo.
(Ord. 2016-OR-07, passed 2-15-2016)
UNLAWFUL NOISES
§ 91.20 PUBLIC POLICY.
   In order to eliminate the nuisance caused by offensive, unnecessary and
undesirable noises in the city, the Common Council ordains:
   (A)   That the making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises of
various kinds and by various means within the limits of the city have so
increased as to constitute a public nuisance;
   (B)   That the making, creation or maintenance of loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged in their time, place and use,
affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety,
welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city; and
   (C)   That the necessity, in the public interest, for the provisions of this
chapter is declared, as a matter of legislative determination for this
declaration of public policy, to be designed to secure and promote the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and
quiet of the inhabitants and visitors in this city.
(Ord. 2009-OR-8, passed 8-8-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 UNLAWFUL NOISES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health and peace or safety of others
within the city.
   (B)   Accordingly, the following acts, among others, are declared to be
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and in violation of this section, but
such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle in any street or public
place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of
any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of
any signaling device except one operated by hand, air or electricity; the use
of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the
continued or repeated use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up, or in any parade, or in any group of vehicles;
      (2)   Radios and media players.
         (a)   Playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or
operated, any radio or television receiving set, compact disc player, MP3, iPod
or other electronic music/video player, phonograph or other machine or device
for producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who
are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is
operated, and who are voluntary listeners thereto, except when a permit
therefor for some special occasion is granted; or
         (b)   The operation of any such set, instrument, machine or device
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
division (B)(2).
      (3)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. Playing, using or
operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio or
television receiving set, musical instrument, compact disc player, MP3, iPod or
other electronic music/video player, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for producing or reproducing sound at any place upon the
public streets or in any vehicle used for the transportation of persons for
hire as a common carrier, for the purpose of commercial or other kind of
advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any activity or
building or structure, which is so used as to disturb and annoy other persons
in their businesses, homes or elsewhere in their right of personal privacy and
quiet;
      (4)   Yelling or shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling or other type of
residence, or of any person in the vicinity;
      (5)   Animals or birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by
causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose
of any person in the vicinity;
      (6)   Whistles. The blowing of any locomotive whistle, or one operated by
any other means, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as
a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of the proper city authorities;
      (7)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
internal-combustion engine or any other type of engine or power unit on a
motorboat, motor vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle or craft of any kind,
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively reduce and
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
      (8)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation therefor, other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a
permit from the City Building Commissioner, which permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days while the emergency continues and which permit
may be renewed for periods of three days while the emergency continues;
      (9)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while it is in use, or adjacent to a hospital which unreasonably
interferes with the operation thereof or which disturbs or unduly annoys
patients in the hospital; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in
such streets indicating that the same has been declared and is a school,
hospital or other such quiet zone;
      (10)   Drums. The use of any drum, horn or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
exhibition, show or sale; except in a parade or place for which authorization
has been granted; and/or
      (11)   Pile drivers, hammers. The operation between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick,
steam or electric hoist or other appliance the use of which is attended by loud
or unusual noise, except when being operated by a public utility in connection
with emergency repairs of such utility.
(Ord. 2009-OR-8, passed 8-8-2009) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 NOISE PERMIT.
   A person or entity that wishes to engage in any activity which might
otherwise be prohibited by this subchapter can request a permit authorizing the
noise made as a consequence of the activity from the Board of Public Works of
the city (the “BPW”). Such permit shall be at no cost to the applicant, and any
person aggrieved by the action of the BPW may appeal that decision to the
Common Council.
(Ord. 2009-OR-8, passed 8-8-2009)
MOSQUITOES
§ 91.35 ELIMINATING CONDITIONS FAVORABLE TO MOSQUITO GROWTH.
   No person(s), business and/or property owner shall own, maintain or allow to
exist, any of the following condition(s) that may harbor or create, or have the
potential to harbor mosquitoes:
   (A)   Storage of used tires in such a manner that may allow them to
accumulate water;
   (B)   Maintaining unlicensed, junk, inoperable or dismantled vehicles;
   (C)   Dilapidated structures containing untreated natural wood products,
which are exposed to the elements of nature;
   (D)   Allowing grass and/or weeds to grow to a height exceeding 12 inches;
   (E)   Allowing standing water to pool on any property or structure for a
period of time exceeding five consecutive rainfall free days; and
   (F)   Possessing or storing drums, barrels, cups, bottles and/or open
container(s) or other similar water containers which are allowed to retain
standing water for a period of time exceeding five consecutive rainfall-free
days.
(Ord. 2003-OR-10, passed 3-3-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.36 PROLIFERATION OF MOSQUITOES; DUTY TO PREVENT; RESPONSIBILITY FOR
PROPERTY CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Duty to prevent. Anyone owning or occupying properties upon which are
located drainage ditches, spillways, water wells, retention basins, detention
basins, creeks, ponds, rivers and/or lakes must maintain that property in such
a manner as to discourage prevent the proliferation of mosquito populations by
observing the following procedures.
      (1)   All refuse and debris in and around such areas must be removed.
      (2)   Grass and weeds must not be allowed to reach a height exceeding 12
inches.
      (3)   Dead animal carcasses shall be removed within 18 hours.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      OTHERS CAUSING VIOLATIONS. Any person who has caused to exist, on any
premises which he or she is not the owner, landlord, occupant or tenant of, any
collection of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed is
responsible, as well as the owner landlord, tenant or occupant, as the case may
be.
      OWNERS or OCCUPANTS. The person responsible for the condition of any
premises is the owner of the premises as well as any other person or legal
entity using or occupying the same. In case the premises are used or occupied
by two or more tenants of a common landlord, or grounds appurtenant to a house
occupied by two or more tenants of a common landlord, then the landlord and
both tenants shall be responsible. Each tenant, however, is only responsible
for that part of the premises that he or she occupies to the exclusion of the
other tenant.
(Ord. 2003-OR-10, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 91.37 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this subchapter, the Board of
Public Works or its designees may, upon having probable cause to believe a
violation of this subchapter is or may be occurring, enter in and upon any
premises within the city for purposes of an inspection for mosquito control or
to effect eradication of mosquitoes.
(Ord. 2003-OR-10, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 91.38 PRESCRIBED METHODS OF TREATMENT.
   The following is a prescribed method of treatment of collections of water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, any variation of these
prescribed methods must be approved by the Board of Public Works or its
designee;
   (A)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each
way, or any other material, which will effectually prevent the ingress or
egress of mosquitoes;
   (B)   Complete emptying every five days of unscreened containers, together
with their thorough drying or cleaning;
   (C)   Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the
Director of the Board of Public Works and Safety or his or her designee;
   (D)   Covering completely the surface of the water with paraffin oil once
every five days;
   (E)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free from vegetable growth and other
obstructions and stocking with mosquito destroying fish;
   (F)   Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the Board of Public Works
and Safety or its designee(s); and
   (G)   Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes,
broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water.
(Ord. 2003-OR-10, passed 3-3-2003)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Each person guilty of violating §§
91.02 through
91.06 of this code, including but not limited to maintaining a public nuisance,
shall be fined in an amount of not less than $150 and not more than $2,500. The
amount of fines imposed shall be at the discretion of the city’s enforcement
officer. A determination that a person has violated §§
91.02 through
91.06 of this code may be appealed as provided in §
91.07 of this code.
   (C)   The first violation of §§
91.20 through
91.22 of this code in any calendar year shall be subject to admission of
violation and payment of a fine of at least $1, up to $100. All second and
subsequent violations in the calendar year are subject to a fine of at least
$100, up to $200.
   (D)   (1)   First violation. Any person or entity in violation of §§
91.35 through
91.38 of this code may be fined $100 for the first day a violation occurs and
$50 for each day thereafter in which the property has not been brought into
compliance with the requirements of §§
91.35 through
91.38 of this code.
      (2)   Second violation in 12 months. The second or subsequent violation
of §§
91.35 through
91.38 of this code for the same property, within a 12-month time frame, shall
result in the property being declared a severe safety hazard and the owner
fined a minimum of $250 up to $1,000, for each day the violation continues.
      (3)   Right to enter and remedy. If a violation continues for more than
seven days after the person responsible for the condition of any the premises
has been notified in writing of a violation of §§
91.35 through
91.38 of this code, then the Board of Public Works and Safety may take steps
necessary to bring the property(s) into compliance with §§
91.35 through
91.38 of this code and all necessary cost incurred for that purpose shall be a
charge against the owner of the affected property(s).
(Ord. 2003-OR-10, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 2009-OR-8, passed 8-8-2009; Ord. 2016-
OR-07, passed 2-15-2016)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
   
92.01   Fire hydrants
   
92.02   Maintenance of fire suppression systems
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All hydrants shall be inspected for deficiencies and tested by the
Water Department or its designee at a minimum of once annually to determine the
actual water flow of each fire hydrant within the city, with all results being
forwarded to the Fire Department.
   (B)   Each hydrant shall be color coded per the National Fire Code standard
for marking of fire hydrants. The colors are set through the National Fire
Protection Association and are a locally and nationally recognized standard
NFPA 291.
   (C)   Those hydrants which are out of compliance at the time of the adoption
of this section shall be painted in accordance with the NFPA standard within
three years of the effective date of this section.
   (D)   No person, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity
shall be permitted to erect, construct, plant, permit or allow any obstruction
which either inhibits access to a fire hydrant, or causes the fire hydrant to
be less visible to fire fighters in cases of emergency. No person, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity shall deface a fire hydrant.
   (E)   No hydrant shall be installed on a water main size that is smaller in
diameter than six inches except for flush hydrants with a single discharge
outlet.
   (F)   The water utilities shall ensure there is a fire hydrant or other
sustainable water supply within 500 feet of a residential or commercial
structure capable of providing an adequate water supply capable of
extinguishing fires.
   (G)   All new fire hydrants installed shall have a minimum barrel height
visible above ground of 28 inches with the large diameter storz outlet facing
towards the street.
   (H)   Any fire hydrant found to inoperable will be clearly marked that it is
out of service and all affected agencies shall be notified of the fire hydrant
status and when returned to working operation.
(Ord. 2008-OR-05, passed 4-21-2008) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 MAINTENANCE OF FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Upon IAWC purchasing and operating the water utility in the city, the
costs incurred by IAWC for the providing of water for fire protection purposes
and for the maintenance of fire suppression systems, including but not limited
to fire hydrants, previously owned, operated and maintained by the city, shall
be apportioned among the water customers that IAWC serves in the city, as
approved by the city’s Board of Public Works and Safety.
   (B)   Expenses incurred for the providing of water for fire protection
purposes and for the maintenance of fire suppression systems previously owned,
operated and maintained by the city shall be reflected in the rates of
customers located in areas adjacent to the city and within $1,000 feet of a
fire hydrant located within the city.
   (C)   The IAWC shall report water sales, customer counts and its costs for
maintaining the fire suppression systems that it owns in the city to the city’s
Board of Public Works and Safety in January of each calendar year and shall
propose an amount to be charged by IAWC to its water customers in the city,
which represents an equitable portion of those costs.
   (D)   The change in the method of recovering such costs described in I.C. 8-
1-2-103(d) shall be effective upon the first day of the month following
approval by the IURC of a new schedule of rates implementing the change. Such
revised rate schedules shall be filed with the IURC within a reasonable time
after the final passage and approval of this section.
(Ord. 2018-OR-14, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity in violation of §
92.01 of this code shall be subject to the penalties for an infraction and
shall be fined not less that $1 nor more than $500 per occurrence. Any person,
partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity that has been given
notice of a violation of §
92.01 of this code is deemed to have committed a separate offense for each day
that the violation occurs.
(Ord. 2008-OR-05, passed 4-21-2008)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Title
   
93.02   General regulations
   
93.03   Ground maintenance
   
93.04   Park hours
   
93.05   Dog park regulations
   
93.06   Alcohol regulations
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the City of Charlestown Parks
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2018-OR-15, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 93.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No motorized vehicles are allowed to be operated in city parks on
trails, except for medically necessary mobility assistance devices.
   (B)   Bicycles must yield to pedestrians.
   (C)   Pet owners must have pets on a leash and pick up waste produced by the
pet(s).
   (D)   No alcoholic beverages are allowed in any city park.
   (E)   No smoking is allowed in any city park.
   (F)   No glass containers allowed in any city park.
   (G)   No littering is permitted in any city park. LITTER is defined as
anything brought into the park from elsewhere and left there without being
placed in a trash receptacle.
   (H)   No hunting is allowed in any city park.
   (I)   No horses are allowed in any city park.
   (J)   No exotic animals (as defined by any city ordinance) are allowed in
any city park.
(Ord. 2018-OR-15, passed 9-4-2018) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 GROUND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   No shrubs, trees or flowers of any type shall be planted without
approval of the Parks and Recreation Department and the City Clerk-Treasurer.
Any items planted without such approval may be removed by the city’s Parks and
Recreation Department.
   (B)   The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department reserves the right
to authorize the removal or trimming of any tree, plant or flowers within the
park in the interest of maintaining proper appearance and use of the park.
   (C)   The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department shall have the
right and to remove and dispose of any and all litter or other items determined
to be unsightly, a source of litter or a maintenance problem.
(Ord. 2018-OR-15, passed 9-4-2018) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 PARK HOURS.
   (A)   City parks shall be open daily between the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
   (B)   Person(s) 17 years or younger who are in city parks must be
accompanied by an adult above the age of 18 years in the hours between dusk to
dawn that parks are opened.
   (C)   No overnight stays are allowed in city parks, except upon permission
and permit from the Director of the city’s Parks and Recreation Department.
(Ord. 2018-OR-15, passed 9-4-2018)
§ 93.05 DOG PARK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All persons and dogs that use or are present in the city’s dog park
are subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   No animals other than dogs shall be permitted in the dog park.
      (2)   Dogs must be spayed/neutered.
      (3)   Dogs must have a current rabies, bordetella, DAPP vaccination.
      (4)   All dog owners are solely responsible for their pet’s actions,
behavior and safety.
      (5)   All patrons use the dog park entirely at their own risk.
      (6)   All children under the age of 13 years must be accompanied by an
adult.
      (7)   All dogs must display on their collar a rabies tag and ID tag at
all times while utilizing the dog park.
      (8)   Sick, injured and/or contagious dogs shall not be allowed to
utilize the park.
      (9)   At least one person is required to supervise every two dogs.
      (10)   All dogs must be restrained until both owner and animals are
inside the dog park fence area.
      (11)   All dog owners/handlers must properly remove (scoop the poop) all
animal waste and dispose same in the designated waste containers in the dog
park.
      (12)   Owners/handlers must have their dog(s) in sight at all times.
      (13)   Unruly, rough-playing or aggressive dogs must be leashed and
removed from the park immediately.
      (14)   Dogs known to exhibit vicious, aggressive or dangerous behavior
are not permitted in the park.
      (15)   No smoking or glass containers are allowed in the dog park.
      (16)   No dog food dishes, dog food, favorite toy or chews/rawhides are
permitted in the dog park.
      (17)   Spiked, pronged, pinch or shock collars are not permitted in the
dog park and must be removed upon entry into the dog park.
      (18)   Dogs must utilize the area of the dog park designated for the
proper size and weight of the dog.
   (B)   In recognition of the fact that this section removes the requirement
that individuals using the city dog park register their dogs with the city’s
Parks and Recreation Department, and the fact that some individuals have
already registered their dog(s) and paid the associated fees for the year 2021,
such individuals shall be entitled to receive a pro rata refund of the fees
paid for the year 2021 at the time that they return to the Parks and Recreation
Department the key fob previously issued to the individual as a result of his,
her or their registration of his, her or their dog(s).
(Ord. 2021-OR-5, passed 5-5-2021)
§ 93.06 ALCOHOL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   As the city’s A & E Building is utilized by private individuals for
various activities such as wedding events, birthday parties, and corporate
events throughout the calendar year, the city desires to allow the sale,
possession, and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages during private events
held at the A & E Building.
   (B)   In order for alcohol to be served at a private event at the A & E
Building, the individual or corporate group must provide a bartender/server who
is licensed in the State of Indiana and provide a satisfactory certificate of
liability insurance.
   (C)   The individual or corporate group wishing to hold a private event
where alcohol will be served must first obtain the approval of the city’s code
enforcement officer prior to the private event.
(Ord. 2025-OR-08, passed 6-2-2025)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of $100. Each violation is a separate offense. Any criminal
prosecutions for trespass for violating any terms herein shall not prevent
imposition of civil penalties, which may be in addition to criminal liability.
(Ord. 2018-OR-15, passed 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
94.01   Policy statement
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Unlawful practice
   
94.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
94.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions
   
94.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service
   
94.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation
   
94.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases
   
94.09   Equal access to housing in HUD programs
   
94.10   Exemptions
   
94.11   Administrative enforcement
§ 94.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   It shall be the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, being Pub. Law No. 90-284, as
amended, the Federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, being Pub.
Law No. 93-383, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who (I.C. 22-9.5-2-2):
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
94.04 through
94.08 of this code or I.C. 22-9.5-5.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined in FAMILIAL STATUS below.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18
years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal custody of
such individual or the written permission of such parent or other person. The
protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of FAMILIAL STATUS
shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing
legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
   HANDICAP.
      (1)   With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;
         (d)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;
         (e)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or
         (f)   Any other impairment defined in 910 I.A.C. 2-3.
      (2)   HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of or addictions to
a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802 and 910 I.A.C. 2-3-2(14);
   COMMISSION. The state’s Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C. 22-
9-1-4 et seq.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)
   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint under
I.C. 22-9.5-6.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the rights to occupy the premises not owned by the occupant.
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.
   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, §
94.09 of this code and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination
in the sale or rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in §
94.04 of this code shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and I.C. 22-
9.5-3.
   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in this
chapter shall apply to:
      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where the
private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses
at any one time; provided, that in the sale of such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period. The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses
at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be
exempted from application of this section only if such house is sold or rented:
         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman or any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent or salesman or person; and/or
         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
advertisement or written notice in violation of §
94.04(A)(3) of this code, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use
of attorneys, escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be deemed to be
in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He, she or they have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He, she or they have, within the preceding 12 months, participated
as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
      (3)   He, she or they are the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.04 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   (A)   As made applicable by §
94.03 of this code and except as exempted by §§
94.03(B) and 94.09 of this code, it shall be unlawful:
      (1)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (3)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination;
      (4)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available;
      (5)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or
rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective entry
into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;
      (6)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap
of:
         (a)   That buyer or renter;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (7)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of:
         (a)   That person;
         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling
after it is so sold, rented or made available; or
         (c)   Any person associated with that person.
      (8)   For purposes of this section, DISCRIMINATION includes:
         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person,
reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by
such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord
may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification
on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition
that existed before the modifications, reasonable wear and tear excepted;
         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of covered multi-
family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30 months after
September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a
manner that:
            1.   The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are
readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by
handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and
            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
               a.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations; and
               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that an individual in a
wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
   (B)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., and of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an
usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited as ANSI A117.1)
suffices to satisfy the requirements of division (A)(8)(c)3.c. above.
   (C)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made available to
an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health of
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.05 DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business
includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED
TRANSACTION means any of the following:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial
assistance:
         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling; or
         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other
than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or familial status.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.06 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national
origin.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.07 INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.
   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any
person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having
exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged
any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or
protected by §§
94.03 through
94.06 of this code.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.08 PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.
   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure,
intimidate or interfere with:
   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
familial status or national origin and because he or she is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting, or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in any of the
activities, services, organizations or facilities described in division (A)
above; or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined according
to local, state and federal law.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.09 EQUAL ACCESS TO HOUSING IN HUD PROGRAMS.
   Pursuant to 24 C.F.R. § 5.403 and 24 C.F.R. § 574.3, the definition of
FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the actual or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity or marital status of its members.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq. shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those activities or
organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization,
association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of
dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to
persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national
origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact
open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes
provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial
purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members
or from giving preference to its members.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status shall apply with
respect to housing for older persons. As used in this section, HOUSING FOR
OLDER PERSONS means housing:
      (1)   Provided under any state or federal program that the Secretary of
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the state’s Civil
Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to assist
elderly person (as defined in the state or federal program);
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years
of age or older per unit.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
§ 94.11 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering this
chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set forth
in division (B) below shall be vested in the Mayor of the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the city, because
of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully administer
enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under the ordinance, herein
elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the articles of this
chapter by complainants to the state’s Civil Rights Commission for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6 and the Mayor of
the city, shall refer all said complaints to the Commission as provided for
under division (A) above to said Commission for purposes of investigation,
resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the city shall administer
their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and urban
development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this chapter
and shall cooperate with the Mayor and the Commission to further such purposes.
   (D)   The Mayor of the city, or the Mayor’s designee, shall provide
information on remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant
requesting such information.
(Ord. 2020-OR-15, passed 8-3-2020)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
Remote Food Sales
   
110.01   Applicability
   
110.02   Permit
   
110.03   Remote food sales permit
   
110.04   Remote food sales on public property
   
110.05   Enforcement
   
110.06   Notices
Electricians
   
110.20   Applicability; license required
   
110.21   Exemptions
   
110.22   Qualifications and fees
   
110.23   Application
   
110.24   Insurance requirements
   
110.25   Renewal of license
   
110.26   Noncompliance
   
110.27   Notice; forms; posting of license
   
110.28   Appeals
 
   
110.99   Penalty
REMOTE FOOD SALES
§ 110.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Authorization. Subject to the other provisions of this subchapter,
remote food sales are hereby allowed within the city on properties that are
zoned residential and commercial, as well as on certain public property.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      REMOTE FOOD SALES. The sale of food and/or non-alcoholic beverages each
day by persons, firms, corporations and entities (“vendors”) at a single
temporary location from trucks, carts, trailers and other mobile means (the
“remote premises”). This term does not authorize sales of food in the city on a
single day in a vehicle moving throughout the city. This term does not include
caterers.
   (C)   Single-family residence or duplex. The provisions of this subchapter
are not intended to prohibit or restrict the ability of vendors to sell their
food or beverages on private property at the invitation of a resident,
provided, that the private property is either a single-family residence or
duplex, and the vendor is only selling food or beverages to the resident and
the resident’s guests. A vendor is required to obtain a permit prior to
engaging in remote food sales at these properties, but is not required to
obtain approval from the city or the City Building Commissioner.
   (D)   Other residential properties. Remote food sales are allowed on private
properties besides single-family residences and duplexes that are zoned
residential, subject to the other provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020)
§ 110.02 PERMIT.
   (A)   Annual permit. In order to engage in remote food sales within the
city, a vendor must first obtain and maintain a permit from the office of the
City Building Commissioner. The cost of a permit is $100 for the vendor’s first
vehicle and $50 for each subsequent vehicle used by the vendor for remote food
sales. This annual permit expires on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued.
   (B)   Application form. Within one month of the passage of this subchapter
the City Building Commissioner or his or her designee (the “Building
Commissioner”) shall develop an application vendors shall use to apply for the
annual permit. Such applications shall be approved, provided the application is
completed correctly and the application fee is paid.
   (C)   Application process.
      (1)   Applications for an annual permit shall be turned in to the
Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall determine whether an
application has been properly completed within seven days of the application
being turned in and any required criminal background checks coming back,
whichever occurs later.
      (2)   An application is not considered complete unless all required
fields in the application are completely filled out and signed, the permit fee
has been paid, the consent to criminal background check form is completely
filled out and signed, and proof of liability insurance is attached to the
application.
   (D)   Display of permit. The original or a copy of the annual permit shall
be displayed by a vendor in a conspicuous place on the vendor’s equipment, in
plain view of the public, at all times while open to the public.
   (E)   Nontransferability of permits. Annual permits are nontransferable. It
is unlawful to transfer, assign, sell or loan such permit for the use of any
other vendor to enable such vendor to engage in remote food sales without a
proper permit from the city.
(Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 REMOTE FOOD SALES PERMIT.
   (A)   Health Department. In order to receive a remote food sales permit, a
vendor must provide proof to the Building Commissioner that the vendor has
obtained any required permits from the state’s Department of Health and the
county’s Health Department.
   (B)   Liability insurance. The vendor shall provide proof that it has
obtained commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less than
$100,000 by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state. Said
insurance shall provide liability coverage for the vendor against all claims
that have a reasonable likelihood of occurrence for property damage, food-borne
illness, personal injury or death arising from the operation of the remote food
sales operation. Proof of the vendor’s liability insurance shall be submitted
to the Building Commissioner at the time the vendor applies for an annual
permit.
   (C)   Criminal background check. All employees or representatives of the
vendor who work in the city must first undergo a criminal background check
prior to working at the remote premises. Said employees or representatives may
not begin working at remote food sales locations operated by a vendor in the
city until the criminal background check is completed and the results are
submitted to the Building Commissioner. The cost of conducting a criminal
background check is at the vendor or employee’s expense and is not included in
the annual permit fee.
   (D)   Sex offenders and convicted felons. No person convicted of any felony
or who has ever been required to register on any state’s sex offender registry
may work at a remote food sales location authorized by this subchapter.
   (E)   Proof of identification. Upon request by any law enforcement officer
or city official, employees or representatives of any vendor working at the
remote premises must provide proof of their identification.
(Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 REMOTE FOOD SALES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Public property definition. For purposes of this subchapter, PUBLIC
PROPERTY includes any real estate owned or leased by the city, including but
not limited to streets, alleyways, sidewalks, walking trails, public parking
lots, schools, the City Square, City Hall and public parks.
   (B)   Approval of Building Commissioner. A vendor shall obtain the approval
of the Building Commissioner no sooner than 60 days and no later than two
business days prior to engaging in remote food sales on or at public property.
Such approval may only be granted if the vendor holds a current annual permit
with the city. A vendor may seek approval from the Building Commissioner to
engage in remote food sales for multiple days and at multiple public property
locations within the city. However, no one vendor shall be allowed to
monopolize any particular location.
   (C)   Public property request form. The Building Commissioner is hereby
authorized to develop an application form for vendors to request engaging in
remote food sales on public property locations.
   (D)   Maximum number of vendors. The Building Commissioner has the authority
to establish, in writing, the number of vendors that may engage in remote food
sales at a publicly-owned property venue on any given day, provided that said
minimum number must be at least one vendor per venue location. The Building
Commissioner may deny public property requests by vendors if said maximum
number is exceeded. If the Building Commissioner establishes a maximum number
of vendors for a public property venue, the Building Commissioner shall provide
those written determinations to the Common Council and to the general public
upon request.
   (E)   Sales on public streets. A vendor that has been approved to engage in
remote food sales on a public street shall serve any food and beverages to the
public on the side of the remote premises facing the sidewalk or grass. At no
time shall a vendor sell their food and beverages to the public on the side of
the remote premises facing a thoroughfare for vehicles, unless the thoroughfare
is closed.
   (F)   Sales at public parks. If a vendor is authorized to engage in sales at
a public park on a certain day and fails to show up for a good reason other
than inclement weather or serious illness, the vendor’s annual permit may be
revoked at the Building Commissioner’s discretion. A vendor may only engage in
remote food sales at a public park while the park is open to the public.
   (G)   Hours of operation. No remote food sales on properties owned by the
city may occur before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Remote food sales on
commercial or residential properties may occur at other times as well.
   (H)   Overnight parking. A vendor shall not park or store their vehicle
overnight on public property without written approval of the city’s Board of
Public Works and Safety (“BPW”). This provision applies even if the vendor is
scheduled to engage in remote food sales on that public property venue on the
next day.
(Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Revocation or suspension of annual permit. The Building Commissioner
may suspend or revoke a vendor’s annual permit for the following causes:
      (1)   Providing false information or making material misrepresentations
in connection with the permit application;
      (2)   Violating any provision of this subchapter or allowing any other
representative of the vendor to violate any provision of this subchapter; and
      (3)   Ceasing to maintain liability insurance for the remote food sales
operation, as required by §
110.03(B) of this code.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. Prior to any revocation or
suspension of a vendor’s permit, the vendor must be notified, in writing, of
the reason for and duration of the revocation or suspension. Any official
decision on revocation or suspension shall be served in writing to the permit
holder per §
110.06 of this code.
   (C)   Appeal of fines and enforcement actions. Any person or entity subject
to fines or other enforcement actions taken under this subchapter (an
“aggrieved party”) may appeal any sanction imposed, determination or action to
the BPW, the “hearing authority” for the purposes of this subchapter. The
procedures and grounds for appealing fines or enforcement actions under this
subchapter to the BPW are also set forth in §
10.17 of this code.
(Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 NOTICES.
   Notices under this subchapter shall be deemed properly served if a copy is
either:
   (A)   Delivered personally to the permit holder or a representative working
for the vendor at a remote food location operated by the vendor;
   (B)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address of the permit holder’s designated representative; or
   (C)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the address that
the permit holder provided in its most recent annual permit application.
(Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020)
ELECTRICIANS
§ 110.20 APPLICABILITY; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Scope. All persons, firms and entities performing any installation,
alteration or repair of any electrical wiring, devices, panels or equipment
within the city’s boundaries for which a permit is required shall be licensed
by the city as an electrical contractor or must be in the employ of a licensed
electrical contractor working under the direct supervision, direction and
responsibility of the licensed contractor.
   (B)   Duration of licenses. Electrical contractor licenses (hereinafter
“license” or “licenses”) shall be issued on an annual basis, beginning July 1
of each year.
   (C)   Nontransferability of licenses. Licenses are nontransferable. It is
unlawful to transfer, assign, sell or loan such license for the use of any
other person, firm or corporation to enable such person, firm or corporation to
work on a job without obtaining the proper license with the city.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions to licensing requirement. No license under this subchapter
is required for the execution or performance of the following electrical work:
      (1)   Installation of communications systems, installations in
recreational vehicles and installations not covered by the State Electrical
Code, being 675 I.A.C. 17-1.8; and
      (2)   The performance of electrical work in a one-family dwelling by the
owner/occupant of the dwelling; provided, however, that this exemption does not
apply to any person hired by the owner/occupant for compensation to assist or
to perform the electrical work on that dwelling, and that the owner/occupant
shall sign a waiver if required by the City Building Commissioner (hereinafter
“Building Commissioner”).
   (B)   Exemptions to licensing exam.
      (1)   Recent work in city. An applicant may be issued a license without
passing the licensing exam if that applicant has done electrical work in the
city for at least one year prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and
the applicant applies for a waiver within six months after this subchapter
first becomes effective.
      (2)   Proof of recent work in city. Proof of having done business in the
city at least one year prior to the effective date of this subchapter shall be
proven by showing that a work permit was issued by the Building Commissioner to
the applicant at least one year prior to the effective date of this subchapter.
      (3)   Recent work in local municipalities. An applicant may be issued a
license without passing the licensing exam if that applicant has done
electrical work for the City of New Albany, Indiana, City of Jeffersonville,
Indiana, Town of Clarksville, Indiana or the Town of Sellersburg, Indiana for
at least one year prior to the effective date of this subchapter.
      (4)   Proof of recent work in local municipalities. Proof of having done
business in the above municipalities for at least one year prior to the
effective date of this subchapter shall be proven by showing that a work permit
was issued by one of the above municipality’s Code Enforcement Officials to the
applicant at least one year prior to the effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 110.22 QUALIFICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Qualifications of applicants. In order to receive a license,
applicants shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   The applicant has passed the master electric exam administered by
the ICC Code Council (hereinafter the “licensing exam”) and provides proof of
his or her passing test score (this requirement may be waived if the applicant
provides proof of certification from an institution of higher learning in the
field of electrical wiring and component installation, or that the applicant
has a current license for performing electrical work from the City of
Jeffersonville, Indiana, City of New Albany, Indiana, Town of Clarksville,
Indiana, Town of Sellersburg, Indiana or the City of Louisville, Kentucky).
      (2)   The applicant provides proof of a valid and current driver’s
license or state-issued identification card.
      (3)   The applicant provides proof of liability insurance in the amount
of at least $100,000.
   (B)   License fees. The license shall cost $75 for the first year, with a
renewal fee of $50 that is payable before July 1 following the year in which
the license was issued.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 110.23 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Contents of application. Each applicant shall apply in writing to the
Building Commissioner. The application prepared by the Building Commissioner
shall include the following information, under penalties for perjury:
      (1)   The applicant’s name/agent, address, telephone number and age;
      (2)   The applicant’s number of years of experience;
      (3)   The applicant’s present place of employment;
      (4)   The applicant is familiar with the provisions of the State
Electrical Code, being 675 I.A.C. 17-1.8;
      (5)   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony crime within the
past five years;
      (6)   Describing all judgments ever entered against the applicant, or of
all lawsuits ever settled against them or the firm where they have been
employed for an amount in excess of $10,000;
      (7)   Showing the applicant is currently insured by an insurance policy
in an amount of at least $100,000, providing liability coverage for performance
of electrical work; and
      (8)   Including an authorization permitting the Building Commissioner to
obtain a complete criminal background check on the applicant.
   (B)   Rejection of application. The Building Commissioner may reject any
application that is incomplete, that demonstrates that the applicant lacks the
necessary qualifications to do electrical work, or if the Building Commissioner
discovers that the applicant has participated in activities or has been
convicted of any crime involving, but not limited to, false statement, fraud,
theft, deceit, dishonesty or other moral turpitude.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 110.24 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Insurance amounts. Each license holder actively employed for hire in
the city and doing electrical work at the time that the application is made for
renewal and/or licensing, shall provide the Building Commissioner with evidence
of liability insurance for each occurrence in the amount of at least $100,000
by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state.
   (B)   Indemnification. Such liability insurance shall indemnify and hold
harmless those persons sustaining loss or damage resulting from any and all
work done under the license.
   (C)   Exceptions to insurance. The following exceptions to this requirement
may be allowed.
      (1)   If the license holder is currently employed by a firm that carries
insurance on the individual and he or she does not do work for hire in the
city, he or she may retain his or her license by renewal, and the Building
Commissioner should indicate on the license that this individual shall not be
allowed to obtain permits for work within the city limits without proof of
insurance, except on the premises of the firm maintaining the insurance.
      (2)   If the license holder is currently not actively engaged in the
electrician’s trade but wishes to retain his or her license by renewal, the
Building Commissioner should indicate on the license that the individual shall
not be allowed to obtain permits for work within the city limits without proof
of insurance, as previously set forth.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 110.25 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Notice of renewal. All license holders will receive notice from the
Building Commissioner via U.S. mail up to four weeks prior to the expiration of
their license.
   (B)   Renewal deadline. License holders shall renew their license on or
before July 1 of each year. Should a license holder fail to renew his or her
license by that date, the license holder will incur a penalty of $25 so that
the renewal fee will then be $75.
   (C)   Failure to renew license. Any license renewed after the July 1
deadline will be made effective retroactively to the previous July 1 renewal
deadline. A license holder may renew his or her license up to three years
following expiration as long as each of the previous year’s renewal fees are
paid in full prior to the expiration of the three-year period. Any license
holder who fails to renew his or her license within three years after the
license’s expiration must submit to the license exam referred to in division
(A) above. However, the Building Commissioner may waive such reexamination for
good cause shown.
   (D)   Consequences for failure to renew license. Any electrical work
performed by a license holder that fails to renew his her or license in a
timely manner will be deemed in violation of this subchapter and subject to the
penalties outlined in §
110.99 of this code.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.26 NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Revocation or suspension of license. Any license issued under this
subchapter shall be revoked or suspended for the following causes:
      (1)   Providing false information in connection with the license
application;
      (2)   Failure on the part of the license holder to comply with city
regulations within a reasonable time after receiving written notice of such
violation by the Building Commissioner or other representative of the city;
      (3)   Failure of the license holder to correct any deficient or defective
work within the city; or
      (4)   Violating §
110.20(C) of this code pertaining to the nontransferability of licenses.
   (B)   Reinstatement. Any license revoked or suspended because of deficient
or defective work shall not be reinstated until the deficient or defective work
has been corrected. This requirement shall not apply if the license holder is
prevented from making this correction by the property owner, or for any other
reasons deemed sufficient by the Building Commissioner.
   (C)   Notice of revocation or suspension.
      (1)   Prior to any revocation or suspension of a license, the Building
Commissioner shall send written notice of the information or complaint
containing the grounds for such revocation or suspension to the license holder.
The notice shall state the nature of the information or complaint, and the
date, time and place for a hearing to be held on the matter. If, after a
hearing, the Building Commissioner is satisfied that the evidence clearly shows
that a violation has occurred, the Building Commissioner may revoke or suspend
the license of that person.
      (2)   Any official decision on revocation or suspension shall be sent in
writing to the license holder.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.27 NOTICE; FORMS; POSTING OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Notice. Notice under this subchapter shall be deemed properly served
if a copy is either:
      (1)   Delivered personally to the license holder;
      (2)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address of the license holder; or
      (3)   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the address that
the license holder provided in their most recent license application.
   (B)   Forms. The Building Commissioner is authorized to develop and use
forms pertaining to the implementation and enforcement of this subchapter.
   (C)   Posting of license. The original or copy of the license issued under
the provisions of this subchapter shall be displayed or posted in a conspicuous
place at any location within the city where electrical work is being performed
by the license holder.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 110.28 APPEALS.
   (A)   Parties who may appeal. Any party aggrieved by any action taken by a
city official under this subchapter may appeal that action by delivering a
written notice of an appeal within ten business days of the time that the
person is provided with notice of the action by a city official. The notice of
an appeal shall be delivered to the City Clerk-Treasurer at 304 Main Cross
Street, Charlestown, Indiana 47111, during regular business hours, whereupon
the city’s Board of Public Works and Safety (the “Board”) should set a hearing
to consider evidence presented by the aggrieved party. Decisions of the Board
may be appealed to the County Circuit Court within 30 calendar days of notice
of a decision being provided by the Board to the aggrieved party.
   (B)   Contents of notice of appeal. The notice of an appeal provided for in
this section must be in writing and shall be written in at least ten-point font
or type, or legible printing, stating, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The name of the aggrieved party;
      (2)   The mailing address of the aggrieved party;
      (3)   The specific action or inaction of the city official from which an
appeal is being taken;
      (4)   The date(s) that the action or inaction of the city official
described above occurred;
      (5)   Each reason the aggrieved party disagrees with the determination of
the city official; and
      (6)   The name and address of all persons the aggrieved party is aware of
that has information or personal knowledge to support the aggrieved party’s
appeal, and what information each such person is believed to possess.
   (C)   Appeal hearing. An appeal of any action taken by any city official
under this subchapter should be heard by the Board within 30 calendar days
after the filing of the notice of an aggrieved party’s intent to appeal such
action(s), or as soon thereafter as practical under the circumstances. The
issues on appeal are limited to:
      (1)   Whether the aggrieved party has properly and timely appealed;
      (2)   Whether there was a preponderance of evidence to support the action
taken by the city official;
      (3)   Whether or not any required notice was served on or provided to the
aggrieved party as required;
      (4)   Whether fines or other enforcement actions that were imposed were
allowable under the circumstances; and
      (5)   Such other issues as may be necessary to conduct a just appeal.
   (D)   Appeal of Board action. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the
Board concerning any appeal made to the Board may appeal the Board’s final
decision to the County Circuit Court in the City of Jeffersonville, Indiana
within 30 days of the date a decision is rendered by the Board. Such an appeal
is to determine if the Board’s record contained sufficient evidence to support
the Board’s determinations and is not in the nature of a trial de novo.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition to having a permit suspended or revoked, any person, firm,
corporation or other entity that violates any provision of §§
110.01 through
110.06 of this code may be fined. The minimum fine for a violation is $50 and
the maximum fine for each violation is $1,500. Failure to comply with any
provision of §§
110.01 through
110.06 of this code constitutes a separate offense. Every day any violation
continues is also considered a separate offense.
   (C)   An individual, firm or entity that violates a provision of §§
110.20 through
110.28 of this code, including but not limited to performing electrical work
within the city after the effective date of this chapter without first
obtaining a license; enabling a person, firm or corporation to evade the
licensing requirements of §§
110.20 through
110.28 of this code; or performing electrical work within the city after
failing to renew his, her or their license in a timely manner, shall be subject
to fines that are effective immediately upon discovery by the Building
Commissioner, provided that proper notice of such violations is provided in
accordance with §
110.20 through 110.28 of this code. The minimum fine for any violation of
licensing requirements shall be $25, with the maximum fine for such violation
being $1,500.
(Ord. 2018-OR-12, passed 4-2-2018; Ord. 2020-OR-09, passed 5-4-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
[Reserved]
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   AT-RISK RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTIES
      
152.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
      
153.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
154.   PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
      
155.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
      
156.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
157.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code
   
150.01   Title
   
150.02   Purpose
   
150.03   Authority
   
150.04   Scope
   
150.05   Adoption of rules by reference
   
150.06   Application for permits
   
150.07   Permit required
   
150.08   Other ordinances
   
150.09   Fees
   
150.10   Review of application
   
150.11   Inspections
   
150.12   Entry
   
150.13   Stop order
   
150.14   Certificate of occupancy
   
150.15   Workmanship
   
150.16   Violations
   
150.17   Right of appeal
   
150.18   Remedies
Inspection Warrants
   
150.30   Definitions
   
150.31   Need for consent, exigency or warrant
   
150.32   Issuance of warrant
Unsafe Building Law
   
150.45   Definitions
   
150.46   Statutes adopted
   
150.47   Compliance required
   
150.48   Nuisances
   
150.49   Enforcement
   
150.50   “Unsafe building” defined
   
150.51   Standards
   
150.52   Authority
   
150.53   Unsafe Building Fund
   
150.54   Board of Public Works and Safety; bids and contracts
 
   
150.99   Penalty
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto shall
be known as the “Building Code of the City of Charlestown, Indiana,” may be
cited as such and will be referred to as “this subchapter.”
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare and
for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.03 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all the provisions of this subchapter. Whenever in this
subchapter it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner or any other office of
the city, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of
determining whether this subchapter has been complied with; and no such
provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to
what this subchapter shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinances, or to enforce this subchapter in an arbitrary or discriminatory
manner.
   (B)   Any variance from adopted building rules are subject to approval under
I.C. 22-13-2-7(b).
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.04 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter apply to the construction, alteration,
repair, use, occupancy and addition to all buildings and structures, other than
industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under I.C. 22-
15-4, in the city.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.05 ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Building rules of the state’s Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission as set out in the following Articles of I.A.C. Title 675 are hereby
incorporated by reference in this subchapter and shall include later amendments
those Articles as the same are published in the State Register as a final rule
or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein:
      (1)   Article 13: State Building Codes; fire and building safety
standards;
      (2)   Article 14: State Residential Code;
      (3)   Article 16: State Plumbing Code;
      (4)   Article 17: State Electrical Code;
      (5)   Article 18: State Mechanical Code;
      (6)   Article 19: State Energy Conservation Code;
      (7)   Article 20: State Swimming Pool Code; and
      (8)   Article 22: State Fire Code; fixed building safety standards.
   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on file in
the Office of Development.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.06 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued for foregoing purposes, unless the
application for permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed
location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the
work to be done. In addition, a copy of a design release, issued by the State
Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3-
1 shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before issuance of a permit
for construction cover by such design release.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.07 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds $500, using
forms furnished by the Building Commissioner, and all fees required by this
subchapter shall be paid to the city through the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.08 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all other
ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits, there
shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.09 FEES.
   All fees shall be assessed in accordance with the appropriate permit fee
schedule as required in
Chapter 157 of this code.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.10 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall:
   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter;
   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonable safe from flooding;
   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within the
floodplain area having special flood hazards to determine that the proposed
repair:
      (1)   Uses construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage; and
      (2)   Uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the floodplain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes) is protected against flood damage, is designed (or modified) and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure,
flood damage and uses construction methods and practices that will minimize
flood damage.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.11 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   After the issuance of any building permit, the Building Commissioner
shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work being done as
are necessary to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
and the terms of the permit. Re-inspections of work found to be incomplete or
not ready for inspection are subject to assessment of re-inspection fees as
prescribed herein.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her designated
representative, shall assist the Building Commissioner in the inspection of
fire suppression, detection and alarm systems and shall provide reports of such
inspection to the Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.12 ENTRY.
   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or his or
her duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure or premises in the jurisdiction of the city to perform any duty
imposed upon him or her by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.13 STOP ORDER.
   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be
done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by
the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.14 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure constructed after
the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued unless such building or
structure was constructed in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or structure unless a full,
partial or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.15 WORKMANSHIP.
   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.16 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sub-lessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building
or structure, other than fences, in the jurisdiction of the city, or cause or
permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.17 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   All persons shall have the right to appeal any order of the Building
Commissioner, first through the city and then to the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission of the state in accordance with the provisions of
I.C. 22-13-2-7 and 4-21.5-3-7.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
§ 150.18 REMEDIES.
   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the city bring actions in the
courts of the city or courts of the county for mandatory and injunctive relief
in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any other order or orders
made by the Building Commissioner, and any such action for mandatory injunctive
relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties provided for in
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001)
INSPECTION WARRANTS
§ 150.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The City Building Commissioner, the Building Commissioner’s
deputies, other code enforcement inspectors and other representatives of the
city authorized to perform inspections of real property in the city.
   COURT. Any court of record in the county, including but not limited to one
of the County Circuit Courts.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. As defined by I.C. 35-31.5-2-185.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, legal
representative, trustee, receiver or any other group or legal entity capable of
owning real estate.
   WARRANT or INSPECTION WARRANT. An order issued by the judge of a court,
which authorizes a Code Official or law enforcement officer to perform an
inspection for the purpose of determining if conditions in a particular
location or structure located in the city violate property maintenance
standards established by the Common Council of the city, or to determine if
conditions make any property or structure unsafe, uninhabitable, or likely to
endanger the health, safety and welfare of the property or structure’s
occupants, or endanger any other person found in the city.
(Ord 2018-OR-22, passed 12-3-2018)
§ 150.31 NEED FOR CONSENT, EXIGENCY OR WARRANT.
   Absent exigent circumstances, if an owner, occupant or possessor of any
property or structure located in the city refuses to allow a Code Official or
law enforcement officer to inspect the property or structure the person owns,
occupies or possesses, the Code Official or law enforcement officer may
petition for issuance of a warrant (an “inspection warrant”) issued by the
judge or magistrate of a court, authorizing the Code Official or law
enforcement officer to perform an inspection for purposes of determining if
conditions on or at the property or structure are unsafe, uninhabitable or
likely to endanger the health, safety and welfare of the property or
structure’s occupants, or of any other person in the city.
(Ord 2018-OR-22, passed 12-3-2018)
§ 150.32 ISSUANCE OF WARRANT.
   The court shall issue a warrant upon the following conditions.
   (A)   Probable cause requirement. The Code Official or law enforcement
officer seeking the warrant must establish that there is probable cause to
believe that either:
      (1)   Some condition, object, activity or circumstance on or in the
property or structure legally justifies an inspection of that property or
structure; or
      (2)   That the property or structure is to be inspected as part of a
legally authorized program of inspection that naturally includes the property
or structure.
   (B)   Affidavit to be under oath or affirmation. An affidavit establishing
one of the grounds described in division (A) above must be presented under oath
or affirmation by a Code Official or law enforcement officer.
   (C)   Examination of affidavit. The court must examine the statement given
by the Code Official or law enforcement officer under oath or affirmation and
verify the credibility of the Code Official or law enforcement officer and the
reliability of the information contained in the Code Official or law
enforcement officer’s statement.
   (D)   Requirements for a valid warrant. The warrant is valid only if it:
      (1)   Is approved and signed by the judge or magistrate of the court and
bears the date and time of its issuance with a notation that the warrant is
only valid for 48 hours from the date and time of its issuance;
      (2)   Describes (either directly or together by reference to the
affidavit) the property and/or structure(s) where the inspection is authorized
to occur so that the executor of the warrant and the owner, occupant or
possessor of the structure(s) can reasonably determine what property the
warrant authorizes the Code Official or law enforcement officer to inspect;
      (3)   Indicates the locations, conditions, objects, activities or
circumstances that the inspection is intended to allow Code Officials or law
enforcement officers to investigate, inspect or check for; and
      (4)   Is attached to a copy of the Code Official or law enforcement
officer’s statement required to be made in order to obtain the warrant.
   (E)   Period for execution. A warrant issued under this subchapter is valid
for 48 hours after its issuance.
   (F)   Executing warrants. A warrant issued under this subchapter must be
personally served upon either the owner, occupant or possessor of the property
or structure if reasonably possible. If the owner, occupant or possessor of the
property or structure cannot be located with reasonable diligence, the warrant
may be executed in the presence of a law enforcement officer, provided that a
copy of the warrant is left or posted at or on the property or structure being
inspected.
   (G)   Return of warrant. A warrant issued under this subchapter must be
returned to the court within 72 hours after execution upon the owner, occupant
or possessor of the property, with a notation of what relevant circumstances
were discovered upon inspection.
(Ord 2018-OR-22, passed 12-3-2018)
UNSAFE BUILDING LAW
§ 150.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Building Commissioner and/or the Director of the
Department of Planning and Zoning.
   HEARING AUTHORITY. The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety as the body
designated to conduct hearings in accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-7 and §
150.52 of this code.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real property that may be
affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this subchapter,
including a fee interest, a life estate, a future interest, a present
possessory interest or an equity interest of a contract purchaser.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.46 STATUTES ADOPTED.
   (A)   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-28, as amended, together with all
hearing requirements, is adopted by reference as the city’s Unsafe Building
Law. All proceedings within the city for the inspection, repair and removal of
unsafe buildings shall be governed by said law and the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   In the event the provisions of this subchapter conflict with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, then the provisions of the state
statute shall control.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.47 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or
occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or premises, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter or any order issued by the Building Commissioner
and/or the Director of Planning and Zoning.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.48 NUISANCES.
   All buildings or portions thereof within the city which are determined after
inspection by the Building Commissioner and/or the Director of Planning and
Zoning to be unsafe as defined in this subchapter are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or
removal or vacated in accordance with the procedure specified in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.49 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The enforcement authority shall, after consultation with appropriate
city officials and/or agencies, be authorized to administer and to proceed
under the provisions of this subchapter in ordering the repair or removal of
any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified
hereafter.
   (B)   Wherever in the building regulations of the city or in this
subchapter, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner or any other officer of
the Planning Department, this shall be construed to give such officer only the
discretion of determining whether the rules and standards established by
ordinance have been complied with; no such provisions shall be construed as
giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such regulations or
standards shall be, power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or
power to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discretionary manner.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.50 “UNSAFE BUILDING” DEFINED.
   The definition of an UNSAFE BUILDING contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is
supplemented to provide minimum standards for building conditions or
maintenance in the city by adding the following to said definition: Any
building or structure which has any or all of the unsafe conditions or defects
hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an UNSAFE BUILDING, provided that
such conditions or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property or
safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:
   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of exit is not of
sufficient width or size or is not arranged as required so as to be in
compliance with the applicable building code then in force;
   (B)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due
to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working
stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location as established by the applicable state building code then in force;
   (C)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such extent that the structural strength
or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe,
and less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of similar structure,
purpose or location as established by the applicable state building code then
in force;
   (D)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property;
   (E)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the
working stresses permitted for such buildings as established by the applicable
state building code then in force;
   (F)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled
to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new
construction;
   (G)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of: Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose
of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse;
   (H)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used;
   (I)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base;
   (J)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows
33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50%
damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members, enclosing or outside
walls or coverings;
   (K)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become
an attractive nuisance to children, or freely accessible to persons for the
purpose of committing unlawful acts;
   (L)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of the city,
or of any law or ordinances of the state or county relating to the condition,
location or structure of buildings;
   (M)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any non-supporting
part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting part, member or
portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or
characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by
law in the case of a newly-constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location;
   (N)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Building Commissioner
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is
likely to cause sickness or disease;
   (O)   Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence,
dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire-resisting construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections
or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Building
Commissioner to be a fire hazard;
   (P)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site
after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever
any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so
as to constitute such building or portion thereon an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public; and
   (Q)   Whenever a structure designed and/or utilized for residential
occupancy is without proper waste disposal for more than a 48-hour period.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.51 STANDARDS.
   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike manner
according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions
of the rules and regulations pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical and one- and two-family dwellings, promulgated by the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, shall be considered standard and
acceptable practice for all matters covered by this subchapter, or orders
issued pursuant to this subchapter, by the Building Commissioner and/or the
Director of Planning and Zoning.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.52 AUTHORITY.
   The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby designated the hearing
authority in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-7 and for the
purpose of conducting hearings in accordance with I.C. 36-7-9-7.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.53 UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.
   An Unsafe Building Fund may be established in the operating budget of the
Board of Public Works and Safety in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-
7-9-14.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.54 BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY; BIDS AND CONTRACTS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Public Works and Safety to
administer any bids for or demolition contracts awarded pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-OR-04, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions
of §§
150.01 through
150.18 of this code, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the Building
Commissioner, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given
by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of §§
150.01 through
150.18 of this code for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person,
firm or corporation shall be fined in any sum not less than $100, nor more than
$1,000. Each day of such lawful activity as is prohibited by the first sentence
of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person that interferes with a Code Official or law enforcement
officer executing a warrant issued in accordance with §§
150.30 through
150.32 of this code, or any person who refuses to comply with the execution of
a warrant issued in accordance with §§
150.30 through
150.32 of this code is in violation. Any person that violates §§
150.30 through
150.32 of this code shall be fined a minimum of $500 and up to $1,500. This
penalty is intended to be in addition to, and not instead of, any penalties for
contempt of court that may be imposed by a judge or magistrate that issues a
warrant hereunder.
(Ord. 2001-OR-18, passed 8-28-2001; Ord 2018-OR-22, passed 12-3-2018)
CHAPTER 151: AT-RISK RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
   
151.01   Definitions and application
   
151.02   Inspections
   
151.03   Delivery of notices and forms
   
151.04   Appeals
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITIONS AND APPLICATION.
   (A)   Name. This chapter is entitled the “Ordinance Establishing an
Inspection Program for At-Risk Residential Rental Properties in the City of
Charlestown, Indiana.”
   (B)   Purpose. This chapter is enacted in order to establish a regular
inspection program for certain at-risk properties used or intended to be used
as rental units, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare by
insuring the proper maintenance of such housing, by identifying and requiring
correction of substandard housing conditions and by identifying and correcting
conditions of deterioration and blight that could adversely affect the health
and safety of occupants of those rental units, as well as economic conditions
and the quality of life in the city.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      APPLICABLE LAWS. Includes, but is not limited to, the city’s Property
Maintenance Code, as defined in
Chapter 152 of this code, the city’s zoning ordinances, other city ordinances
or other statutes, laws and regulations relating to the health or safety of
residential dwellings or the public.
      AT-RISK PROPERTY. Any residential housing that is accurately described by
the following conditions:
         (a)   Is at least 65 years old;
         (b)   Was originally constructed without footers or a foundation; or
         (c)   Was originally constructed with asbestos or other building
materials now deemed to be hazardous to human health.
      BOARD. The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety.
      BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The City Building Commissioner or a designee of
the Building Commissioner.
      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. The certificates issued evidencing compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
      CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
      DEFICIENCY. Any failure by a unit subject to this chapter to comply with
APPLICABLE LAWS, as defined above.
      INSPECTOR. The Building Commissioner, or his or her appointee, whose
responsibility it is to conduct inspections pursuant to this chapter.
      OCCUPANT. A person lawfully residing in a unit.
      OWNER. The owner of record of a rental unit as shown by the most recently
recorded deed to the real estate upon which the unit is located or as indicated
by the County Assessor’s tax records, or that owner’s authorized agent.
      RENTAL UNIT. A unit in an at-risk property occupied by or intended for
occupancy by a person or persons other than the owner of the unit or the
owner’s grandparents, parents, siblings, children or grandchildren.
      UNIT. A dwelling within the city, including structures used as single-
family homes, duplexes, multi-family dwellings or other living accommodations.
      UNIT UNAVAILABLE FOR RENT. A unit whose owner has filed with the Building
Commissioner a statement signed under penalty of perjury, which statement
provides that such unit is not offered or available for rent as a rental unit,
and that prior to offering or making available such unit for rent as a rental
unit, the owner will apply for a certificate of compliance for such unit
pursuant to this chapter and any applicable administrative regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all at-
risk property that has at least one rental unit, except for units that are
exclusively owner-occupied or units unavailable for rent.
   (E)   Registration of existing rental units. The owner of each rental unit
that is subject to inspection under this chapter shall register the rental unit
with the office of the Building Commissioner, in writing, on or before July 1,
2016, on forms provided by the Building Commissioner, and shall supply the
following information:
      (1)   Owner’s name;
      (2)   If owner is a corporation, LLC, partnership or other business
entity, the name and mailing address of the authorized agent for service of
legal process for the entity;
      (3)   Owner’s mailing address;
      (4)   Owner’s telephone number;
      (5)   Owner’s email address;
      (6)   Rental unit mailing address;
      (7)   Year the rental unit was constructed;
      (8)   Finished living space of the rental unit (plus or minus 50 square
feet); and
      (9)   The year the electrical service (service panel) in the rental unit
was last updated.
   (F)   Registration of new rental units. Any unit that becomes a rental unit
after this chapter becomes effective shall register the rental unit with the
Building Commissioner, in writing, on a form provided by the Building
Commissioner, in order to provide an inspector with the opportunity to inspect
the rental unit per §
151.02 of this code, prior to the time the rental unit is occupied by an
occupant. Failure of an inspection to take place within three business days
after the form is received at the office of the Building Commissioner, due to
the unavailability of an inspector, should not be cause to prevent the rental
unit to be rented or occupied.
   (G)   Registration fee. To help defray the expense of managing this program
each registration for a rental unit required to be filed under this chapter
shall be accompanied by a one-time registration fee in the amount of $20.
(Ord. 2016-OR-2, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 151.02 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Authority to inspect. Rental units subject to this chapter shall
periodically be made available for an inspection by the Building Commissioner
or inspector for: Good cause; an annual housing inspection; re-inspections;
prior to the time that a new tenant/occupant takes possession of the rental
unit; or as otherwise permitted or required by this chapter or any other
applicable laws.
   (B)   Requirement to permit inspections. Every owner and/or occupant of a
rental unit located within the city shall, upon notice by the Building
Commissioner, permit the inspection of the rental units as required by this
chapter, as well as the real property on which such rental unit is located.
   (C)   Annual housing inspections. Every rental unit shall be made available
for an inspection by an inspector, without other cause, for an “annual”
inspection one time each year, upon at least 21 days’ notice to the owner and/
or occupant of the rental unit. The inspector may cause each rental unit to be
routinely inspected to ensure compliance with all applicable laws.
   (D)   Re-inspections. If, during any inspection of a rental unit any
deficiency or violation of applicable laws is discovered, the owner of the
rental unit shall permit an inspector to re-inspect the rental unit at any time
after at least 72 hours’ notice to the owner and/or occupant of that rental
unit.
   (E)   Vacancy inspections. The owner of each rental unit shall notify the
Building Commissioner, in writing, on a form provided by the Building
Commissioner any time a rental unit is vacated or will be leased or occupied by
a different occupant and shall provide an inspector with an opportunity to
inspect the rental unit, prior to the time the rental unit is occupied by a new
occupant. Failure of an inspection to take place within three business days
after the owner has proof that such notice form was received at the office of
the Building Commissioner, due to the unavailability of an inspector, will not
be cause to prevent the rental unit to be rented or occupied after that time.
   (F)   Complaint-based inspections. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or
restrict the authority of an inspector or the city’s other enforcement
officials to inspect any structure or premises on account of conditions
observed or other information received, indicating the existence of code
violations and/or violations of other applicable laws at such a property or
structure, and to pursue all code enforcement remedies permissible under this
chapter or other applicable laws following such a complaint-based inspection of
any structure or premise.
   (G)   Voluntary inspection requests. Any owner or occupant may voluntarily
request an inspection pursuant to this chapter to determine whether a rental
unit complies with applicable laws, even if such an inspection may not yet be
otherwise due pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. Such voluntary
inspection requests shall be conducted at no cost as the Building Commissioner
is available. However, such an inspection should be completed within ten
business days if an inspection fee of $25 is paid.
   (H)   Immediate health and safety threats. Nothing in this chapter shall
limit the city’s ability to inspect properties and institute enforcement action
for property-related conditions that may constitute a violation of other laws,
statutes, ordinances or regulations, or which pose an immediate health or
safety threat.
   (I)   Deficiencies. As soon as practical following an annual inspection,
vacancy inspection or re-inspection conducted by an inspector pursuant to this
chapter, the Building Commissioner should provide the owner and/or occupant
with written notice of deficiencies required to be remedied. A failure to
notify or give an owner or occupant of a rental unit notice of each existing
deficiency observed does not waive the right of the Building Commissioner to
enforce all applicable laws at a later time.
   (J)   Certificate of compliance. As soon as practical following an annual
inspection, voluntary inspection, vacancy inspection or re-inspection conducted
by an inspector pursuant to this chapter, if no deficiencies are noted, a
certificate of compliance should be issued to the owner and/or occupant of a
rental unit.
   (K)   Remediation of violations. Any violation(s) or deficiencies which
cause a rental unit not to receive a certificate of compliance after an
inspection conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be remedied within 30 days
of the time a notice of deficiencies is sent to the owner or occupant as set
out in division (I) above.
   (L)   Inspection fees. No fee shall be charged for an annual inspection
described above. A $25 fee shall be paid by the owner of a rental unit for each
re-inspection occurring because of deficiencies discovered during an
inspection. This re-inspection fee is a user fee, not a penalty. Likewise, a
$25 fee shall be paid by the owner of a new rental unit for vacancy
inspections.
   (M)   Failure to allow inspection. Owners and occupants of rental units
shall make all reasonable efforts to ensure each rental unit is made available
for inspection as required under this chapter. Failure to facilitate such an
inspection in accordance with this chapter shall be cause for the Building
Inspector to obtain an inspection warrant per I.C. 36-7-9-16. An occupant of a
unit that objects to an inspection hereunder should express that objection, in
writing, to the office of the Building Commissioner at 304 Main Cross,
Charlestown, Indiana 47111 within ten calendar days of receiving notice of an
inspection. Otherwise, if no objection is expressed by an occupant at that
time, then each day an owner or occupant does not permit an inspector to enter
a rental unit for purpose of conducting an inspection after notice has been
provided under this chapter is a separate offense.
   (N)   Presumption a rental unit is unfit for habitation. If notice of the
inspection of a rental unit is provided to an owner and/or occupant and no
objection to the inspection is made in a timely manner by an occupant of the
rental unit the inspector may perform an inspection. If an inspector arrives
for an inspection and is not permitted to enter for purpose of conducting an
inspection, when required by this chapter, the rental unit shall be presumed to
be unfit for habitation. In that case, after notice to the owner and/or
occupant of that rental unit, the Building Commissioner may order that utility
services to that rental unit be discontinued, until an inspector is allowed
access to the rental unit and an inspection of the rental unit is completed.
The cost of utility service disconnection/reconnection shall be borne by the
owner and/or occupant of the rental unit and not the city.
(Ord. 2016-OR-2, passed 2-1-2016) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03 DELIVERY OF NOTICES AND FORMS.
   (A)   Notice to owners. Notice is deemed given to the owner of a rental unit
when provided by any one of the following means:
      (1)   When personally delivered to any owner or the owner’s local contact
representative;
      (2)   If the owner is a corporation, LLC, partnership or other legal
entity, by personal delivery or mailing a written notice by certified U.S.
mail, to any representative or agent authorized to receive service of process
on behalf of the owner or entity;
      (3)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail, to the owner’s
tax mailing address on file at the office of the County Auditor;
      (4)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail to the owner’s
address provided to the Building Commissioner in writing by the owner; or
      (5)   If no address for mailing (as described above) is readily apparent,
or for other good cause, then notice is provided by posting a notice in a
conspicuous location on the exterior of the rental unit.
   (B)   Notice to an owner of multiple rental units. If an owner has more than
one rental unit, notice of multiple inspections can be included in the same
written notice.
   (C)   Notice to occupants. Notice is deemed given to the occupant of a
rental unit when provided by any of the following means:
      (1)   When personally delivered to any adult occupant of the rental unit;
      (2)   By mailing a written notice by certified U.S. mail addressed to
“occupant,” to the street or mailing address of the rental unit; or
      (3)   By posting a notice in a conspicuous location on the exterior of
the rental unit after attempting to deliver a notice personally.
   (D)   Delivery to building commissioner or inspector. Notice or such forms
required to be delivered to the Building Commissioner or an inspector may be
delivered either in person (provided a receipt for delivery is issued by the
recipient), by U.S. mail (postage prepaid), by fax or email (provided that
proof of electronic transmission is received and retained by the owner).
Delivery is considered completed only when actually received at the office of
the Building Commissioner and written or electronic verification of that
delivery can be produced. It is the responsibility of the person delivering any
notice or form to the Building Commissioner’s office to obtain proof of
delivery.
   (E)   Certificate of compliance contents. A certificate of compliance issued
pursuant to this chapter should specify: The date of issuance; the legal use
and occupancy of the unit; the unit address; the name of the unit owner to whom
the certificate is issued; that the unit is deemed to substantially comply with
applicable laws so far as was determined by inspection; and the signature of
the inspector or Building Commissioner.
   (F)   Local contact representative. Owners of rental units may designate, in
writing, a local contact representative with full authority to act on behalf of
the owner for all purposes under this chapter including acceptance of service
of all notices from the city. Any such local contact representative must
establish and maintain a local telephone number and residence within 20 miles
of the city limits.
   (G)   Notice of appeal. A notice of appeal per §
151.04(A) of this code shall be delivered, in writing, on forms available from
the Building Commissioner, within ten days of the time the action occurred (or
did not occur) which the aggrieved party objects to. The appeal form shall be
delivered to the City Clerk-Treasurer’s office during regular business hours.
It is the responsibility of the party appealing to obtain proof of delivery of
a notice of appeal.
   (H)   Forms. The Building Commissioner is authorized to develop and use
forms pertaining to the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-OR-2, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 151.04 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal hearing. An appeal of any action taken by the Building
Commissioner or inspector taken under this action shall be heard by the city’s
Board of Public Works and Safety (the “Board”) at the Board’s next regular
meeting following the filing of a notice of an aggrieved party’s intent to
appeal such action(s). The issues on appeal are limited to: Whether or not
notice of an inspection was provided to the owner and/or occupant of the rental
unit in question; whether the owner and occupant of the rental unit make all
reasonable efforts to ensure the rental unit was made available to an inspector
for inspection as required by this chapter; whether fines imposed were
reasonable under the circumstances; and whether utility service should be
disconnected because a rental unit is presumed to be unfit for habitation.
   (B)   Appeal of Board action. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the
Board concerning any appeal to the Board may appeal that Board action to the
County Circuit Court. Such is an appeal to determine if the Board was presented
with sufficient evidence to support its determination and is not in the nature
of a trial de novo.
(Ord. 2016-OR-2, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   A person, business, corporation, limited liability company or other
entity that fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,500 for each provision of
this chapter that is violated. Fines shall be determined by the Building
Commissioner or an inspector. Each day any violation continues to occur or
exist is considered a separate violation. This penalty is in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any other penalty or penalties that might be imposed for
violation of other applicable laws.
   (B)   To the extent other enforcement options are available to the city,
including but not limited to equitable relief, injunction or mandamus, these
shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, other penalties listed.
(Ord. 2016-OR-2, passed 2-1-2016)
CHAPTER 152: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
152.01   Administration
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   General requirements
   
152.04   Exterior property areas
   
152.05   Exterior structure
   
152.06   Extermination
   
152.07   Garbage, refuse and trash
   
152.08   Abandoned vehicles declared public nuisance
   
152.09   Vehicles in general
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   General provisions.
      (1)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of the city, hereinafter referred to as “this chapter.”
      (2)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall uniformly apply to all
existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises
and existing or proposed improvements on existing premises and constitute
minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, sanitation,
protection from the elements, safety from other hazards, and for safe and
sanitary installation and maintenance of improvements; the responsibility of
owners, operators and occupants for their properties; and for administration,
enforcement and penalties irrespective of when or under what code or codes such
buildings were originally constructed or rehabilitated, except for the rules of
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.
      (3)   Purpose. This chapter shall be construed to secure its expressed
intent, which is to protect, preserve and promote the physical and mental
health and social well-being of the people, to prevent and control the
incidence of communicable diseases, to reduce environmental hazards to health,
to regulate privately- and publicly-owned buildings, structures or improvements
for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health, and to
protect the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare. It is
further declared that the purpose of this chapter is to eliminate blight, to
ensure maintenance of property, and to thereby ensure public health, safety and
welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance
of structures and premises. Existing structures, improvements and premises that
do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a
minimum level of health and safety as required herein.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   General provisions. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to
all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises except as to those
matters governed by the provisions of the State Building Code, State
Residential Code, State Fire Code, State Electric Code, State Fuel Gas Code,
State Mechanical Code, State Energy Code, State Accessibility Code, State
Plumbing Code, State Swimming Pool Code, 675 I.A.C. 12, as the same shall be
amended from time to time. Where, in a specific case, different sections of
this chapter specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
      (2)   No private cause of action. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to create a private cause of action in favor of one party against another.
      (3)   Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be made or accomplished in accordance
with the procedures and provisions of the State Building Code, State
Residential Code, State Fire Code, State Electric Code, State Mechanical Code,
State Fuel Gas Code, State Energy Code, State Accessibility Code, State
Plumbing Code and/or State Swimming Pool Code, 675 I.A.C. 12, as same may be
amended from time to time.
      (4)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure,
which is dangerous or unsafe.
      (5)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this chapter shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
      (6)   Requirements not covered by code. The authority having jurisdiction
thereof shall determine requirements necessary for the strength, stability or
proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment or for the
public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission and this chapter.
      (7)   Proposed improvements. Any proposed improvements or maintenance
thereto shall be designed, permitted, installed and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and the current city standards that govern
the work associated with the installation or maintenance of such improvements
that may be amended from time to time. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this and other applicable codes, or those codes of other federal,
state or local government agencies that have jurisdiction over the installation
or maintenance of such improvements, specify different requirements, the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission regulations shall govern.
   (C)   Code enforcement.
      (1)   General. Property maintenance inspections as required by this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the city and other such persons as shall
be designated by the city, hereinafter referred to as “Code Enforcement
Official.”
      (2)   Restriction of employees. No official or employee connected with
the enforcement of this chapter shall be engaged in, or directly or indirectly
connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the
construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or improvement within the
city, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless he or she is
the owner of the building.
      (3)   Liability.
         (a)   The Code Enforcement Official, officer or employee charged with
the enforcement of this chapter, while acting under its jurisdiction, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
         (b)   Any suit instituted against any official or employee because of
an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties
and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by the legal
representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs
in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter; and any official of the city, acting in good faith
and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any
of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of
official duties in connection therewith.
   (D)   Duties and powers of Code Enforcement Official.
      (1)   General. The Code Enforcement Official shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
      (2)   Inspections. The Code Enforcement Official shall make all of the
necessary inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Code Enforcement Official is authorized to engage
such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues
that arise, subject to the approval of the city.
      (3)   Right of entry. The Code Enforcement Official, pursuant to this
chapter, may make inspections of all buildings, structures and premises located
within the city’s corporate limits to determine their compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Such inspections shall be made between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday. All inspections shall be
subject to the following standards and conditions.
         (a)   An inspection of an interior of a structure may take place only
if a complaint has been received by the city and such complaint, in the opinion
of the Code Enforcement Official, provides reasonable grounds for the belief
that a violation exists, or if such inspection is undertaken as part of a
regular inspection program whereby certain areas of the city are being
inspected in their entirety at the direction of the Board of Public Works and
Safety.
         (b)   The Code Enforcement Official shall furnish to the owner, tenant
or occupant of the building, structure or premises sought to be inspected
sufficient identification and information to enable the owner, tenant or
occupant to determine the purpose of the inspection and that the person is a
representative of the city.
         (c)   The Code Enforcement Official may apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction for a search warrant or other legal process for the
purpose of securing entry to any premises if the owner, tenant or occupant
shall refuse to grant entry and shall request a city police officer to
accompany him or her to the premises.
   (E)   Approval of modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Code Enforcement
Official shall have the authority, upon approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the Code
Enforcement Official shall first find that the practical difficulty makes the
strict letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not
lessen health, life and fire safety requirements or modify the rules of the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission. The details of action granting
modification shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
   (F)   Violations.
      (1)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   Notice of violation. The Code Enforcement Official shall serve a
notice of violation and request for abatement in accordance with divisions (G)
(3) and (G)(4) below.
      (3)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a
notice of violation and request for abatement served in accordance with
divisions (G)(3) and (G)(4) below shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the
notice of violation is not complied with, the Code Enforcement Official shall
cause to be instituted the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
      (4)   Abatement of violation.
         (a)   The imposition of the penalties prescribed in §
152.99 of this code shall not preclude the city from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation in the city, county or state.
         (b)   The city may direct the owner or responsible party to restore
all improvements to the original design condition, alter the improvement to
remedy the violation, or remove the improvement if determined to be in
violation or represents the potential to be in violation of this chapter.
Violations shall be remedied to the satisfaction of the city.
         (c)   In the event that the owner or responsible party fails to remedy
the violation within the time frame stipulated in the notice, the city reserves
the right to remedy the violation and collect such costs together with
reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultant fees and collection fees, including
reasonable attorneys’ fees, by suing the owner or responsible party in a court
of competent jurisdiction or in the alternate, by certifying said costs of
correction as any other special assessment upon the premises from which said
remedy of said violation was made.
   (G)   Notice and orders.
      (1)   Warning citation. It is the policy of the city to use fair and
reasonable judgment in the administration of its enforcement actions. To this
end, a warning citation may be issued for a violation of this chapter. The
warning citation shall be worded so as to sufficiently identify the premises
and the nature of the violation. If the premises owner or person being cited
fails to correct the violation in the time allotted by a Code Enforcement
Official, then a notice of correction order shall be issued. In his or her
discretion, a Code Enforcement Official shall have the right to forego issuing
a warning citation and may proceed to issue a notice of correction order. The
issuance of a warning citation shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of a
notice of correction order. There shall be no right of appeal from the issuance
of a warning citation.
      (2)   Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the
Code Enforcement Official determines that there has been a violation of this
chapter or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, a notice of
correction order (“correction order”) shall be given to the owner or the person
or persons responsible therefor in the manner prescribed in divisions (G)(3)
and (G)(4) below. The city will take enforcement action only with the owner or
responsible party at the time the violation is identified.
      (3)   Notice of correction order. Such notice prescribed in division (G)
(2) above shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
         (c)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and section
(s) violated and why the notice is being issued and include a description of
the actions necessary to correct the violation or violations;
         (d)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable amount of time,
of at least ten days (excepting cases of emergency or safety concerns), but not
more than 60 days, from the time when the correction order is served, to make
the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit, structure or
improvement into compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
         (e)   Include a notice containing the right to appeal the Code
Enforcement Official’s determination to the Board of Public Works and Safety in
accordance with division (H) below.
      (4)   Method of service.
         (a)   Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is sent by certified return receipt mail or hand-delivered by an
employee of the city.
         (b)   If these two means of service are attempted, but service is not
successful, notice may be given by leaving a copy of the notice at the dwelling
house of the person to whom the notice must be given and sending the notice by
first class to the last known address of the person to whom the notice must be
given, in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 1-1-7-1.
   (H)   Means of appeal.
      (1)   Appeal to Board of Public Works and Safety. Any person aggrieved by
a determination of the Code Enforcement Official to the effect that a notice of
violation or order served in accordance with division (G) above is in error, or
should, due to hardship, be modified or entitled to a variance from
enforcement, or that a reasonable extension of time for the compliance should
be granted upon the grounds of a demonstrated case of hardship and evidence of
an actual undertaking to correct the violation, together with a legitimate
intent to comply within a reasonable time period, may appeal to the Board of
Public Works and Safety for rescission of the notice or order, or for a
modification, variance or extension of time for compliance. However, the Board
of Public Works and Safety shall not consider or grant modifications or
variance from any applicable rule of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission.
      (2)   Procedure and hearing. A request for rescission, modification,
variance or extension of time shall be made in writing, to the City Clerk-
Treasurer’s office, to be placed on the Board of Public Works and Safety
agenda, within ten days of the appellant’s receipt of a copy of the notice or
order. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall schedule a hearing within 30
days of receipt of the request.
      (3)   Open hearing. All hearings before the Board of Public Works and
Safety shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant’s
representative, the Code Enforcement Official and any persons whose interests
are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
      (4)   Findings. Prior to ruling on an appeal, the Board of Public Works
and Safety shall make the following findings:
         (a)   The violator was served with a notice of correction order as
provided by divisions (G)(3) and (G)(4) below;
         (b)   The notice of correction order that was served stated the
specific nature of the violation; the specific corrective action needed to be
taken to abate the violation; and a specific time period for abatement of
violation;
         (c)   Within the time period stipulated by the notice of correction
order, the violator failed to comply with the correction order by not abating
the violation, and/or not bringing the offending property into compliance with
this chapter;
         (d)   Upon expiration of the date indicated for compliance in the
correction order, the premises or structure was being maintained in violation
of specific provisions of this chapter and/or conditions imposed by Board of
Public Works and Safety as a prerequisite to the modification of a previous
compliance order; and
         (e)   Determination that a violation exists on the property.
      (5)   Board decision. At the conclusion of a hearing at which a
continuance is not granted, the Board of Public Works and Safety may reverse,
affirm or modify the order, notice, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as justice would require. The Board’s determination and findings of fact shall
be recorded in the Board’s minutes and if a notice or order is affirmed or
modified, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall, in the determination on
appeal, reestablish a reasonable time line to make the repairs and improvements
required to bring the dwelling unit, structure or improvement into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
      (6)   Court review. Any interested party having standing, whether or not
a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the
appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law.
Commencement of an application for writ of certiorari must be filed in the
County Circuit Court within 30 days of the filing of the decision of the Board
of Public Works and safety in the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer. There is
a 30-day limit to file an appeal with the court.
      (7)   Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order
until the Board of Public Works and Safety rules on the appeal.
   (I)   Unsafe structures.
      (1)   General provisions. Unsafe structures shall be regulated and
enforced as provided by the city’s unsafe building regulations.
      (2)   Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement
Official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or
structure which endangers life or other property, or when any structure or part
of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the
structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building
occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives,
explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials,
or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the Code Enforcement Official
is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate
the premises. The Code Enforcement Official shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This structure is
unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by the City of Charlestown.” It
shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose
of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
   (J)   Demolition.
      (1)   General. This division (J) shall only apply when demolition is
ordered pursuant to the enforcement of division (I) above.
      (2)   Salvage of materials. When any structure has been ordered
demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under
said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage
and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable within 30 days of
demolition. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such
demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale
or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for
the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a
surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
   (K)   Transfer of ownership. No owner of any dwelling unit or structure or
improvement who has received a correction order or upon whom a notice of
violation has been served shall sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose of to another until the provisions of the correction order have been
complied with, or until such owner first furnishes the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Enforcement Official and furnishes to the Code Enforcement
Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such correction order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition
for making corrections or repairs required by such correction order or notice
of violation.
   (L)   Nonconforming conditions. If additional nonconforming conditions are
encountered during the course of any approved alteration or repair which were
not considered or known initially, the Code Enforcement Official shall have the
authority to require compliance with this chapter of such additional
conditions. The determination of what is necessary to bring such conditions
into compliance shall take into consideration the use of alternatives and
equivalent approaches as provided for in this chapter. The Code Enforcement
Official shall have the authority to approve construction changes in the field
when conditions are encountered which make the originally approved work
impractical, provided such changes in approved work can be readily determined
to be in compliance with this chapter and are requested by the owner or the
owner’s agent prior to such construction changes. Such changes shall be
specifically documented by the owner or the owner’s agent describing the change
in work and the reasons for justification for the change and shall be filed
with the permit for the project.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
chapter and are defined in the State Building Code, State Residential Code,
State Fire Code, State Electric Code, State Mechanical Code, State Energy Code,
State Accessibility Code, State Plumbing Code and/or State Swimming Pool Code,
such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in those codes, unless a
term is alternatively defined by the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission in which case the definition of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission shall apply.
   (B)   Parts. Whenever the words ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, BUILDING, DWELLING
UNIT, PREMISES, HOTEL and/or STRUCTURE are stated in this chapter, they shall
be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
   (C)   General definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A building, structure or part of a building which is
secondary or subordinate in capacity or use from the main or principal building
or structure on the same premises.
      APPROVED. Approved by the Code Enforcement Official.
      BASEMENT. The portion of a building, which is partly or completely below
grade.
      BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for
the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
property. When separated by firewalls, each portion of such a building shall be
considered a separate structure. See also STRUCTURE.
      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any of his or her duly
authorized representatives, including, but not limited to, the City Code
Enforcement Officers or their designees, and authorized members of the city’s
Police Department.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
      GARBAGE. Animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
      HAZARDOUS CONDITION. Any condition likely to cause injury to any person.
This term shall not mean a temporary condition caused by weather such as rain,
snow or ice.
      HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guestrooms, intended or
designed to be occupied, or which are rented or hired, for sleeping purposes by
guests.
      IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which poses an immediate risk of serious or
life threatening injury or death if not promptly abated or remedied.
      IMPROVEMENT. Existing or proposed surface or subsurface improvements
including, but not limited to: Public drainage systems; private drainage
systems; permanent or temporary buildings or structures; drives; walks; patios;
irrigation systems; fences; landscaping; vegetation; decorative items;
playgrounds; air conditioning units; gutters; decks; parts of permanent or
temporary structures; roof overhangs; pools; permanent or temporary erosion
control measures; permanent or temporary sediment control measures; permanent
or temporary stormwater quality measures; or best management practices or other
items determined by the city to be an improvement.
      INFESTATION. The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
      OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
      OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building or having
possession of a space within a building.
      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
      OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the office of the County
Recorder as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the
property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person, if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
      PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting
as a unit.
      PEST. Each of the following organisms when it is detrimental or injurious
to persons, domestic or wild animals, useful plants or other useful articles or
substances is declared to be a PEST:
         (a)   Mammals, including but not limited to dogs, cats, pigs,
chickens, moles, bats, wild carnivores and wild herbivores;
         (b)   Birds, including but not limited to starlings, house sparrows,
wild pigeons and black birds;
         (c)   Fishes, including but not limited to alewives, sea lampreys,
gizzard shad and carp;
         (d)   Amphibians and reptiles, including but not limited to poisonous
snakes;
         (e)   Aquatic and terrestrial invertebrates, including but not limited
to slugs, snails and crayfish;
         (f)   Roots and other plant parts growing where not wanted; and
         (g)   Viruses, other than those on or in living persons and other
animals.
      PLUMBING. Include all the following supplied facilities and equipment:
Gas pipes; gas burning equipment; water pipes; garbage disposal units; waste
pipes; water closets; sinks; installed dishwashers; lavatories; bathtubs;
shower baths; installed clothes washing machines; catch basins; drains; vents
and other similar supplied fixtures; and the installation thereof, together
with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
      PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land or groups of lots, plots or
parcels of land, whether residential, commercial or industrial, including any
structures thereon or for which improvements are to be installed and/or benefit
from the existence of these improvements.
      REFUSE. All solid waste products which are composed wholly or partly of
such materials as garbage, sweepings, cleanings, trash, rubbish, litter,
industrial solid wastes or domestic solid wastes, including organic wastes or
residues of animals, meat, fruit, vegetables, grains or fish; animal excreta or
carcasses of animals; rubbish including wood, leaves, vegetation, tree
trimmings, dead trees and shrubs, branches, sawdust, shavings, grass, paper
products, straw, rags, clothing and all other combustibles; waste matter
composed of soil, clay, sand, earth, gravel, fill, stones, bricks, plaster,
glass, glassware, crockery, ashes, cinders, shells, metal and other non-
combustibles; waste debris resulting from the construction, demolition, repair
or alteration of structures or buildings; accumulated waste materials composed
of cans, containers, tires, junk, vehicle parts or other substances which may
become a nuisance.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Person, agent, operator, firm, corporation or federal,
state or local governmental agency having primary responsibility for
maintenance of improvements located on the premises, rights-of-way or
easements. Said party shall be the owner unless responsibility for such
maintenance is provided in other codes, restrictive covenants or is legally
established to be the responsibility of another person, agent, operator, firm,
corporation or federal, state or local governmental agency.
      RODENT. Any of various mammals, as a mouse, rat or squirrel, having teeth
adapted for gnawing.
      RUBBISH. Trash, combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
including, but not limited to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, discarded furniture, mattresses, appliance and other
household materials, dust and other similar materials.
      STORAGE UNIT. Temporary (or portable) storage units (also known as PODS,
portable on-demand storage structures); any container, shipping container,
storage unit, shed-like container or other structure or assembly of materials
without a permanent foundation which is so designed, constructed or
reconstructed to make it portable and capable of storage of personal property
of any kind, building materials (before they are utilized for building
purposes), household goods, personal items and other materials, and not for
occupancy by persons.
      STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove mental culpability, such as negligence,
knowledge or intent, as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the
defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which
the defendant was legally required to do.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or installed, the use of which requires a
location on a parcel of land. It includes a moveable structure, which is
located on land, which can be used for housing, commercial, business and
agricultural or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. The term
also includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180
days.
      TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
      UNSAFE STRUCTURE. A structure that is found in whole or in part to be
occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or was erected,
altered or occupied contrary to law.
      VACANT STRUCTURE. A structure, which is not occupied and devoid of any
indication of occupancy.
      WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner and in accordance with accepted
practice; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without
marring adjacent work.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 152.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property and the installation of improvements on the
premises.
   (B)   Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior premises in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this chapter. A person shall not occupy as owner/
occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit are responsible for keeping in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit or premises,
which they occupy and control.
   (C)   Permit responsibility. The owner of the premises shall be responsible
for obtaining the necessary improvement permits as required by the state, the
county or the city including but not limited to electrical, plumbing, heating
and cooling, structural or life safety requirements and drainage or other
improvements on the premises.
   (D)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure, healthful and
sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect public health and safety or violate the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   Violations. Existing improvements determined to be in violation of
this chapter or determined to be nonconforming to the current city standards
shall be remedied under the provisions of this chapter by the owner or
responsible party.
   (F)   Remedies. Portions of existing driveways or sidewalks within the
right-of-way determined to be nonconforming to the current city standards shall
be remedied under the provisions of this chapter by the owner or responsible
party.
   (G)   City to determine improvements. The city reserves the right to
reconstruct drives and sidewalks in the right-of-way as a part of a city road
or other improvement projects and to make the sole determination as to an
asphalt or concrete drive apron within the right-of-way and for determining the
type of access provided to the reconstructed driveway that is in the best
interest of public safety.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in
a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The owner or occupant shall keep that
part of the exterior property, which such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   Stairs. Stairs and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair and maintained free of hazardous conditions.
   (C)   Weeds and rank vegetation. Property shall be kept free from weeds and
other rank vegetation. Weeds and other vegetation that are visible from streets
or other rights-of-way shall be kept in a neat, orderly and well-maintained
condition. Weeds and vegetation shall be maintained in such a way as to not
negatively impact neighboring properties’ value and/or marketability.
   (D)   Exhaust vents. Pipes, chimneys, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers
must be installed in accordance with the state’s Fire and Building Safety
Codes.
   (E)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures on premises shall be in
good condition and in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Garbage, leaves and
rubbish shall not be allowed to accumulate in swimming pools, spas and hot
tubs.
   (G)   Motor vehicles. Property shall remain free of abandoned vehicles.
   (H)   Temporary storage units. Temporary storage units shall not be
permitted to be stored on properties in excess of ten consecutive days and are
subject to the accessory structure setback regulations applicable to the
property’s zoning district as outlined by the city zoning regulations located
in §§
157.15 through
157.22 of this code, except that said storage units may sit in driveways for a
period of less than ten days. Temporary storage units shall not be permitted in
public rights-of-way and shall not be located on lawns.
   (I)   Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti
without the consent of the owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
to restore said surface to a state of maintenance and repair within 15 days.
   (J)   Hazardous trees. Trees located within the public right-of-way shall
adhere to the following regulations and shall apply to all properties within
the corporate limits of the city.
      (1)   Dead, dying, damaged or diseased trees shall be prohibited to exist
or be maintained on any premises, which are hazardous to persons on adjacent
property or to adjacent property.
      (2)   Tree stumps greater than 12 inches in height above ground level
shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than 30 days
after the tree has been cut. Exceptions: Property is covered by a valid
improvement location permit; or property is one acre or greater in size.
      (3)   Fallen trees, removed tree limbs or other portions of any tree
shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more
than 30 days.
   (K)   Exterior use or storage of indoor furniture/appliances.
      (1)   It shall be prohibited to store materials or objects exterior to a
structure, which are customarily utilized or intended to be utilized by the
manufacturer in the interior of a structure. These materials and objects shall
include but are not limited to appliances, couches, furniture, mattresses,
storage bins and boxes.
      (2)   Materials or objects temporarily placed for disposal or removal
from property within two days shall be exempt from this section or those
materials or objects being utilized in conjunction with a construction or other
improvement project on the subject property.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.05 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited
to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks
and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other
than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter
of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained weather-resistant and
water-tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from
exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt
from this requirement.
   (C)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (D)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
Foundation walls shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of
rodents and other pests. Mortar joints shall be maintained.
   (E)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (F)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and down spouts shall be maintained in good repair and
free from obstructions. Roof drain discharges shall be discharged as a legal
connection or a legal discharge. Inappropriate or temporary roofing coverings
including but not limited to tarps shall be deemed inadequate protection and
not uniform and as such shall be prohibited for a period exceeding 30
consecutive days.
   (G)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   (H)   Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, stand pipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   (I)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the designed loads.
   (J)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (K)   Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (L)   Window, skylight and doors. Every window, skylight and door shall be
kept in sound condition, weather-tight and in good repair. All glazing
materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Every window, other
than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being locked and
held in position by window hardware. No special tools or knowledge shall be
required to open a window. If it is necessary to attach boards over broken or
damaged windows, such boards shall not be permitted after ten consecutive days.
Exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good
condition.
   (M)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water and be capable
of supporting normally imposed loads.
   (N)   Basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be
supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection
against the entry of rodents.
   (O)   Guards for area wells. Guardrails or covers shall be required for area
wells deeper than 30 inches and located within ten feet of the corner of a
building.
   (P)   Fences. Fences shall be maintained in good repair and condition,
constructed of durable and uniform materials and be properly treated for the
elements.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.06 EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect, pest, bug
and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects, bugs, pests or rodents
are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be
taken to prevent re-infestation.
   (B)   Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure.
   (C)   Single occupant. The occupant of a single-family dwelling or of a
single-tenant nonresidential structure shall also be responsible for
extermination on the premises.
   (D)   Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy or a multiple-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in all areas of the structure
and exterior property.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.07 GARBAGE, REFUSE AND TRASH.
   (A)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage prohibited. All exterior property
and premises shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish and garbage.
   (B)   Proper and timely removal of trash and debris. The owner, tenant,
resident or agent of any residential or business structure shall hold all
garbage in suitable containers with tight covers that shall be removed and
properly disposed of; and at no time shall be maintained in a manner as to
present an extreme pungent or foul smell as to cause the adjoining property
owners the loss of peaceful enjoyment of their property. All residual trash
surrounding trash receptacles shall be immediately removed after being removed/
picked-up by the contracted service.
   (C)   Weekly removal of garbage required at private residences or dwellings.
Every person owning or controlling, whether as principal or agent, or occupying
any private residence or dwelling, which by reason of said occupancy
accumulates garbage shall keep such garbage in suitable containers which shall
be properly disposed of at least once a week.
   (D)   Rubbish collection and disposal required weekly. Every person owning
or acting as agent for any business, office, theater or other place of
business, and every person owning or controlling, whether as principal or
agent, or occupying any private residence or dwelling shall collect all rubbish
accumulating on the premises in suitable containers and shall properly dispose
of such rubbish at least weekly.
   (E)   Location of refuse containers. For residential properties, when not
placed at the curbside for pick up, all refuse containers shall be maintained
beyond the front yard building line.
   (F)   Requirements for transportation of garbage.
      (1)   If in the disposal of garbage it becomes necessary to transport the
same within the city, such garbage shall be transported only in tight, covered
containers.
      (2)   No person shall haul on any street or alley any rubbish, ashes,
earth, sand, stone or other material liable to become scattered on the streets,
except in a vehicle provided with a closed or open box well closed on the sides
so as to retain such materials. No person shall scatter any such materials from
any vehicle upon any street or alley.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 ABANDONED VEHICLES DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Purpose. Because of the danger to the health from harboring vermin,
the danger of personal injury to children attracted by such vehicles, danger of
fire by the storage of gasoline and oil thereon, any abandoned, unlicensed,
inoperable, disassembled, wrecked or junked motor vehicle on any street or
public property for more than 24 hours or upon any private property for more
than 48 hours, except as hereinafter provided, is declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful.
   (B)   Authority. The Police Department is designated as the “public agency”
within the meaning of I.C. 9-13-2-1 and I.C. 9-22-1-3 which has the
responsibility for the removal, storage and disposal of abandoned vehicles.
   (C)   “Abandoned vehicle” defined. For the purpose of this section, the
following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE.
         (a)   A vehicle located on public property illegally, or a vehicle
left on public property continuously without being moved, for more than 24
hours;
         (b)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic on a public right-of-way;
         (c)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner, or person in control, of that property, for more than 48
hours;
         (d)   A vehicle from which there has been removed the engine,
transmission or differential or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property;
         (e)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or a public
agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or ordinance if the
vehicle once impounded is not claimed or redeemed by the owner or his or her
agent within 20 days of its removal; or
         (f)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old and
mechanically inoperable and is left on private property continuously in a
location visible from public property for more than 20 days. A vehicle covered
by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl, rubber, cloth or textile covering is
still considered visible.
   (D)   Other definitions. All other terms defined in I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.,
as amended, are incorporated herein by reference.
   (E)   Application. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed
for operation on privately-owned raceways;
      (2)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed forces of
the United States who is on active duty assignment;
      (3)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot or at a commercial vehicle
servicing facility;
      (4)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an automobile
scrap yard; or
      (5)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18.1 et seq., as an
antique vehicle.
   (F)   Time limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or allow to
remain in the open upon any public street, public property or private property
within the city, any disassembled or inoperable and unlicensed, or any junked,
wrecked or abandoned motor vehicle for a period of 24 hours or more on such
public street or other public property, or for a period of 48 hours or more on
any private property, unless it is in connection with an automotive sales or
repair enterprise, which is operated under a duly issued and exhibited store
license and is located in a properly zoned area.
   (G)   Public property.
      (1)   Whenever the Chief of Police, his or her designee, the City
Building Commissioner and/or the City Director of Planning and Zoning shall
find such vehicle placed or stored in the open upon a public highway, alley or
thoroughfare, or other public property, within the city, he or she shall issue
an order to the owner of such vehicle, if known, to remove such vehicle within
three days.
      (2)   Notice of such order shall be given to such owner, if known, in
writing, but if such owner shall be unknown, such written notice shall be
placed in plain view upon the vehicle.
      (3)   If such vehicle is not removed within three days after such notice,
the Chief of Police, his or her designee, the City Building Commissioner and/or
the City Director of Planning and Zoning shall cause said vehicle to be removed
by a junk or salvage yard or wrecker service, the cost and expense of such
removal by a junk or salvage yard or by a wrecker service to be paid by the
owner of the vehicle.
      (4)   Impounded vehicles shall be released either upon payment of the
fees charged for towing and storage by the owner, operator or authorized
representative of same, or upon order of the Chief of Police, his or her
designee, the City Building Commissioner, the City Director of Planning and
Zoning, or upon the order of the judge of the County Court.
      (5)   The form of all notices shall be issued pursuant to the provisions
of I.C. 9-22-1-11.
   (H)   Private property.
      (1)   Whenever the Chief of Police, his or her designee, the Building
Commissioner and/or the City Director of Planning and Zoning shall find such
vehicle placed or stored in the open upon private property, within the city, he
or she shall issue an order to the owner of such vehicle, if known, or the
person who owns or controls the private property upon which such vehicle is
placed or stored according to the procedures set forth in I.C. 9-22-1-11
through 9-22-1-14.
      (2)   Impounded vehicles shall be released either upon payment by the
owner, operator or authorized representative of same, of the fees charged for
towing and storage, or upon order of the Chief of Police, his or her designee,
the City Building Commissioner, the City Director of Planning and Zoning or
upon the order of the judge of the County Court.
   (I)   Enforcement.
      (1)   If such vehicle is not removed within three days after such notice,
the Chief of Police, his or her designee and/or the City Building Commissioner
and/or the City Director of Planning and Zoning in accordance with this chapter
shall issue a written order in violation of §§
152.01(F) and 152.08 of this code, which is subject to civil penalties of this
chapter, and enforcement shall be by the City Attorney or his or her designee
and appropriate action by the city’
      (2)   The form of all notices shall be issued pursuant to the provisions
of I.C. 9-22-1-11.
      (3)   Any person who is judged to have violated the provisions of this
chapter is subject to a fine of up to $500 in addition to towing and storage
charges.
      (4)   All provisions and respective civil penalties are designed for
enforcement through the County Circuit Court.
   (J)   Disposal and sale of abandoned vehicles.
      (1)   The provisions of I.C. 9-22-1-27 et seq. shall govern the
disposition and sale of abandoned vehicles.
      (2)   The market value of an abandoned vehicle or vehicle parts below
which an officer of the Police Department may dispose of the vehicle or parts
pursuant to I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq. is $500.
   (K)   Towing and storage charges of abandoned vehicles. An owner or
lienholder who claims a vehicle impounded and declared abandoned by the city’s
Police Department, the City Building Commissioner and/or the City Director of
Planning and Zoning shall be charged a towing fee and a per day storage fee.
The storage fee shall be allowed to accumulate for a maximum period of 60 days.
   (L)   “Junk” and “junk cars” defined. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      JUNK. Any articles in any form composed of or consisting of any of the
following enumerated secondhand, discarded, abandoned or cast-off metals or
materials, namely, iron, brass, bronze, copper, tin, zinc, lead or any other
metals or compounds thereof, broken glass, rags, clothing, rubber, plastics and
synthetic substances and fabrics, bottles, papers, feathers or any other waste
material or any compound or by-product of the foregoing enumerated materials.
JUNK shall also include and mean, wrecked, abandoned or dismantled automobile
or parts thereof.
      JUNK CAR. Any motor vehicle which does not bear a currently valid license
plate and is not kept in a garage or building.
   (M)   Junk and junk cars declared nuisances. Because of the danger of health
by the harborage of vermin, pests, rodents, bugs and insects and because of the
danger of the safety of children attracted by junk or junk cars, abandoned and
junked motor vehicles are declared to be nuisances except in lawfully operated
junk yards.
   (N)   Storage prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or to
allow to remain in the open upon public or private property within the city,
any disassembled and/or non-operative and unlicensed, or junked, wrecked or
abandoned motor vehicle for a period of 24 hours or more on public property, or
a period of 48 hours or more on private property unless it is in connection
with an automobile sale or repair business.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.09 VEHICLES IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOBILE BUSINESS VEHICLES (MBV). Any vehicle that is utilized on-site as a
place of doing business, has a primary use other than transportation to and
from a business or job related facility. The vehicle is considered mobile as
long as it can be self motorized, pushed, pulled and/or towed in such a manner
as to be capable of mobility. For the purpose of this chapter, MOBILE FOOD
VEHICLES are excluded from this definition. (See definition of a MOBILE FOOD
VEHICLE.)
      MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE (MFV). Any vehicle which sole purpose is that of
temporarily locating upon a public street, right-of-way and/or public property
for the sale/resale of food items.
      RV. A vehicle designed primarily for recreational camping or travel use
that has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle,
including travel trailers, fifth-wheel trailers, folding camping trailers,
truck campers and motor homes.
      TRAILER. Any vehicle which can be utilized in the transportation or
moving of various items and which can be towed, pushed or pulled by other
means. This term shall include but is not limited to trailers utilized for the
moving and/or storage of boats, ATVs, wood or garbage.
   (B)   On-street parking. Parking upon a public street, right-of-way or
public property not designated for such by an RV, trailer and/or MBV shall be
strictly prohibited. Any RV, trailer and/or MBV which is properly attached to a
registered automotive vehicle which is designed and intended for towing shall
be excluded from this requirement; parking upon a public street, right-of-way
and/or public property is permitted for an MFV as long as the owner/operator of
such MFV has permission (written or verbal) from the municipality and/or
property owner to locate the MFV on said property, public street and/or right-
of-way.
   (C)   Vehicle parking surface.
      (1)   All vehicles as defined by the state’s Bureau of Motor Vehicles and
Department of Transportation must be parked on a hard pan surface such as
asphalt, concrete, gravel or any surface approved by the city’s Office of
Planning and Zoning or the City Building Commissioner.
      (2)   Parking of any type of vehicle(s) on more than 25% of any single
property and/or inclusive of adjoined property ownership shall be prohibited.
   (D)   Occupancy. Permanent or temporary occupancy of an RV, trailer and/or
mobile business vehicles located upon public or private property which is
secondary to the primary structure located on the property as designated by the
city and/or office of the County Recorder is strictly prohibited. MFVs may only
be occupied for the use for which they are intended.
   (E)   Utility services. The improper attachment of electrical, water or
sewer service by means of extension cords, sewage disposal tanks (stationary
and mobile) or garden hose, which as designated by the City Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her designee as a hazardous condition shall be prohibited and
shall be subject to immediate removal.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   In addition to any injunctive relief which may be sought, any person
who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or
with any of the requirements thereof, shall be fined on the first offense of a
violation of this chapter, a fine of $50. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense subject to
a daily fine of $50 per day. The daily fines of each violation of this chapter
may not accrue in the excess of $1,000 every 90 days.
   (C)   Any person who is found to have committed a separate offense of this
chapter after having been found to commit an earlier offense no sooner than 30
days but within a two-year period shall be assessed a fine of $100 per day. The
purpose of this provision is to double the fines assessed against those
persons. The daily fines of each repeated violation of this chapter may not
accrue in excess of $1,000 every 90 days.
(Ord. 2020-OR-05, passed 4-6-2020)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Purpose; authority
   
153.02   Short title
   
153.03   Application of zoning regulations
   
153.04   Definitions
   
153.05   Subdivision procedure
   
153.06   Final plan
   
153.07   Applicable construction codes
   
153.08   Bonding requirements
   
153.09   Adjoining agricultural uses
   
153.10   Restrictive covenants
Design Standards
   
153.25   General standards
   
153.26   Sidewalks
   
153.27   Drawings
   
153.28   Roadway standards
   
153.29   Dedications for roadways and easements
   
153.30   Sight distances, curves and grades
   
153.31   Blocks, lots and public spaces
   
153.32   Parks, schools and playgrounds
Minimum Improvements
   
153.45   Work and materials
   
153.46   Water supply
   
153.47   Fire hydrants
   
153.48   Sanitary sewage
   
153.49   Monuments and markers
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 PURPOSE; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to enact provisions amending
and clarifying the requirements for the development of subdivisions in the City
of Charlestown, Indiana (hereinafter the “city” or “Charlestown”). This chapter
is intended to amend provisions of all other ordinances inconsistent herewith.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.02 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Subdivision Control Ordinance of the
City of Charlestown” and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.”
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.03 APPLICATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS.
   All sections, divisions, definitions and phrases contained in the Zoning
Ordinance of the city, or any amendments thereof, related to or in any way
appertaining to the design, development, location, restriction, dedications,
measurement or arrangement of the subdivision of land herein regulated shall
apply also in this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Wherever the word APPROVED or APPROVAL appears in these
regulations, with respect to a requisite to permission, it shall mean by the
city’s Plan Commission, or its representative having authority granted herein,
or elsewhere, by ordinance.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The city’s Board of Zoning Appeals.
   BUILDING SET-BACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land (so
designated on the plat of a proposed subdivision) between which line and the
property or boundary line of the adjoining roadway where the erection of any
part of a structure is prohibited.
   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the city.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. Detailed drawings conforming to the requirements of §§
153.06,
153.25 through
153.32 and
153.45 of this code.
   DEAD-END ROADWAY. A roadway having but one outlet for vehicular traffic.
   DEVELOPER. Any person dividing or proposing to divide land so as to
constitute a subdivision, including any agent of the developer.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her duly authorized representative.
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a roadway between two roadway
intersections, crossing or terminating, measured along the line of the roadway,
or if the roadway is a dead end, then all of the property abutting on one side
between a roadway intersection and the dead end of the roadway.
   FRONT LOT LINE. The property line dividing a lot from a roadway. On a corner
lot, only one roadway line shall be considered as a front line, and the shorter
roadway frontage shall be considered as the FRONT LOT LINE, unless otherwise
indicated by the original plat of record.
   FRONT PROPERTY LINE. The boundary line of a lot or parcel of land which
abuts upon the boundary line of one or more roadways or highways, and not the
center line of the roadway or highway.
   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT. A individual parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a
person who intends to use that land in any way permitted in zoning regulations.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
   LOT CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more roadways at their intersection.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot.
   LOT WIDTH. The mean distance between the side lines of a lot.
   MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. The minimum frontage at the required front yard line, or
building lien of radial lots.
   PARKWAY. See BOULEVARD.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, LLC, partnership, joint venture,
association, club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust,
receiver, organization, syndicate, city, county, municipality, district or
other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a
unit. This term also includes the agent of a PERSON, as defined above.
   PLACE. An unoccupied open space, other than a roadway or alley, permanently
reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
   PLAT. A map, drawing or chart showing a developer’s subdivision plan
conforming with the requirements of this chapter.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A plat conforming to the requirements of §
153.05 of this code.
   REAR LOT LINE. The line opposite the front lot line.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a roadway designed for the use of vehicular traffic;
a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of vehicular
access to abutting property.
   ROADWAY LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous roadway.
   ROADWAY WIDTH. The distance between the adjacent front lot lines delineating
the right-of-way of the roadway, as measured normally to the center line of the
roadway at a point.
   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than a front lot line or a rear lot line.
   SUBDIVIDE. To divide land and make a SUBDIVISION, as defined herein.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
parcels, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development. The term includes any and all changes in roadway or lot lines, or
re-subdivision. Division of large tract into parcels of ten acres or more, not
involving any new roadways or easements of access, shall not be considered
subdivision in the meaning of these regulations if the parcel is being sold to
a family member for continued use as a residence or farm.
   THOROUGHFARE. A roadway.
   THROUGH LOT. An interior lot having frontage on two roadways.
   TRACT. A parcel of land grater than 43,560 square feet in area, the deed of
which was recorded in the office of the Clerk of the County Court prior to the
effective date of Ordinance 1961-12.
   ZONE. Same as ZONING DESIGNATION below.
   ZONING. Same as ZONING DESIGNATION below.
   ZONING DESIGNATION. Any area of the city or the unincorporated adjoining
area of the county, within which the city’s zoning jurisdiction applies (the
two-mile fringe area).
   ZONING MAP. The maps setting forth the boundaries of the zoning designations
of the city and the unincorporated adjoining area of the county within which
the city’s zoning jurisdiction applies (the two-mile fringe area).
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.05 SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In the area of the county, subject to the zoning jurisdiction of the
Plan Commission of the city, any person that is the owner of any lot or tract
of land who desires to subdivide such land shall proceed as outlined herein.
Before any person contracts for or offers to sell any land or lot within a
proposed subdivision, approval of the subdivision shall be obtained as
described below.
      (1)   The developer shall submit to the Commission two copies of a
preliminary subdivision plat drawn and prepared in accordance with the design
standards required by this chapter.
      (2)   The Commission shall review such preliminary information and, if it
meets the requirements set forth in this chapter, approve the same. If the
preliminary information does not meet the requirements of this chapter, it
shall be rejected, the Commission noting in writing the reasons for rejection.
The Commission shall return one copy of the approved plan to the developer
noting thereon that the approval of the subdivision is tentative and subject to
approval of the final plat and accompanying data.
      (3)   Upon receipt of the preliminary approval, the developer shall
prepare and submit to the Commission final plans for said subdivision. These
plans shall include, but not be limited to the following: An accurate plat of
the subdivision showing the following:
         (a)   Property lines;
         (b)   Lot lines; lot corners;
         (c)   Roadways;
         (d)   Easements;
         (e)   Lot area for each lot;
         (f)   Building lines;
         (g)   Storm drainage;
         (h)   Sanitary sewer drainage;
         (i)   All utilities, proposed and existing;
         (j)   Lot numbers;
         (k)   Roadway names;
         (l)   North point;
         (m)   Date;
         (o)   Scale;
         (p)   Names of adjoining landowners;
         (q)   Developer’s name;
         (r)   Name and certification of engineers and/or surveyors preparing
said plat;
         (s)   All drawings sections and details necessary for construction of
roads, walks, drainage, utilities and site grading and any other information
pertaining to the subdivision or construction thereof which may have been
requested by the Commission; and
         (t)   The subdivision name.
      (4)   The developer, in the event of rejection, shall have recourse of
appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals as hereinafter outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   Utilities. All structures shall be attached to public water and
sanitary sewer facilities that have been approved by those local, state and
federal agencies charged with the licensing, permitting and monitoring of said
facilities. Any utilities installed, such as electric, telephone, gas, sewer,
water and cable television services shall be installed underground.
   (C)   Utility plans to be submitted prior to construction.
      (1)   It is beneficial for efficient and intelligent location of utility
facilities that no utility facilities ultimately intended for use as trunk
lines, distribution lines, collection lines or mains shall be constructed
within the area where these zoning regulations are in effect, without the
person owning the facilities or constructing the facilities having first
obtained all requisite state-required approvals, in advance.
      (2)   In addition, proof shall be provided to the city’s Plan Commission
that copies of the engineering plans for all utility facilities shall be
provided at least 60 days in advance of any construction, to the following
entities:
         (a)   The City Development Coordinator;
         (b)   The city’s sewage utility;
         (c)   The city’s Water Department;
         (d)   The city’s Volunteer Fire Department;
         (e)   The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety;
         (f)   The state’s Utility Regulatory Commission;
         (g)   The state’s Department of Transportation (if the utility
facilities are located adjacent to a state-maintained roadway); and
         (h)   The owners of all real properties upon which the utility
facilities are to be located.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalties that might be imposed, a person
or entity failing to comply with this provision shall immediately cease
construction of the utility facilities until 60 days after providing proof of
providing notice, as required in division (C)(2) above.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.06 FINAL PLAN.
   The roadway layout shall be in substantial agreement (this means except for
minor detail) with the approved preliminary plan. A plan and profile shall be
made of each roadway, alley and off-roadway drainage ditch or facility.
   (A)   A typical roadway (or roadway) section shall be shown for each width
or type of construction proposed within the subdivision. This section shall
extend from property line to property line (i.e., the entire dedicated width of
the roadway) and shall indicate proposed construction of each feature or
appurtenance as follows:
      (1)   Width and crown characteristics of the paved roadway;
      (2)   Construction of pavement, with thickness and gradation of each
course; the method of construction of each course, from insulation course to
wearing surface inclusive;
      (3)   Type and height of curbs; width of any grass plots between curbs
and sidewalks; width, thickness and construction of sidewalks; and treatment of
any space between sidewalks and property lines; and
      (4)   Where no storm sewer system is to be installed, the cross-section
as required under division (A)(3) above shall omit the curbs and show width and
slope of shoulder, typical ditch sections in both cut and fill conditions, with
side slopes and back slopes shown, and location, width and thickness of
sidewalks. Treatment of any intervening areas between the roadway and property
lines shall also be detailed. Typical conditions indicting proposed drains
under driveways and cross roadways shall also be shown, including criteria as
to placement and type of culvert headwalls.
   (B)   The profile shall show the following:
      (1)   Existing ground line by prominent broken lines;
      (2)   Proposed road grades by prominent solid lines, with percent of
grades and length of vertical curves;
      (3)   Elevation of proposed road grades to one-hundredth of one foot at
every 100 feet station on uniform grades, and at P.C., P.T. and 50-foot
stations on vertical curves, and at the center of all roadway intersections;
      (4)   Centerline stationing is to be shown along the bottom of the grid,
below the bottom grid-line;
      (5)   Show equation with centerline stationing of intersecting roads or
roadways;
      (6)   Show centerline station of culverts and cross drainage structures,
with elevation of inverts at inlet and outlet, and the size of the pipe or
structure;
      (7)   Side road ditches to be shown by lighter broken lines, with
elevation and grades where the proposed roadway ditches do not conform with
road grades or typical cross-sections;
      (8)   Detailed cross-sections of ditches not conforming with typical
sections;
      (9)   Lengths and grades of other than roadside ditches, existing or
proposed, which comprise the remaining increments of the drainage plan. The
ground line (top of ditch bank) shall be shown in a solid line, with the flow
line shown in long broken lines, if proposed, or solid lines for existing
ditches not proposed for grade change. Elevations of the ground and flow lines
shall be written in (as for road profiles) on vertical grid lines at the
station points, and any breaks in flow line grade;
      (10)   Details of all culverts and structures, including size, type,
grades of flow lines and the like as is necessary to compute the flow
capacities, shall be shown complete on the drawings;
      (11)   All storm sewer systems and sanitary sewer systems shall be shown
complete with stationing, elevations, grades, depth of cover, manholes, catch
basins, junction boxes, lamp holes and other appurtenances and incidentals, as
is necessary to check the design and capacity of the system;
      (12)   The lowest used floor of buildings, or proposed buildings, which
will be served by a sanitary sewer, (i.e., the basement floor level, or first
floor of buildings having no basement) shall be plotted on the profile, at the
proper location (station wise, at right angles to the sewer line) along the
sewer. Floor and outer vertical wall lines of buildings on the far side of the
sewer, as viewed from the profile shall be shown in solid lines; and the same
feature shall be shown in broken lines on the near side of the sewer. Buildings
shall be identified by roadway numbers, or by lot number where roadway numbers
have not been assigned; and
      (13)   Sufficient details of all standard and special features shall be
shown to enable the engineer to determine with exactness the size, shape and
design of such features.
   (C)   All sanitary sewer plans shall comply in every respect with the
requirements of the state’s Department of Health and will be subject to review
and approval by that Department, in accordance with the statutes.
   (D)   Wherever approved drawings or specifications indicate a certain make
or brand, “or equal,” the engineer of the Commission or its authorized
representative shall be the final authority in determining equality.
   (E)   Upon approval of the construction plan, as submitted or amended, one
approved copy shall be returned to the developer, and this approval shall
constitute his or her authority to proceed with construction in accordance with
the approved plan.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.07 APPLICABLE CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   The most current edition of the following Codes shall govern construction,
remodeling, building and reconstruction in the city: I.A.C. Title 675: Article
13, State Building Code, Article 14, State Residential Code, Article 16, State
Plumbing Code, Article 17, State Electrical Code, Article 18, State Mechanical
Code, Article 19, State Energy Conservation Code, Article 20, State Swimming
Pool Code, Article 22, State Fire Code. Each such code is hereby incorporated
by reference in §
150.05 of this code.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.08 BONDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Commission may not approve a plat for a subdivision without a bond
to cover the proposed plat improvements and installation. The bond shall:
      (1)   Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to
complete the improvements and installations in compliance with the chapter;
      (2)   Provide surety satisfactory to the Commission;
      (3)   Run to and be in favor of the city;
      (4)   Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and
installations (both on- and off-site);
      (5)   Be in effect and shall not terminate until 30 days after the final
construction is approved by the Commission and the maintenance bonds have been
accepted;
      (6)   Not be released until the City Engineer has certified that he or
she has inspected the improvements during construction and after completion,
and that they have been installed in accordance with the intent of the approved
construction plans and specifications; and
      (7)   Be on a form approved by the Council.
   (B)   There is hereby created a dedicated account in a form acceptable to
the state’s Board of Accounts which shall hold and accumulate all funds paid
pursuant to the provisions of this section and which shall not thereafter be
appropriated for any use unless it is associated with the completion of
infrastructure improvements which had been approved by the staff of the city
and which had not been completed after having been initiated for any reason
whatsoever.
      (1)   In the absolute discretion of the Development Coordinator in
consultation with the Clerk-Treasurer and the City Engineer for the city as
needed, an entity or person obligated to provide a performance bond to the city
may be allowed to pay a cash amount to the city in lieu thereof, equivalent to
the amount of premium which would be paid by said entity or person if it were
to obtain a performance bond. Conditions governing the exercise of discretion
by the Development Coordinator shall include but not necessarily be limited to
the following:
         (a)   The general credit worthiness of the entity or person seeking
such alternative form of payment;
         (b)   The nature of the proposed improvement;
         (c)   The reputation and history involving the person or entity
seeking such alternative form of payment; and
         (d)   Such other underwriting standards as may be appropriate under
the circumstances.
      (2)   It shall be the policy of the city as incorporated into this
section that the Development Coordinator shall document his or her reasons for
denying a request in writing when such a denial occurs, and that said
Development Coordinator need not be limited to the conditions set out herein.
      (3)   All other requirements pertaining to the time of posting and the
calculation of the amount shall remain the same as currently exists within the
ordinances of the city. Specifically, the cash amount in lieu of bond shall be
exactly equal to the amount of premium for such a bond as evidenced by a
certified quote for such premium from a recognized commercial bonding company.
It shall be the duty of the person seeking the benefit of this section to
provide the evidence of the premium to the Development Coordinator.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall in any way limit the ability of the
city to give consideration to other alternative forms of insuring the proper
completion of public improvement projects involving infra-structure which is to
be dedicated to the city or for the benefit of the public.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003; Ord. 2006-OR-8, passed 5-1-2006)
§ 153.09 ADJOINING AGRICULTURAL USES.
   In order to properly put purchasers of lots in any subdivision abutting land
zoned for agricultural use of that condition, a developer conveying land in
such a subdivision shall have the grantee of the parcel acknowledge in writing
that the surrounding land is agriculture in usage and subject to agricultural
practices that may include grain handling operations, or use of manure,
fertilizers or other agricultural chemicals, and that farming operations may
include disruptive noises and light for 24 hours per day during the crop
planting and harvesting seasons.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.10 RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   If a developer has restrictive covenants that run with the land and apply to
all properties within the subdivision, the covenants shall convey to the city
the right to enforce the terms and conditions of the restrictive covenants.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 153.25 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   Unless otherwise approved by the Commission, all roadway designs shall
conform with the design following standards: The city’s Storm Drainage, Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance shall apply to all subdivisions.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.26 SIDEWALKS.
   Concrete or paved sidewalks in a minimum width of five feet in width and
four inches in thickness shall be constructed on both sides of all new roadways
in any subdivision and on the side of any existing roadway where a subdivision
is developed.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.27 DRAWINGS.
   Drawings shall be neat in appearance and so arranged that the subject matter
is presented with reasonable continuity in a set.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.28 ROADWAY STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where practical, roadway plans shall make provision for continuation
of existing roadways in or contiguous to the area being developed, and as is
necessary for public requirements.
   (B)   Roadways which are a continuation of existing roadways, or are by
pattern a projection of such roadways, shall bear the name of the existing
roadway. Names that duplicate or closely approximate in spelling or phonetics,
the names of existing roadways, shall not be approved for use. Plans will not
be approved until nomenclature is satisfactory to the Commission.
   (C)   Roadways shall be so laid out as to intersect other roadways at right
angles, or as nearly so as is practicable. Roadways and alleys shall be so
arranged as to permit continuity as is necessary for proper future development
of adjacent properties. Offsets of less than 150 feet will not be permitted
unless special conditions will not permit compliance with this requirement.
Dead-end roadways shall terminate in a turn-around area. In the event a future
extension is planned, the type of interim terminus shall be as prescribed by
the commission. Cul-de-sac roadways should be not longer than 500 feet from
intersection to turn-around.
   (D)   Where a proposed subdivision adjoins an existing half roadway, or a
roadway of less than minimum dedicated width, the remainder of the roadway
shall be dedicated when deemed necessary by the Commission.
   (E)   No strip, area or “buffer zone” of any description shall be reserved
along or across any roadway or alley, or any portion thereof which will
prohibit free access thereto by adjacent property owners, or public emergency
vehicles.
   (F)   When an area proposed for subdivision abuts a heavily traveled (more
than 2,000 vehicles per day) roadway, service roads approximately parallel to
such roadway shall be provided for the purpose of reducing the number of
entrances to such traffic arteries to a minimum. Extra widths of dedication for
such service roads and width and type of pavement shall be as prescribed or
approved by the Commission.
   (G)   The provisions of division (F) above shall also be applicable to any
subdivision area traversed by or abutting a railroad. Railway crossing signals
of the flashing type, with self-operating or watchperson-operated gates where
deemed necessary by the Commission, shall be installed at railway crossings.
Details of crossings with proposed signals and safety devices approved or
concurred in by the railroad company shall be furnished the commission for
approval as a part of the construction plan.
   (H)   (1)   All platted roads that have not yet been accepted for dedication
as public streets by the city’s Board of Public Works and Safety shall be kept
clear of accumulation of snow and ice so that they are readily passable by
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (H), it will be presumed that:
         (a)   Developers of subdivisions located within the city, having
platted roads that have not yet been accepted for dedication as public streets
by the Board of Public Works on behalf of the city shall continue to bear
responsibility for maintenance of those roads; and
         (b)   Roads are not readily passable if there is accumulation of snow
amounting to more than two inches or more of ice amounting to more than one-
quarter inch.
      (3)   It is a defense that the road in question has been properly plowed
within the previous 12 hours, in the case of snow, or properly salted or
treated with an ice retardant chemical within the previous 12 hours, in the
case of ice accumulation.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003; Ord. 2010-OR-05, passed 3-1-2010) Penalty,
see §
153.99
§ 153.29 DEDICATIONS FOR ROADWAYS AND EASEMENTS.
   (A)   The following minimum standards for roadway width shall apply:
      (1)   Twelve-inch concrete curbs and gutters shall be required on all
roadways abutting a new subdivision or in a subdivision;
      (2)   Pavement width shall be 24 feet in residential zoning, excluding
curbs and gutters;
      (3)   Right-of-way (roadway width) shall be 50 feet in agricultural
zoning;
      (4)   Pavement width shall be 28 feet in residential zoning, excluding
curbs and gutters;
      (5)   Right-of-way (roadway width) shall be 60 feet in residential
zoning;
      (6)   Pavement width shall be 40 feet in business zoning, excluding curbs
and gutters;
      (7)   Right-of-way (roadway width) shall be 80 feet in business zoning;
      (8)   Pavement width shall be 48 feet in industrial or manufacturing
zoning, excluding curbs and gutters; and
      (9)   Right-of-way (roadway width) shall be 100 feet in industrial or
manufacturing zoning.
   (B)   (1)   All roadways in areas zoned for business, agricultural or
residential uses shall be constructed to the cross-sections and profiles as
shown on the approved construction plans.
      (2)   All roadways and the like shall be graded, surfaced and improved
and finished to the cross-sections and profiles as shown on said plans, the
construction being accomplished in accordance with the above requirements and
the following roadway sections:
         (a)   Rigid type plain concrete local roadways shall be a minimum of
six inches thick, placed upon an approved compacted base sub-surface. The
thickness shall be heavier for special soil conditions or for special base
preparation as determined by the city’s consulting engineer.
         (b)   Flexible hot asphaltic concrete (HAC) local roadways shall be
constructed with one inch of HAC surface placed upon three inches of HAC Binder
placed upon two inches of compacted #11 or #53 stone placed in two-inch lifts
placed upon eight inches of compacted #2 or #4 stone placed in two four-inch
lifts, upon an approved, sub-surface soil material.
   (C)   All roadways proposed in areas designated for industrial or
manufacturing designations shall be constructed to the thickness and widths as
follows.
      (1)   Rigid-type plain concrete local roadways shall be a minimum of 12
inches thick, placed upon an approved compacted base sub-surface. The thickness
shall be heavier for special soil conditions, or for special base preparation
as determined by the city’s consulting engineer.
      (2)   Flexible hot asphaltic concrete (HAC) local roadways shall be
constructed with one inch of HAC surface placed upon six inches of HAC binder
placed upon six inches of compacted #11 or #53 stone placed in six inch lifts
placed upon eight inches of compacted #2 or #4 stone placed in two four-inch
lifts, upon an approved, sub-surface soil material.
   (D)   All roadway intersection lines shall be rounded to radii satisfactory
to the Commission, generally in accordance with the following:
Dedication Width Radius at Intersection
Dedication Width Radius at Intersection
150 feet         75 feet
100 feet         60 feet
80 feet          50 feet
60 feet          40 feet
50 feet          30 feet
Culs-de-sac      45 feet
At intersections of roadways of varying widths, the radius set for the wider
roadway would generally be used.
 
   (E)   Easements shall be dedicated for drainage, sewers, water and public
utilities, as required by the Commission, for all public agencies and utilities
to properly serve the subdivision. Such dedications as are required for
extension of these services into adjacent undeveloped areas shall also be
provided, as determined by the Commission.
   (F)   Utilities shall be located, whenever practical, in the roadway right-
of-way. Where not practical, utility easements must be at least 20 feet in
width, and wider where necessary for ingress, egress and maintenance of the
utility facilities located therein.
   (G)   For safety reasons, unless waived by the Commission, all subdivisions
shall have roadways that intersect with two existing public roadways.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.30 SIGHT DISTANCES, CURVES AND GRADES.
   The criteria herein are general in nature and intended for minimum standards
for subdivision roadways only. It is presumed that high-speed traffic
expressways, throughways and major thoroughfares when traversing subdivisions
will have been designed as a part of the major thoroughfare system and are not
to be identified with subdivision roadway design.
   (A)   Minimum sight distances computed in accordance with highway standards,
shall be as follows:
 
Speed Limit Designation Sight Distances Minimum
55 mph                  450 feet
45 mph                  350 feet
35 mph                  250 feet
25 mph                  125 feet
 
   (B)   Minimum radius of curvature as measured along the centerline of the
roadway shall be:
 
Speed Limit Designation Sight Distance Minimum
55 mph                  450 feet
45 mph                  350 feet
35 mph                  250 feet
25 mph                  125 feet
 
   (C)   There shall be a tangent of at least 100 feet between reversed curves
or between sections of a compound curve.
   (D)   Roadway curbs at intersections shall be rounded to a radius of not
less than 25 feet. This radius shall be increased in special cases, at the
discretion of the Commission, with, or without, the advice of the Engineer.
   (E)   No roadway or alley shall have a grade less than 0.4% nor greater than
7%, except where topography and the character of the roadway or alley make it
impractical to comply with this specification. The Commission may approve flat
grades or grades of up to 12% for relatively short distances at its discretion
and with the recommendation of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.31 BLOCKS, LOTS AND PUBLIC SPACES.
   No block shall exceed 1,200 feet in length, nor be less than 500 feet long,
unless the developer can satisfy the Commission of the necessity for variation
from these standards.
   (A)   Blocks over 750 feet in length shall have a mid-block walkway not less
than ten feet in width dedicated to public use, connecting the roadways on
either side to provide proper access to schools, shopping centers, playgrounds
and other roadways and facilities.
   (B)   Double-frontage or through lots will not be permitted. Blocks shall be
of sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth for
buildings and required yards. Where it is patently impossible to meet this
provision, the Commission may require such buffer strips, screen planting or
other necessary measures to protect property values and the public interest.
   (C)   No lot shall have less width or area than required by zoning
regulations applying to the district in which the lot is located. All lots
shall be of such shape as to provide appropriate building space while observing
all district stipulations as to building set-back lines and yard widths, depths
and spaces.
   (D)   Roadway lights shall be required to be installed at least every 300
feet along all roadways, at all roadway intersections and at all intersections
of roadways and mid-block walkways.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.32 PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PLAYGROUNDS.
   (A)   (1)   In all subdivisions or five or more lots, a developer must allot
a portion of the area subdivided for public uses. Absent some other specific
requirement, 5% of a subdivided area, excluding roadways and mid-block
walkways, shall be dedicated and developed for public recreational use. A
retention or detention pond or basin may be included for this purpose only with
Commission approval, which is discretionary.
      (2)   No outright grant will be obligatory from a tract of 20 acres or
less, provided, however, that the developer shall pay to the city an amount
equal to the fair market value of that much developed land in the subdivision.
      (3)   These proceeds shall be used by the city to augment its park
facilities on a more regional basis.
   (B)   Where a park, playground or other public area must be provided in the
subdivision, or a portion of the subdivision, in accordance with this chapter,
such area shall either be dedicated to the proper public agency within a
specified reasonable period of time.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS
§ 153.45 WORK AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   All plans, work and materials shall conform with best engineering and
construction practices, and all construction shall be in accordance with plans
approved by the Engineer and the Commission.
   (B)   All operations shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
Engineer and other city representatives. Inspection costs, including salaries
of field inspectors, where detailed inspection is required to assure compliance
with plans and specifications, will be borne by the developer.
      (1)   Grading. All roadways in new subdivision shall be graded to the
full width of right-of-way including side slopes, ditch back slopes and the
like. The grading shall conform with the sections and details shown on the
drawings. No grading work shall be commenced until approval of a preliminary
plat is granted by the Commission.
      (2)   Pavement design. The base, width, thickness, type and design of
paving of roadways, sidewalks, alleys, curbs, gutters or ditches and other
roadway improvements shall conform to the specifications or requirements of the
Commission and shall be subject to its approval before acceptance.
   (C)   Generally, state highway specifications for the type and loading
design of pavement shall prevail.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.46 WATER SUPPLY.
   All subdivisions shall be provided with a complete water distribution system
from a public water supply. The proposed system shall be shown on the
construction plan and shall conform to the requirements of the water supply
agency and the state’s Board of Health. In order that adequate fire protection
be available for all land that is subdivided, the potable water supply required
by this subchapter shall be furnished by mains that are at least six inches in
diameter, back to the point of origin.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.47 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Fire hydrants shall be located adjacent to roadway intersections and in the
center of blocks 1,000 feet or more in length. If any consecutive blocks are
300 feet each, or less, the installations of hydrants at every second
intersection will provide satisfactory spacing. Location, spacing, type and
size of fire hydrants shall be subject to approval of the responsible fire
authority for the area in which the subdivision is located and the State Fire
Marshal where so provided by the statute.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.48 SANITARY SEWAGE.
   All subdivisions shall be connected to a public sanitary sewage collection
system, with pretreatment facilities as required by the sanitary system owner.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.49 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   (A)   Permanent reference monuments shall be installed at all subdivision
survey control points, including:
      (1)   All points of change of direction of all boundary lines of the
subdivision;
      (2)   The intersection of roadway property lines and subdivision boundary
lines;
      (3)   Roadway property line tangent intersections, with radii of curves
at roadway intersections;
      (4)   Points of curvature and points of tangency of all curves in
roadways, alleys or rear property lines, where such lines are curves, or chords
or subtangents of curves;
      (5)   All angle points in property lines of roadways or alleys where such
points are not the central point of a curve; and
      (6)   All lot corners.
   (B)   Monuments shall be five-eighths-inch diameter steel rods at least 18
inches long, with a copper, aluminum or other non-corrosive cap. Monuments
shall be set plumb and the top shall match the finish grade elevation. The
cross on monuments shall coincide exactly with the intersection of the plat
point being referenced, or points of tangency or curvature. One line of the
cross shall be in alignment with at least one line of the subdivision line
referenced.
   (C)   The surveyor or registered engineer shall submit a letter to the
Commission stating that the points shown on the plat have actually been set in
the field.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or other legal entity that is found to have subdivided land
in a manner inconsistent with the standards set out herein, or otherwise
violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $50 and not more than $500 for each violation. Each separate instance of
noncompliance and each separate day a violation continues is considered a
separate violation.
   (C)   Any person or entity that fails to comply with the requirements of §
153.28(H) of this code may be fined a minimum of at least $500 per violation
and a maximum of $2,500 per violation. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 2003-OR-13, passed 5-8-2003; Ord. 2010-OR-05, passed 3-1-2010)
CHAPTER 154: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Section
Rights-of-Way and Easements
   
154.01   Requirements
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Street cut
   
154.04   Relocation of utilities
   
154.05   Protecting work sites
   
154.06   Lane restrictions
   
154.07   Excavation, backfill and restoration of service
   
154.08   Final inspection
   
154.09   Waiver of permit fee
   
154.10   Suspension of permit
   
154.11   Surety
   
154.12   Responsibility and indemnification
   
154.13   Notifications
   
154.14   Fees, costs and fines
   
154.15   Refund of fees
 
   
154.99   Penalty
RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS
§ 154.01 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation now owning, operating or hereafter
installing and operating any utility within the right-of-way of any street or
easement in the city, or any person, firm or corporation doing any repair in
any street right-of-way or easement shall do so only in accordance with the
terms and condition of this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any and all work in a right-of-way that is not included in the
limits of and otherwise permitted construction project shall require a right-
of-way (ROW) permit from the city’s Building and Safety Department. A project
that requires and does not have a ROW permit shall be subject to a stop work
order.
      (2)   A reinstatement fee of $400 shall be incurred by the person,
corporation, firm, owner or operator performing and or responsible for the
right-of-way/easement work being done in defiance of any stop work order
issued. The fee incurred must be satisfied prior to any ROW permit being
issued. No permit will be required for normal maintenance activities not
requiring excavation in the right-of-way or easement, or blocking of traffic.
      (3)   For new construction, a utility shall submit two sets of project
construction plans at the time of filing an application for a permit. Plans
will not be required for routine maintenance and service installation.
      (4)   The construction plans will be promptly reviewed, and a permit will
be issued within three working days after submitting the plans, or written
comments submitted for revision of the plans to be made by the utility.
Revisions will be limited to those areas affecting city facilities and/or
traffic or pedestrian flow and protection. The utility will be responsible for
the engineering and design of its project and the integration of its
maintenance and construction responsibilities.
      (5)   No permit shall be issued until the permittee has presented a
utility location request number as assigned by the local utility locating
service which meets the required 72 hours’ notification requirement, except for
in cases of emergencies as defined in §
154.02 of this code.
      (6)   In order to expedite the issuance of a permit, a permit may be
issued with conditions and work hours initialed on the face of the permit in
lieu of requiring revisions in the plans. Upon issuance of the permit, one set
of project plans shall be marked approved and returned to the utility service.
      (7)   For all work conducted in the right-of-way or easement belonging to
the state, the permittee shall meet all state’s Department of Transportation
(INDOT) permitting requirements prior to the issuance of a ROW permit from the
city. Proof of state approval must be submitted with any pertinent city ROW
permit application.
      (8)   For any work conducted in any federal right-of-way or easement, the
permittee shall meet all federal guidelines and permitting requirements prior
to the issuance of a ROW permit from the city. Proof of approval from the
administrator of any federal land, right-of-way and/or easement must be
submitted with any pertinent city ROW permit application.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. The repair of a utility which may be made to restore service to
avoid property damage, or to eliminate danger to the public. Notice of an
emergency pavement cut shall be given to the City Director of Streets or, if
contact cannot be made with the Director of Streets, then contact must be made
with the City Building Commissioner by telephone during normal business hours.
If the cut is made after normal business hours, then notification shall be
given at the beginning of the next business day. An application will be made
for a permit for all emergency cuts within 72 hours after the cut has been
made. All other provisions of this subchapter shall apply to emergency cuts.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or EASEMENT. All of the area presently used, owned or dedicated
to or by the city’s Department of Transportation (INDOT) and/or the federal
government for a street, including sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveway aprons
and all other areas of the right-of-way or easement whether or not physically
incorporated in the street.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.03 STREET CUT.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut or dig in the city for the
purposes of connection with water, sewer, gas, phone, cable, telecommunications
or other mains or pipes in said streets, or for any other purpose by digging or
cutting more than half-way across such street until the half which has been cut
or dug up shall have been backfilled or plated over with street traffic plates
so that one-half of the passageway of the street shall always remain open and
free for the uninterrupted passage of traffic.
   (B)   Exceptions for emergencies as defined in §
154.02 of this code must be approved in writing by the City Director of
Streets.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.04 RELOCATION OF UTILITIES.
   In the event of abandonment, widening, repair, installation, construction or
reconstruction by or for the city, the state’s Department of Transportation
(INDOT) and/or federal government of any road, bridge, culvert, traffic signal,
street light, water distribution system, sewage system, storm drain system or
any other city facility within a street right-of-way or easement, the owner of
any utility shall move, relocate and/or renew such facility upon request by the
city, when necessary for public safety and welfare and when a suitable site is
available, all at the cost and expense of the owner of such utility. The city
will give as much advance notice to the affected utilities as possible to
facilitate their planning. The affected utilities shall have 90 days upon
notice by the city to relocate their utility service.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.05 PROTECTING WORK SITES.
   Every person, firm or corporation making or causing to be made any
construction ditch or any other excavation, road maintenance, utility
maintenance or utility construction in a street right-of-way and/or easement
shall do so in a careful, prudent and professional manner so as to properly
safeguard and protect the work site and to prevent injury to persons or
property in at least the following manner:
   (A)   Complying with the state’s Department of Transportation (INDOT) work
zone traffic control guidelines and the Indiana Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, as well as those safeguards listed in divisions (B), (C), (D)
and (E) below;
   (B)   By placing of substantial and adequate barricades in, around and along
the sides of the work area;
   (C)   By providing and maintaining adequate light to disclose to the public
the existence of any construction in the street, whether night or day;
   (D)   During the nighttime, to place at least one blinking light at the end
of work area and the placing of other blinking lights spaced at intervals
recommended for traffic speed within and adjacent to the construction; and
   (E)   When necessary (as deemed by the City Director of Streets) adequately
trained traffic control personnel to direct traffic in a safe, prudent and
professional manner.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.06 LANE RESTRICTIONS.
   Per the state’s Department of Transportation (INDOT) traffic control
standards, and in compliance with the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, prior to the issuance of a city ROW permit, a traffic maintenance plan
must be filed with the City Director of Streets and approved by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.07 EXCAVATION, BACKFILLING AND RESTORATION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   All ROW excavation within five feet of the right-of-way and or
easement must be backfilled with materials approved by the City Engineer and/or
Director of Streets and must be free from cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable
organic matter, boulders, rocks or stones, wet material or other materials
which renders same unsuitable to obtain a firm and compact cover for the
installation. (See Figures 1 and 2 below.)
   (B)   Design and procedures for the installation of backfill must first be
approved in writing by the City Engineer and/or the City Director of Streets.
   (C)   (1)   Trench cut width shall be kept to the minimum width necessary to
install and properly place flowable fill around any pipe or new installation.
If rock or adverse soil conditions are encountered and shoring is required,
then the trench cut shall be of sufficient additional width to provide for the
protection of the workers and proper installation of the pipe or other
structure.
      (2)   Excavations shall comply with applicable Department of Labor,
Safety and Health standards and guidelines for excavations.
   (D)   Asphalt pavement shall be neatly saw cut on each side one foot wider
than the trench opening. The pavement and base material shall be replaced
according to the specification set forth by the City Engineer. All seams must
be cleaned and tack-coated to provide a seamless joint to the surrounding
pavement. No cold patch shall be used except for temporary patching which will
be maintained by the contractor for the duration until HMA pavement can be
installed.
   (E)   Concrete pavement shall be neatly saw cut and the whole disturbed
panel shall be removed and replaced. There will need to be at least two feet of
undisturbed soil on each side of the excavation to allow the concrete patch to
bridge the excavation. The new concrete patch shall be installed using Class A
concrete. The finish is to match the existing finish of the surrounding
pavement. All concrete patches shall be treated with a curing compound.
   (F)   Ditches disturbed by excavating shall be properly graded, seeded and
blanketed to allow for positive drainage. The blanket needs to be approved by
the City Engineer and/or Director of Streets.
   (G)   (1)   All drain, water, sewer, electric or gas pipes shall be
installed in any street, sidewalk or easement of the city so that the pipe will
be buried at a depth not less than three feet.
      (2)   Exception may be made where required by unusual conditions and must
be approved by the City Engineer and/or Director of Streets.
   (H)   When soil conditions permit and there are no conflicting utilities,
gas, water, sewer, telephone, cable and the like, service lines shall be
installed through a jacking or boring process. Sewer lines may be installed
through a jacking or boring process. In the event the jacking or boring
procedure attempt is unsuccessful, then the pipe may be installed using an open
cut approved by the City Engineer and/or Director of Streets.
   (I)   Before backfill of any cuts in streets or street right-of-way, the
utility contractor shall request an inspection by the City Engineer and/or
Director of Streets.
   (J)   Any cost for core drilling or any other testing procedures required
for the performance of any inspection by the City Engineer and/or Director of
Streets shall be incurred by the permittee.
   (K)   Grass areas that are disturbed shall have a minimum of six inches of
aggregate free soil installed and seeded (equal to or better than existing
areas). The stabilization needs to be completed within 14 days from the date of
completion of the install and/or repair.
   (L)   No cuts will be permitted to be opened if, in the opinion of the City
Director of Streets, the cut cannot be backfilled, and resurfacing restored
within a reasonable amount of time, or if the traffic flows cannot be
maintained. Exceptions will be made for emergencies as defined in §
154.02 of this code.
Figure 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6805ee1d4621613beb0f5fca313be8ca13b53bf2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-811.png]
 
Figure 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6805ee1d4621613beb0f5fca313be8ca13b53bf2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-813.png]
 
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.08 FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   Upon the completion of all installation or repairs, a final inspection
by the City Engineer and/or Director of Streets shall be scheduled by the
permittee. If all work and stabilization is completed to the sole satisfaction
of the inspector and stabilization has been maintained for no less than 21
days, the inspector shall sign off on the release of the permit. The release of
the permit does not release the contractor from the settling and germination
requirements of 70% germination.
   (B)   If the inspector deems the craftsmanship or quality of work to be
questionable, the city reserves the right to withhold the release for up to one
year from the date of final inspection.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.09 WAIVER OF PERMIT FEE.
   The city may waive the permit fee for all work performed by a governmental
agency, whether this work is performed by the employees of the government
agency or by a private firm or corporation under contract with the governmental
agency. However, such governmental agency or private firm or corporation under
contract therewith shall not be relieved of the responsibility for obtaining a
permit for the work covered in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.10 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   If a person performing construction fails to perform said construction
in accordance with the conditions of the permit or the requirements of this
subchapter or existing ordinances of the city, the permit may be suspended and
work stropped until such time as the person performing the work gives the city
written assurances of his, her or their ability and intention to complete the
work in accordance with the conditions of the permit, this subchapter and other
ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The written letter of ability and intention will be delivered to the
City Director of Streets. Any stop work order notice shall be delivered in
writing to the representative of the person, firm or corporation performing the
work and shall state the reasons for such notice.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.11 SURETY.
   (A)   (1)   The city requires that prior to any issuance of a ROW permit, a
surety or performance bond must be filed with the city which is satisfactory to
the city to indemnify the city from any and all costs resulting from the
failure of the applicant to satisfactorily complete the work.
      (2)   The surety/performance bond amount shall be determined by the
estimated cost of excavation and street restoration as recommended by the City
Engineer. Utilities operating under a franchise agreement with the city will be
exempt from this requirement.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to require a larger surety/performance
bond if unusual conditions exist which may dictate higher than usual damages.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.12 RESPONSIBILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The city shall hold the applicant directly responsible for all work
performed under the permit.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation making a street cut or performing any
construction work in the city will file with the city, evidence acceptable to
the city that the person, firm or corporation making the cut and performing any
construction work in the streets, right-of-way and/or easement of the city has
sufficient expertise and ability to perform the work in a timely, prudent, safe
and professional manner and shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless
agreement to the city along with a certificate of insurance for personal and
property in an amount determined by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.13 NOTIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The City Engineer and City Director of Streets shall be notified a
minimum of four hours prior to starting all pavement repairs so that an
inspector may observe the placement of the new patch material.
   (B)   Failure to notify the City Engineer or Director of Streets shall
result in removal and replacement of such material with applicant responsible
for the cost. Hours for this inspection shall occur during regular business
hours.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.14 FEES, COSTS AND FINES.
Activity permit filing fee            $50
Failure to relocate utilities         $1,000 per day after 90-day notice
Open cut maintenance bond             As determined by the City Engineer
ROW open cut                          $300 plus $5 per lineal foot
ROW boring                            $50 plus $0.75 per lineal foot
Stop work reinstatement fee           $400 each occurrence
Surety requirement                    As determined by the City Engineer
Work completed during stop work order $500 per day
Notes to Table:
ROW fees do not apply to repairs of existing sidewalks
Surety may include any of the following: Bond or certified check
 
(Ord. 2006-OR-8, passed 5-1-2006; Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.15 REFUND OF FEES.
   If the work for which a permit has been issued is canceled, the city will
refund the amount paid, if requested prior to the beginning of any work and no
later than the date on which the permit expires. In lieu of refund, a credit
for the permit may be given to the person, firm or corporation which may be
applied against the cost of subsequent permits.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure to move the utility service as requested in §
154.04 of this code will result in a $1,000 per day fine, and should the city
be forced to take action to move the affected utility as requested, the cost
for such relocation service will be incurred by the utility.
(Ord. 2020-OR-11, passed 7-6-2020)
CHAPTER 155: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
155.01   Purpose and intent
   
155.02   Acronyms
   
155.03   Definitions
   
155.04   General provisions
   
155.05   Applicability
   
155.06   Administration; ultimate responsibility
   
155.07   Design methodology for storm sewer
   
155.08   Storm sewer design standards
   
155.09   Open channel design standards
   
155.10   Detention basins
   
155.11   Sinkholes
   
155.12   Final drainage plans
   
155.13   Submittals and fees
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of stormwater and
non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system and the water resources
within Charlestown. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;
   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system; and
   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.02 ACRONYMS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following acronyms shall apply.
ASTM  American Society for Testing Materials
BMP   Best Management Practices
CBPWS Charlestown Board of Public Works and Safety
COE   United States Army Corps of Engineers
CWA   Clean Water Act
DGA   Dense graded aggregate
EPA   Environmental Protection Agency
FEMA  Federal Emergency Management Agency
GIS   Geographical Information System
HAC   Hot asphalt concrete
IDEM  Indiana Department of Environmental Management
INDOT Indiana Department of Transportation
MS4   Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
NGVD  National geodetic vertical datum
NRCS  USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
RCP   Reinforced concrete pipe
SCS   Soil Conservation Service (now known as the USDA Natural Resources
      Conservation Service)
SWCD  Soil and Water Conservation District
SWPPP Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
USDA  United States Department of Agriculture
USFWS United States Fish and Wildlife Service
 
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the city addressing
the enforcement of this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY. The city's Board of Public Works and
Safety (CBPWS).
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
   DETENTION. Managing stormwater runoff by temporary holding and controlled
release.
   DISCHARGE. Usually the rate of water flow. The volume of fluid passing a
point per unit time commonly expressed as cubic feet per second, cubic meters
per second, gallons per minute or millions of gallons per day.
   DRAINAGE AREA. The area draining into a stream at a given point. It may be
of different sizes for surface runoff, subsurface flow and base flow, but
generally the surface runoff area is considered as the drainage area.
   DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT. An activity within or adjacent to a natural stream or
a human-made drain primarily intended to improve the flow capacity, drainage,
erosion and sedimentation control, or stability of the drainage way.
   EASEMENT. A right of use over designated portions of the property of another
for a clearly specified purpose.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). A permit developed
by the U.S. EPA through the Clean Water Act. In Indiana, the permitting process
has been delegated to IDEM. This permit covers aspects of municipal stormwater
quality.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to practice professional engineering.
   PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Indiana to practice land surveying.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The discharge or elevation associated with the 100-year
flood as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and
approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the peak flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
   RUNOFF. The portion of precipitation that flows from a drainage area on the
land surface, in open channels or in stormwater conveyance systems.
   SINKHOLES. Any closed depression in a limestone region formed by the removal
of water, surficial soil, rock or other material, that is connected to a cavern
or underground passage. The sinkhole drainage area shall include any area that
contributes surface water directly to the SINKHOLE.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries stormwater, surface drainage, street wash
and other wash waters but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. Also called a
storm drain.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such
precipitation.
   WATERSHED. The region drained by or contributing water to a specific point
that could be along a stream, lake or other stormwater facility. Watersheds are
often broken down into subareas for the purpose of hydrologic modeling.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The city's Zoning Ordinance or any replacement zoning
ordinance and its amendments.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Permits for construction in a floodway. The 1945 Flood Control Act
(I.C. 13-2-22 (I.C. 13-2-22 has been repealed)) of the state prohibits the
construction of abodes or residences in or on a floodway. Prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources is required for any type of construction,
excavation or filling in or on a floodway.
   (B)   Wetlands.
      (1)   Landowners and/or developers must notify and make applications to
all appropriate state and federal agencies with authority for wetland
protection. In cases where federal or state jurisdictional wetlands have been
determined to exist, those wetland areas and boundaries must be indicated on
preliminary and final drainage plans.
      (2)   The Board will not make determinations of the accuracy of
delineation or extent of jurisdictional wetlands. Approvals required by this
chapter may be deferred until wetland related approvals have been obtained.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024) Penalty,
see §  
155.99
§ 155.05 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all developments requiring a permit or
approval, from the city's Plan Commission, or any other agency of the city,
subject to the following exceptions:
      (1)   Projects that require only individual improvement location permits
for a single- family dwelling, a two-family dwelling or their accessory
structures are not subject to these requirements; and
      (2)   Projects that are agricultural structures in locations included in
current soil and water conservation plans that have been approved by the
county's Soil and Water Conservation District are also exempt from these
requirements.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed as additional
requirements to minimum standards required by other ordinances of the city. In
the case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.
   (C)   The Plan Commission may grant a waiver from any requirements of these
regulations if there are exceptional circumstances applicable to the site such
that strict adherence to the provisions of these regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of these regulations.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.06 ADMINISTRATION; ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Administration.
      (1)   The city's Board of Public Works and Safety (CBPWS) shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any powers granted, or duties imposed upon the CBPWS may be
delegated in writing by the CBPWS to the enforcement personnel.
   (B)   Ultimate responsibility. The standards set forth herein and
promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this
chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure
that there will be no contamination, pollution nor unauthorized discharge of
pollutants.
   (C)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city's Drainage Board finds that a
person or developer has violated or failed to meet a requirement of this
chapter, the CBPWS may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      (5)   Payment of reimbursement expenses to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and
      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (D)   Appeal of notice of violation.
      (1)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the CBPWS. The notice of appeal must be received within ten
calendar days from the date of the notice of violation.
      (2)   Hearing on the appeal before the CBPWS shall take place within 30
calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of
the CBPWS shall be final.
   (E)   Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been
corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation,
or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the CBPWS,
the CBPWS may pursue all remedies provided for in this chapter or by law.
   (F)   Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a
person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the
CBPWS may seek any remedies available under any applicable law, including, but
not limited to the following:
      (1)   Preliminary or permanent injunction; and
      (2)   Stop work order.
   (G)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement
processes and penalties provided in § 155.99, any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be summarily
abated or restored at the violator's expense, or a civil action to abate,
enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
   (H)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state
or local law. It is within the discretion of other authorized enforcement
agencies to seek cumulative remedies.
      (1)   Each day a violation remains uncorrected is a distinct and separate
civil stormwater drainage and sediment control violation subject to an
additional citation and fine in the amount prescribed below, provided a warning
ticket has first been issued pursuant to § 155.06(C).
      (2)   The monetary fine for each civil stormwater drainage and sediment
control violation shall be $250, except that for a repeated stormwater drainage
and sediment control violation, the following fines shall apply:
         (a)   Second citation: $500.
         (b)   Each citation in excess of two: $1,000.
      (3)   All fines prescribed by this section for civil stormwater drainage
and sediment control violations shall be paid within 72 hours to the City of
Charlestown Clerk-Treasurer, who shall render to the person making the payment
a receipt stating the amount and purpose for which the fine has been paid, and
duplicate of which shall be made a part of the records of the Plan Commission.
All fines thus received shall be deposited with the City of Charlestown Clerk-
Treasurer.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024) Penalty,
see §
155.99
§ 155.07 DESIGN METHODOLOGY FOR STORM SEWER.
   This chapter establishes the minimum required standards for the planning and
design of drainage systems and stormwater management facilities within the
city. All plans concerning drainage shall be prepared under the supervision of
and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer licensed
by the state. It is assumed that practicing engineers/surveyors involved with
preparing drainage plans have adequate knowledge of the recommended procedures,
therefore, there is no attempt in the Charlestown Design Manual to provide
step-by-step calculation methodologies.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.08 STORM SEWER DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The professional engineer or professional land surveyor shall refer to the
Charlestown Design Manual for design methodology for storm sewers. The
exception being that all storm sewer systems will be designed for the ten-year
event. The 100-year discharge elevation must be checked for all locations to
avoid flood damage to adjacent structures. Manning's Equation is recommended to
calculate pipe flow and velocity. The storm sewer hydraulic grade line for the
100-year event shall be contained within the storm sewer system.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.09 OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Open channel design shall meet the requirements set forth in the Charlestown
Stormwater Design Manual.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.10 DETENTION BASINS.
   Detention basin design shall meet the requirements set forth in the
Stormwater Drainage Manual.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.11 SINKHOLES.
   General provisions.
   (A)   The use of sinkholes as stormwater management is not permitted, unless
there are no other alternatives.
   (B)   The city does not encourage the use of natural sinkholes as outlets
for drainage from developed areas and will avoid requests for modifications to
sinkhole entrances. The proposed use of sinkholes as outlets for development
must be approved by the City Engineer and the Plan Commission.
   (C)   Designs utilizing sinkholes shall meet the requirements set forth in
the Stormwater Drainage Manual.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.12 FINAL DRAINAGE PLANS.
   Final drainage plans shall be submitted to the CBPWS. Before final
subdivision plat approval or before construction for all other developments,
the final construction plans shall provide or be accompanied by the
requirements set forth in the Charlestown Stormwater Design Manual.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.13 SUBMITTALS AND FEES.
   (A)   Plans shall be submitted 20 working days prior to the scheduled Board
of Public Works and Safety meeting. In addition to the plans, the design
professional shall submit the following:
      (1)   Drainage plan review application;
      (2)   Drainage plan review checklist; and
      (3)   Detention analysis checklist.
   (B)   The forms listed in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(3) above can be found
in the appendix of the ordinance codified in this section or can be picked up
at City Hall.
   (C)   Drainage review fees shall be paid at the time of submission.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or fail to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for civil penalties to the
CBPWS up to $2,500. Each day that the violation exists or continues shall be
deemed a separate offense. Any such person, firm or corporation shall also
reimburse the CBPWS for all attorneys' fee incurred in any enforcement action.
(Ord. 2005-OR-06, passed 4-4-2005; Ord. 2024-OR-08, passed 7-22-2024)
CHAPTER 156: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Statutory authorization
   
156.02   Findings of fact
   
156.03   Statement of purpose
   
156.04   Objectives
   
156.05   Definitions
   
156.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
156.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data
   
156.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
156.09   Compliance
   
156.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
156.11   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations
   
156.12   Interpretation
   
156.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.25   Floodplain Administrator designation; duties; responsibilities
   
156.26   Permit procedures
   
156.27   Variance and Appeals Board
   
156.28   Variance and appeals procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
156.40   General standards
   
156.41   Specific standards
   
156.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
156.43   Critical facilities
   
156.44   Standards for identified floodways
   
156.45   Standards for identified fringe
   
156.46   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or
floodways/fringes
   
156.47   Standards for flood prone areas
 
   
156.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the
Common Council of the city does hereby adopt the following floodplain
management regulations.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in the potential for loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, public expenditures
for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately floodproofed or
otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands; and
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures and
their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood
insurance program.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains; and
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   A ZONE. Portions of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) in which the
principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination
of both. In A ZONES, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are
usually not a significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as ZONE
A, ZONE AE, ZONES A1-A30, ZONE AO, ZONE AH, ZONE AR and ZONE A99 on a FIRM. The
definitions are presented below.
      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood
event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base
flood elevation or depths are shown.
      (2)   ZONE AE and A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are
shown within these zones. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)
      (3)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone.
      (4)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.
      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a previously
accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of
being restored to provide base flood protection.
      (6)   ZONE A99.
         (a)   Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood event,
but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-construction
federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood hazard where
enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection system, such
as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating
purposes.
         (b)   ZONE A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has
reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood
elevations or depths are shown.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor area
400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the
principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial
investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have
minimal flood damage potential. Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached
garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns and hay sheds.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to the
perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-
bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed ADDITION, which is
connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing
walls, is new construction.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
Kentucky and Indiana.
   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the federal insurance
administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular
program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to
develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to,
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or
hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. 
      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a structure or any
addition to a structure;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than
180 days;
         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction
of roads or similar projects;
         (d)   Construction of flood-control structures such as levees, dikes,
dams, channel improvements and the like;
         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling
operations;
         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
         (g)   Storage of materials; or
         (h)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing
roads or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, excavation or the construction of permanent
structures.
   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter
walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings or
columns (posts and piers).
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a structure’s
elevation information.
   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates in
the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic report
provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM
(where applicable) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)
   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two
feet at any given location in the SFHA. (see FREEBOARD.)
   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or
watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory
flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood-control works, floodplain management
regulations and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power which control development in
flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in
any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS are also referred to
as FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ORDINANCE and FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is water-tight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that
are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated debris impact
forces.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
nonresidential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above
the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or
architect.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently
carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or
stream.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than those calculated for the base flood.
   FRINGE. The portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
   HARDSHIP. As related to variances of this chapter, the exceptional hardship
that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Board of
Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual and peculiar
to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not
exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps,
personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional HARDSHIP. All of these problems can be
resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface,
prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.
   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to
bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood
damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation,
relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business
flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will
include ICC coverage.
   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new
flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month
adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management
regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously
incorporated an automatic adoption clause.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA), LETTER OF MAP REVISION
(LOMR) and LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). The definitions are
presented below:
      LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA
through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is only
issued by FEMA.
      LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations
and elevations.
      LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement entryway
immediately next to the structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:
      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;
      (2)   The top of the basement floor;
      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of
the structure;
      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or
pillars; and
      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement,
below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any
resistance to the flow of floodwaters unless:
         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic
flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters by
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a
minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area,
each shall have openings on exterior walls;
         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square
inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the
interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and
         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of
vehicles and building access.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a
willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market
will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent certified appraisal,
replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or
adjusted assessed values.
   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to
people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of MITIGATION
is twofold: To protect people and structures; and to minimize the cost of
disaster response and recovery.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.
   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929, a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the floodplain.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain
ordinance.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other than
a boundary river.
   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993 is a
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into
any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or
velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare
or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being
carried downstream.
   1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is
subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community’s FEMA
map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain
boundary delineations, regulatory floodways and planimetric features. These
changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements,
annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base
flood elevations or SFHAs.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is: Built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for
recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations
determined in a FIS.
   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable
to and approved by the state’s Department of Natural Resources and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is
as defined in §
156.07 of this code. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known by the terms BASE
FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD and 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 et seq., as amended, which states that no new flood insurance
coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has
been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other
authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations
or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land
development or occupancy in flood prone areas.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the
city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the city are
generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map for the county and
incorporated areas dated April 16, 2014 as well as any future updates,
amendments or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-
A30, AH, AR, A99 or AO.)
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “repetitive loss”
or “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements or any
alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structures continued designation as a “historic structure.”
   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP because
the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management
regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which
permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification or other evidence of compliance required in this
chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (500-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs) designate
areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2%.
   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.
   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.
   ZONE B, C AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or
minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in
participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones.
(ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONES B AND C.)
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.
   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for the
studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city shall be as delineated on the
1% annual chance flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the county and
incorporated areas, and the corresponding flood insurance rate map dated April
16, 2014 as well as any future updates, amendments or revisions, prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.
   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits for each of
the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city, delineated as an “A Zone” on the
flood insurance rate map for the county and incorporated areas dated April 16,
2014 as well as any future updates, amendments or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be
according to the best data available as provided by the state’s Department of
Natural Resources; provided, that the upstream drainage area from the subject
site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better data that
meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be
submitted to the state’s Department of Natural Resources for review,
subsequently approved.
   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification
on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe limits of
any watercourse in the community’s known flood prone areas shall be according
to the best data available as provided by the state’s Department of Natural
Resources; provided, that the upstream drainage area from the subject site is
greater than one square mile.
   (D)   Upon issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD), any more
restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized
for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all
previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally
altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall
hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.11 DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain
(SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on
the profiles shall govern.
   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood
elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the
base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be
considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied.
The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.12 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.13 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and
will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the city, the state’s Department of Natural Resources
or the state for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.25 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATION; DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Designation of Administrator. The Common Council of the city hereby
appoints the Building Commissioner to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Administrator is
further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are
consistent with its spirit and purpose. Duties and responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete
substantial damage determinations;
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
state’s Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to
§§
156.44 and
156.46 of this code, and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy
of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment);
      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been
received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies
of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;
      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway;
      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of
such notifications to FEMA;
      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local
permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map change (LOMC),
copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization and floodplain analysis and
regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents
and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed
subject to this chapter;
      (8)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map change (LOMC) or physical
map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community;
      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished;
      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance;
      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in
accordance with §
156.26 of this code;
      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with §
156.26 of this code;
      (13)   Stop work orders:
         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator, work on any
building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall immediately cease.
         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner
of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and
shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
      (14)   Revocation of permits:
         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit or approval
issued under the provisions of this chapter in cases where there has been any
false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit upon
determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the
structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in
conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.26 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following:
Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen
fill, storage of materials or equipment; drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Application stage.
         (a)   A description of the proposed development;
         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams;
         (c)   A legal description of the property site, along with the name(s)
of the owner(s);
         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;
         (e)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;
         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any nonresidential
structure will be floodproofed; and
         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted
to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a letter of map revision. (See §
156.25(B)(6) of this code for additional information.)
      (2)   Construction stage.
         (a)   Upon establishment/placement of the lowest floor, before framing
continues, to include any approved floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD
88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built.
Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer
or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of
the floodproofing certification shall be at the applicant’s risk. (The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing
elevation survey data submitted.) The applicant shall correct deficiencies
detected by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure
to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall
be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
         (b)   Any work undertaken prior to submission of the elevation
certification shall be at the applicant’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation survey data submitted.
The applicant shall correct any deficiencies detected by such review. Failure
to submit the elevation certification or failure to make correction required
shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.
      (3)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, a FEMA
elevation certificate which depicts all finished construction is required to be
submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate is required to be
submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.27 VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board may appeal such decision to the County Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.28 VARIANCE AND APPEALS PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
      (1)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (4)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and
      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to §§
156.44 or
156.46 of this code may be granted.
      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§
156.44 or
156.46 of this code will require a permit from the state’s Department of
Natural Resources.
      (4)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
156.41 of this code may be granted only when a new structure is to be located
on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of
any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the
elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of
the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation (see §
156.28(C) of this code).
      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the state’s Department of Natural Resources upon request (see §
156.28(C) of this code).
   (C)   Variance notification.
      (1)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest
floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be
given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
         (b)   Such construction below the flood protection grade increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (D)   Historic structure. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of “historic structures” upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as an “historic structure” and the variance is the minimum to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (E)   Special conditions. Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§
156.27 and
156.28 of this code, and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 156.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas, the following provisions are
required.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters and other service facilities shall be located at/
above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities
may be located below the FPG.
   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure
that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Structures, general. In addition to the requirements of §
156.40 of this code, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be
protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement
applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area
greater than 400 square feet;
      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the
cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing structure (excluding the value of the land);
      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the
costs of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the
land) before damage occurred;
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days;
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing
manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed
to avoid flood damage;
      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure; and
      (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure with a
previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.
   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of
any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor;
including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood
elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below.
   (C)   Nonresidential structures. New construction or substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure (or manufactured
home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be floodproofed to
or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of division (D)
below. Structures located in all “A Zones” may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated if done in accordance with the following.
      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account
flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures and impacts
from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in §
156.25(B)(12) of this code.
      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity.
   (D)   Elevated structures.
      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures
shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.
      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two
exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area);
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher;
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions;
         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);
         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and
         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.
   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential
structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the
following.
      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with either the
standard or modified proctor test method, which shall be retained in permit
file.
      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the
structure before sloping below the BFE.
      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is
used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or
above the FPG.
   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. To the
extent manufactured homes or recreational vehicles are allowed by another
ordinance, if at all, manufactured homes or recreational vehicles to be
installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet
one of the following requirements.
      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in §
156.41(D) of this code.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on
a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.
         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor
of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated
structures in §
156.41(D) of this code.
         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame
or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have openings.
      (3)   If allowed, recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
         (a)   Be on-site for less than 180 days;
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions);
or
         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated earlier
in this section.
   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:
      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG; and
      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in §
156.41(D) of this code.
   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or
liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.42 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage, in accordance
with
Chapter 155 of this code to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the SFHA and/
or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of SFHA
for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.43 CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical
facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site
is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
   (B)   Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to
the extent possible.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.44 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in §
156.07 of this code, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry
debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential. If the site is in an
identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant
to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications,
to the state’s Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit for
construction in a floodway from the state’s Department of Natural Resources is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This
includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and
paving undertaken before the actual start of construction of the structure.
However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to existing
(lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows
construction of a non-substantial addition/improvement to a residence in a non-
boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in the
floodway from the state’s Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if
fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval
for the fill is required from the state’s Department of Natural Resources.)
   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
state’s Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the state’s Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit,
provided the provisions contained in §§
156.40 through
156.47 of this code have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be
less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
state’s Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
   (C)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination
with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency
of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse affect is
defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least
fifteen-hundredths of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood
elevation under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway
condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.
   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including
levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency
Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping standard
regulations found at 44 C.F.R. § 65.12.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.45 STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.
   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§
156.40 through
156.47 of this code have been met. The key provision is that the top of the
lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or
above the FPG.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.46 STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND/OR
FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.
   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain
Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along
with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the state’s Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment;
      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
either a permit for construction in a floodway permit (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has
been received from the state’s Department of Natural Resources; and
      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit
for construction in a floodway permit (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued, provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the state’s Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in §§
156.40 through
156.47 of this code have been met.
   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the
floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area
upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator
shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the
limits of the floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site; and
      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in §§
156.40 through
156.47 of this code have been met.
   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the
regulatory flood more than one fourteen-hundredths of a foot and will not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.47 STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.
   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or
where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as
required per §§
156.40 through
156.47 of this code.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All
violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in
accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the city. All violations
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.
      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
   (C)   Any person, firm, business or entity violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $100 or more than $1,500 for each
violation or offense. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2014-OR-04, passed 4-7-2014)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Purpose; authority
   
157.02   Zoning maps
   
157.03   Location and operation of clinics in the city
   
157.04   Provisions subject to other laws
Zoning Designations
   
157.15   General requirements for all zoning designations
   
157.16   Residential zoning designations
   
157.17   General requirements for business and industrial zoning designations
   
157.18   Business zoning designations
   
157.19   Industrial zoning designations
   
157.20   Agricultural zoning designations
   
157.21   M-1 Manufacturing Designation
   
157.22   INAAP Redevelopment District
Planned Unit Developments
   
157.35   Intent of designation
   
157.36   General design provisions
   
157.37   Land use ratios
   
157.38   Proposals
   
157.39   Filing procedure
   
157.40   Preliminary plan hearing
   
157.41   Approval of final detailed plan
   
157.42   Covenants and maintenance
   
157.43   Recording of plans
   
157.44   Permit
   
157.45   Construction
   
157.46   Extensions, abandonment and expiration
Special and Nonconforming Uses
   
157.60   Special uses
   
157.61   Nonconforming uses
 
   
157.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01 PURPOSE; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to enact provisions amending and
clarifying the Zoning Code for the City of Charlestown, Indiana (hereinafter
the “city”). This chapter is intended to amend certain provisions of all other
ordinances inconsistent herewith. The zoning designations in this chapter
supercede previous zoning designations. This chapter is not intended to rescind
the effects of any other ordinances, except as specifically stated herein. This
includes, but is not limited to ordinances for protection and preservation of
agricultural land.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq. The zoning
maps incorporated by reference herein and adopted hereby are also adopted
pursuant to that authority.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.02 ZONING MAPS.
   Contemporaneously with the adoption of this chapter the Common Council is
adopting a zoning map, consisting of two sheets, for the city, which are
incorporated by reference herein.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.03 LOCATION AND OPERATION OF CLINICS IN THE CITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CLINIC. Pain management clinics and opiate addiction treatment clinics.
      OPIATE ADDICTION TREATMENT CLINIC. Any privately-owned clinic, facility
or office which advertises in any medium concerning the availability of the use
of methadone, diskets, dolophine, methodose, buprenorphine or other substances
as a maintenance treatment for opioid addiction or which employs a physician or
osteopathic physician or who is primarily engaged in the treatment of opioid
addiction by prescribing or dispensing substances controlled by federal and/or
state law.
      PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINIC. Any privately-owned clinic, facility or office
which advertises in any medium concerning the availability of any type of pain
management services or which employs a physician or osteopathic physician or
who is primarily engaged in the treatment of pain by prescribing or dispensing
substances controlled by federal and/or state law, but the term shall not
include:
         (a)   A clinic that is owned by a publicly held corporation whose
shares are traded on a national exchange or on the over-the-counter market and
whose total assets at the end of the corporation’s most recent fiscal quarter
exceeded $50 million;
         (b)   A clinic where the majority of the physicians who provide
services in the clinic primarily provide surgical services;
         (c)   A clinic that is affiliated with an accredited medical school at
which training is provided for medical students, residents or fellows;
         (d)   A clinic that does not prescribe or dispense substances
controlled by federal and/or state law for the treatment of pain; or
         (e)   A clinic that is owned by a corporate entity exempt from federal
taxation under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3).
   (B)   Location and additional restrictions. Clinics shall be located in
areas of the city with a zoning map designation of IR and shall also be subject
to the following additional regulations.
      (1)   Parking. Parking areas must be sufficient to simultaneously provide
a parking spot to accommodate a vehicle for every employee of the clinic during
any two abutting or overlapping shifts, plus one parking spot for the number of
patients the building has the capacity to treat in any one day.
      (2)   Security cameras. A working video recording system shall be in
place to survey the exterior of the clinic, which has sufficient capacity to
accurately detect the make, model and license numbers of all vehicles entering
and leaving the parking lot of the clinic. Recordings shall be preserved for a
minimum of 30 days from the date first recorded.
      (3)   Security personnel. Each clinic shall have one on-duty person whose
primary job is to oversee security and parking during all hours of operation to
prevent loitering and to curb any potential illegal dealing in drugs.
      (4)   Loitering. Persons on premises of a clinic shall not loiter
outdoors for more than five minutes before or after they arrive at the clinic,
but shall be required to wait indoors.
      (5)   Distance from schools. Clinics shall not be located within 1,000
feet of any kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school or high school.
(Ord. 2016-OR-08, passed 2-15-2016)
§ 157.04 PROVISIONS SUBJECT TO OTHER LAWS.
   This chapter does not supercede federal or state laws, statutes or
regulations, except as allowed. As with other ordinances, any amendment to city
zoning ordinances shall be subject to veto by the city executive only as
permitted by law.
ZONING DESIGNATIONS
§ 157.15 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the following standards shall apply in all
areas that have any zoning designation.
   (A)   Drainage. The city’s drainage ordinance, codified in
Chapter 155 of this code, shall apply.
   (B)   General off-street parking and loading requirements.
      (1)   Where a particular use in a specific district requires off-street
parking, off-street parking shall be defined as hard surface area; parking
spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 25 in length. If the off-
street parking space cannot be provided on the same lot, which the principal
use is conducted, the Plan Commission may permit such space be provided on
other off-street property, provided such space be within 300 feet of any
entrance to such principal use.
      (2)   Such off-street parking space shall thereafter be deemed to be
required open space associated with this permitted use and shall not be reduced
nor encroached upon in any manner. Where the specific use or district requires
off-street loading of facilities each single loading berth shall be not less
than ten feet in width and 45 feet in length and 14 feet in height if enclosed.
   (C)   Obstructions to vision at intersections prohibited. No fence, wall,
hedge, signs, earth terraces, parking facilities or other structure or plant
which would obstruct motor vehicle visibility, traffic approaching a corner or
intersection shall be erected.
   (D)   Off-street parking and loading.
      (1)   One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor space, and for
office uses one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. For
theaters, auditoriums, including school auditorium, church or other place of
public assembly, there shall be a minimum of one space for each eight seats
available at maximum capacity. Wholesale storage and manufacturing
establishments shall have one space for each two employees per shift.
      (2)   At least one off-street loading space shall be provided for every
hospital, institution, commercial and industrial building erected after the
date of this chapter with a floor area of 5,000 square feet or more. Each
loading space shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum length of 35
feet, and a minimum height, if covered, of 14 feet. Each loading space shall
have access to a public street or alley.
   (E)   Utilities. All structures shall be attached to public water and
sanitary sewer facilities that have been approved by those local, state and
federal agencies charged with the licensing, permitting and monitoring of said
facilities. Any utilities installed, such as electric, telephone, gas, sewer,
water and cable television services shall be installed underground.
   (F)   Utility plans to be submitted prior to construction.
      (1)   It is beneficial for efficient and intelligent location of utility
facilities that no utility facilities ultimately intended for use as trunk
lines, distribution lines, collection lines or mains shall be constructed
within the area where these zoning regulations are in effect, without the
person owning the facilities or constructing the facilities having first
obtained all requisite state-required approvals in advance.
      (2)   In addition, proof shall be provided to the city’s Plan Commission
that copies of the engineering plans for all utility facilities shall be
provided at least 60 days in advance of any construction, to the following
entities:
         (a)   The City Development Coordinator;
         (b)   The city’s sewage utility;
         (c)   The city’s Water Department;
         (d)   The city’s Volunteer Fire Department;
         (e)   The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety;
         (f)   The state’s Utility Regulatory Commission;
         (g)   The state’s Department of Transportation (if the utility
facilities are located adjacent to a state-maintained roadway); and
         (h)   The owners of all real properties upon which the utility
facilities are to be located.
      (3)   In addition to any other penalties that might be imposed, a person
or entity failing to comply with this provision shall immediately cease
construction of the utility facilities until 60 days after providing proof of
providing notice, as required above.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003) Penalty, see §
157.99
§ 157.16 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Designations. The following standards shall apply in all residential
areas designated for single-family uses. Those designations shall include:
      (1)   R Residential;
      (2)   R-1   Single-Family Residential;
      (3)   R-2   Rural Residential;
      (4)   R-3   Two-Family Residential; and
      (5)   R-4   Multi-Family Residential.
   (B)   General requirements for residential zoning designations. Except as
otherwise provided, the following standards shall apply in all areas designated
for residential zoning.
      (1)   Accessory building coverage. Except in areas designated for
agricultural zoning, the total square footage of all accessory buildings shall
not exceed 50% of the first floor square footage of the primary building.
      (2)   Exterior construction. The exterior construction of all structures
built in areas designated for residential use, above ground level, shall be 70%
brick or decorative stone walls, with the remainder of the exterior surfaces
being built from maintenance-free materials. In addition, all roofs shall have
a pitch of at least five to 12 or steeper.
      (3)   Group homes. GROUP HOMES are defined as dwellings where up to eight
resident patients or individuals with special medical or social services needs
reside and are provided with assistance in receiving the necessities of life.
Excluding full-time group home parents, a GROUP HOME shall not have more than
two staff members on duty at one time and shall not include the provision of
acute medical care services to the patient/residents.
      (4)   Height restrictions.
         (a)   The maximum height in any area designated for a single-family
residential use shall be as follows:
            1.   Primary building: 30 feet; and
            2.   Accessory building: 15 feet.
         (b)   In any case, the accessory building shall not have a height in
excess of that of the primary building.
      (5)   In-home day care facilities. IN-HOME DAY CARE FACILITIES are
residential child care operations where one or more residents of the dwelling
provide child care for up to eight children, including children under the age
of 16 that reside at the residence.
      (6)   Maintenance-free materials. MAINTENANCE-FREE MATERIALS are exterior
materials that have a useful life expectancy, without painting or coating with
any substance, of at least 30 years. Examples include, but are not limited to:
Vinyl siding; aluminum siding; and anodized metal.
      (7)   Maximum lot coverage. MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE is the portion of the
lot covered by the footprint of primary and accessory buildings.
      (8)   Minimum floor area. MINIMUM FLOOR AREA refers to the square footage
of living space and porches, carports, stoops, breezeways, basements and
garages shall not be used for calculating that area.
      (9)   Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall not be less than 75% of
the minimum road frontage.
      (10)   Minimum road frontage. Minimum road frontage is the width of a lot
at the public roadway upon which it fronts.
      (11)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking in residential zoning
designations shall be a minimum of two spaces per single-family dwelling unit.
Parking areas shall be paved with a non-porous pavement or concrete.
      (12)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed in any residential zoning designation to be used except
for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Single-family dwelling;
         (b)   Accessory uses to single-family dwelling;
         (c)   Group homes;
         (d)   In-home day care facilities; and
         (e)   Churches.
      (13)   Road frontage. All parcels of property in a residential
designation shall front on a public roadway that has been accepted by the city
or its municipal predecessor in interest. ROAD FRONTAGE is the actual distance
that one side of the parcel is contiguous with a public roadway.
      (14)   Roof overhangs. Structures built in areas designated for
residential use shall have roofs that overhang the exterior walls of the
buildings (both main and accessory) by at least 12 inches.
      (15)   Width/depth ratio. No parcel of land developed after the date of
the passage of this chapter shall have a depth that is more than four times the
road frontage.
   (C)   R Residential.
      (1)   Intention of Designation. The R Residential Designation is intended
for low-density, single-family residential development in locations of the
city, which contain previously platted smaller lots located within existing
residential zoning areas. The R Designation is a stand-alone designation and is
not a part of a hierarchy system of zoning. For example, what is permitted in
the R Designation is not permitted in the R-1 Designation. Only those uses and
development standards that are expressly permitted and noted herein apply to
the R Designation.
      (2)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for a single-family
dwelling shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be 9,600 square feet; and
         (b)   Minimum road frontage: 60 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor shall be 1,100 square feet.
      (4)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for a lot used for a
single-family dwelling in this Designation shall be as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be at least 70 feet measured from
the center of the pavement, or as far back from the pavement as the adjoining
house nearest to the pavement, whichever is greater.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 12 feet.
      (5)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 25% of the
lot area.
   (D)   R-1 Residential.
      (1)   Intention of Designation. The R-1 Residential Designation is
intended for moderately dense single-family residential developments. The R-
1 Designation is a stand-alone designation and is not a part of a hierarchy
system of zoning. For example, what is permitted in the R-1 Designation is not
permitted in the R-2 Designation. Only those uses and development standards
that are expressly permitted and noted herein apply to the R-1 Designation.
      (2)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for a single-family
dwelling shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be 12,000 square feet; and
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet, provided that any plat of a
subdivision consisting of five lots or more submitted for plat approval in
accordance with the subdivision control ordinance may reduce such minimum width
of 20% of the total number of lots within such plat to a minimum of 60 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor shall be 1,500 square feet.
      (4)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for a lot used for a
single-family dwelling shall be as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
      (5)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30% of the
lot area.
   (E)   R-2 Rural Residential.
      (1)   Intention of Designation. The R-2 Residential Designation is
intended to permit limited residential development in rural areas in order to
satisfy individual housing preferences. The R-2 Designation is an exclusive
designation and is not a part of a hierarchy system of zoning. Except as
expressly allowed, what is permitted in the R-1 Designation is not permitted in
the R-2 Designation. Only those uses and development standards that are
expressly permitted and noted herein apply to the R-2 Designation.
      (2)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for a single-family
dwelling shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet; and
         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet, provided that any plat of a
subdivision consisting of five lots or more submitted for plat approval in
accordance with the subdivision control ordinance may reduce such minimum width
of 20% of the total number of lots within such plat to a minimum of 80 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor shall be 1,800 square feet.
In multi-level dwellings, the first story must contain at least 1,200 square
feet.
      (4)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for a lot used for a
single-family dwelling shall be as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
      (5)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30% of the
lot area.
   (F)   R-3 Two-Family Residential.
      (1)   Intention of District. The R-3 Residential District is intended to
provide for urban density, residential development and allow for more choice in
dwelling unit types by providing for two-family dwelling structures. The R-
3 District is a stand-alone district and is not a part of a hierarchy system of
zoning. For example, what is permitted in the R-2 District is not permitted in
the R-3 District. Only those uses and development standards that are expressly
permitted and noted herein apply to the R-3 District.
      (2)   Permitted uses. In addition to the general permitted uses the
following uses shall be permitted:
         (a)   Two-family dwelling; and
         (b)   Accessory uses to two-family dwelling.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for a two-family
dwelling shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be 12,000 square feet; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
      (4)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area shall be 1,000 square
feet per unit. In computing the square footage, porches, carports, stoops,
breezeways, basements and garages shall not be used.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for a lot used for a two-
family dwelling shall be as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
      (6)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 40% of the
lot area.
      (7)   Accessory building coverage. Accessory building coverage shall not
exceed 25% of the first floor area.
   (G)   R-4 Multi-Family Residential.
      (1)   Intention of District. The R-4 Residential District is intended to
provide for multi-family residential development of three or more units,
including detached, attached or semi-attached dwellings. The R-4 District is a
stand-alone district and is not a part of a hierarchy system of zoning. For
example, what is permitted in the R-3 District is not permitted in the R-
4 District. Only those uses and development standards that are expressly
permitted and noted herein apply to the R-4 District.
      (2)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Multi-family dwelling (three or more families); and
         (b)   Accessory uses to multi-family dwelling.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for a multi-family
dwelling shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be 7,000 square feet per
first floor dwelling unit; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet on a public roadway.
      (4)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area shall be 1,000 square
feet per unit.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for a lot used for a
multi-family residential development shall be as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 30 feet.
      (6)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in an R-4 District shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Primary building: 35 feet; and
         (b)   Accessory building: The maximum height of an accessory building
shall not exceed the height of the primary building and in no case shall exceed
20 feet.
      (7)   Landscaping and buffering. Twenty-five feet of the front setback
area and the rear and side setback areas shall be maintained in natural
material and utilized for landscaping purposes. Said landscaping materials
shall include appropriate vegetation, durable plants and trees such as pine and
evergreen species from the front building line to the rear. Any lot within this
District that abuts any lot utilized for residential purposes shall also be
screened with a combination of opaque fencing, not to exceed six feet, and
natural material consisting of either small trees and/or shrubs.
      (8)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 40% of the
lot area.
      (9)   Accessory building coverage. The total square footage of accessory
buildings shall not exceed 50% of the first floor square footage of the primary
building.
      (10)   Trash receptacles. Space shall be provided for trash receptacles
for tenants of buildings having three or more dwelling units. The spaces shall
have a brick exterior and be gated so that dumpsters or other trash receptacles
are not visible when the gate is closed. Unless the trash receptacle areas are
being entered, exited or the receptacles emptied, the gates shall remain
closed.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.17 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the following standards shall apply in all
areas designated for business and industrial uses.
   (A)   Accessory building coverage. The total square footage of accessory
buildings shall not exceed 25% of the first floor square footage of the primary
building.
   (B)   General off-street parking and loading requirements.
      (1)   Where a particular use in a specific district requires off-street
parking, OFF-STREET PARKING shall be defined as hard surface area; parking
spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 25 in length. If the off-
street parking space cannot be provided on the same lot, which the principal
use is conducted, the Plan Commission may permit such space be provided on
other off-street property provided such space be within 300 feet of any
entrance to such principal use. Such off-street parking space shall thereafter
be deemed to be required open space associated with this permitted use and
shall not be reduced nor encroached upon in any manner. Where the specific use
or district requires off-street loading of facilities each single loading berth
shall be not less than ten feet in width and 45 feet in length and 14 feet in
height if enclosed. The minimum off-street parking requirements for all other
uses shall be one space per 200 square feet of floor area.
      (2)   One parking space is required for each 400 square feet of gross
floor space and, for office uses, one space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area. For theaters, auditoriums, including school auditorium, church or
other place of public assembly, there shall be a minimum of one space for each
eight seats available at maximum capacity. Wholesale storage and manufacturing
establishments shall have one space for each two employees per shift. At least
one off-street loading space shall be provided for every hospital, institution,
commercial and industrial building erected after the date of this chapter with
a floor area of 5,000 square feet or more.
   (C)   Landscaping and buffering. A total of 12 feet of the transitional
setback area and an area ten feet in width along the rear and ten feet in width
along each side of the transitional setback area shall be maintained in natural
material and utilized for landscaping purposes. Said landscaping materials
shall include appropriate vegetation, durable plants and trees such as pine and
evergreen species from the front building line to the rear. Any lot within this
district that abuts any lot utilized for residential purposes shall also be
screened with a combination of opaque fencing, not to exceed six feet and
natural material consisting of either small trees and/or shrubs.
   (D)   Performance standards. Prior to the issuance of a building permit the
following requirements shall be met.
      (1)   Plans and specifications for proposed sewage disposal facilities
and all required written approvals, required under state, federal and local
laws from all appropriate state, federal and local agencies, shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission.
      (2)   Written approval of proposed connection to a public sewer shall be
obtained from said utility.
      (3)   Plans and specifications for proposed storm drainage facilities
shall be submitted with evidence of written approval obtained from the City
Engineer in addition to all necessary permits which must be obtained from all
appropriate state agencies.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.18 BUSINESS ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   B-1 Limited Business.
      (1)   Intention of District. The B-1 Business District is intended to
provide for professional office uses, personal service uses and retail service
uses which dispense convenience goods and services directly to consumers on the
premises. The B-1 District is a stand-alone district and is not a part of a
hierarchy system of zoning. For example, what is permitted in the R-4 District
is not permitted in the B-1 District. Only those uses and development standards
that are expressly permitted and noted herein apply to the B-1 District.
      (2)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   General business offices including insurance agencies, real
estate agencies, trade association offices, communication company offices,
travel agencies, health studios and banking facilities;
         (b)   Medical offices;
         (c)   Clothing service uses including dry cleaning and laundry
receiving stations, laundromats, dressmaking, tailoring and shoe repair shop;
         (d)   Equipment uses including electrical household appliance store,
radio, television, recorded music sales, sporting goods and hardware stores;
         (e)   Food service uses including grocery, meat and fish markets,
delicatessen eating places and bakery;
         (f)   Personal service uses including beauty and barber shops, camera
and photographic shops and optician shops;
         (g)   Professional office uses including clinics;
         (h)   Retail service uses including drug stores, variety stores, book
and stationary stores, news stands, candy and ice cream stores, florists, gift,
antique, art, music, toy, hobby shops, paint and wallpaper stores, jewelry and
leather stores;
         (i)   Retail service uses including department stores, furniture,
carpet, interior decorating, upholstering stores, office supply stores,
restaurants and catering establishments and storage processing and/or
conditioning when incidental to any of these uses;
         (j)   Mortuaries, funeral parlors;
         (k)   Garden supply centers;
         (l)   Automobile accessory stores;
         (m)   Automobile service station uses but not including major body
repair, the dismantling or wrecking or the storage of inoperable or damaged
vehicles;
         (n)   Drive-in restaurants;
         (o)   Public and semi-public buildings;
         (p)   Off-street parking facilities including parking garages;
         (q)   Accessory uses which are incidental to or commonly associated
with the operation or permitted use;
         (r)   Automated food distribution warehouse; and/or
         (s)   Other uses comparable and compatible with those set forth in
this section as determined by the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this District
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
      (4)   Minimum floor area. No single business establishment shall have
less than 870 square feet in total gross floor area.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this district shall be
as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 24 feet.
      (6)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a B-1 District shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Primary building: 30 feet; and
         (b)   Accessory building: 15 feet.
      (7)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 75% of the
lot area.
   (B)   B-2 Community and Roadside Business.
      (1)   Intention of District. The B-2 Business District is intended to
provide for highway-oriented business uses offering supplies and services to
the general public which are ordinarily located along highways. The B-
2 District is a stand-alone district and is not a part of a hierarchy system of
zoning. For example, what is permitted in the B-1 District is not permitted in
the B-2 District. Only those uses and development standards that are expressly
permitted and noted herein apply to the B-2 District.
      (2)   Conduct of permitted uses. The conduct of permitted uses in a B-
2 District shall be within completely enclosed buildings except for accessory
uses that are clearly subordinate to the permitted use. Such accessory uses
shall not occupy an area in excess of 30% of the total floor area of the main
building. Outdoor storage and display of merchandise shall be allowed, but
purchase shall be prohibited. Retail establishments providing drive-in
services, outdoor sales, service and display of merchandise shall be allowed.
All outdoor storage and materials shall be within completely enclosed buildings
or effectively screened by a solid wall or fence not less than six feet in
height. Storage within such enclosures shall not be in excess of the height of
the wall or fence provided that for display of goods, such as automobiles, such
wall or fence shall not be less than two feet in height.
      (3)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Hotels and motels;
         (b)   Sales, rental and storage of automobiles, campers, recreational
vehicles, manufactured homes and boats provided that all service and
maintenance work shall be conducted within enclosed buildings;
         (c)   Special service uses including model home displays, building
material sales, vending preparations, food locker plants, auction rooms, plant
nursery and greenhouses;
         (d)   Mini-warehouses;
         (e)   Transportation facilities and accessory facilities, including
but not limited to, waiting rooms, loading and unloading areas, storage and
associated commercial uses;
         (f)   Printing and publishing establishments, blueprinting and photo
establishments, radio and television studios;
         (g)   Limited automobile servicing, when enclosed;
         (h)   Sales and display rooms for retail and wholesale distribution of
goods, materials and products;
         (i)   Package liquor stores;
         (j)   Special service uses including children’s homes, daycare
facilities, kindergartens and nursing homes;
         (k)   Public service uses including utility substations, distribution
centers, bus stations, police stations, fire stations, post offices, libraries,
telephone exchanges, waterworks, pumping stations, assembly halls, vocational
and special schools;
         (l)   Indoor commercial recreational uses including auditorium,
theater, bowling alley, billiard rooms, dance studios and amusement facilities;
         (m)   Commercial recreational uses including golf, amusement parks,
drive-in movies, riding stables and other similar outdoor amusement facilities;
         (n)   Accessory uses which are incidental to or commonly associated
with the operation or permitted use;
         (o)   Feed stores;
         (p)   Pet stores; and
         (q)   Other uses comparable and compatible with those set forth in
this section as determined by the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this District
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be two acres; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
      (5)   Minimum floor area. No single business shall have less than 6,000
square feet in total gross floor area.
      (6)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this district shall be
as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 24 feet.
      (7)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a B-2 District shall be
40 feet;
      (8)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 75% of the
lot area.
   (C)   B-3 General Business.
      (1)   Intention of District. The B-3 Business District is intended to
provide for a general business district where a full range of goods and
services are offered at the greatest amount of land use intensity. The B-
3 District is a stand-alone district and is not a part of a hierarchy system of
zoning. For example, what is permitted in the B-2 District is not permitted in
the B-3 District. Only those uses and development standards that are expressly
permitted and noted herein apply to the B-3 District.
      (2)   Conduct of permitted uses. The conduct of permitted uses in a B-
3 District shall be within completely enclosed buildings except for accessory
uses that are clearly subordinate to the permitted use in area, extent and
purpose. Such accessory uses shall not occupy an area in excess of 30% of the
total floor area used in the same building or the same firm or enterprise.
Outdoor storage and display of merchandise shall be limited to materials that
are not immediately available for purchase. Any other storage or display of
merchandise must be within an enclosed building.
      (3)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Night clubs;
         (b)   Live entertainment venues;
         (c)   Venues for conducting non-sanctioned sporting events including
but not limited to wrestling and boxing;
         (d)   Pawn shops and “fast” cash business and other similar lending
institutions not insured by the FDIC/FSLIC;
         (e)   Accessory uses which are incidental to or commonly associated
with the operation or permitted use; and/or
         (f)   Other uses comparable and compatible with those set forth in
this section as determined by the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this District
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be three acres; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
      (5)   Minimum floor area. No single business establishment shall have
less than 12,000 square feet in total gross floor area.
      (6)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this district shall be
as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings, the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 24 feet.
      (7)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a B-3 District shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Primary building: 40 feet; and
         (b)   The total floor area of the building shall not exceed 50% of the
lot area.
      (8)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 75% of the
lot area.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.19 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   I-1 Light Industrial.
      (1)   Intention of District. The I-1 Industrial District is intended to
provide for the type of industrial operation conducted within completely
enclosed buildings that have no nuisance factors that result in emission
outside of the building. The I-1 District is a stand-alone district and is not
a part of a hierarchy system of zoning. For example, what is permitted in the
B-3 District is not permitted in the I-1 District. Only those uses and
development standards that are expressly permitted and noted herein apply to
the I-1 District.
      (2)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Engineering or research laboratories, vocational or industrial
training facilities, data processing or analysis;
         (b)   Light manufacturing including processing, refining, fabricating,
assembly, cleaning, testing or repairing of goods, materials or products;
         (c)   Enclosed wholesaling, warehousing, packaging, storage or
distribution facilities;
         (d)   General offices associated with an industrial use including
service facilities for employees or guests provided that any service facility
shall be entirely enclosed within a building;
         (e)   Printing, lithographing, publishing or photography
establishments;
         (f)   Utility installations and facilities;
         (g)   Accessory uses which are incidental or commonly associated with
the operation or permitted use including recreational areas for employees,
lodging facilities for owners, guards or caretakers;
         (h)   Commercial bakeries, secondary food processing, milk processing,
manufacture and bottling of dairy products and beverages;
         (i)   Machine, welding, tool and die shops and electroplating
operations;
         (j)   Manufacture of cloth, jewelry and leather products;
         (k)   Biological, medical and cosmetic manufacturing;
         (l)   Manufacture and assembly of optical goods, musical and recording
instruments, office machinery, electrical and mechanical;
         (m)   Manufacture and assembly of marine, office, household
appliances, furniture, communication and automobile equipment, air
conditioning, heating and refrigeration equipment;
         (n)   Can and container manufacture, processing and milling of forest
products;
         (o)   Dyeing and cleaning works and services such as linen suppliers,
freight movers and communication and canteen operations;
         (p)   Trucking and railroad terminals;
         (q)   Upholstering and leather goods manufacture;
         (r)   Cannery, bottling, processing and packaging of food and
beverages, granaries, grain processing and starch manufacture;
         (s)   Commercial processing of animals or animal products, including
the slaughter or butchering of animals, or rendering of animal by-products;
         (t)   Commercial storage or warehousing of grains, cereals or animals;
and
         (u)   Other uses comparable and compatible to those set forth in this
section.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this District
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be two acres; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
      (4)   Minimum floor area. No single business establishment shall have
less than 12,000 square feet in total gross floor area.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this District shall be
as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 24 feet.
      (6)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a I-1 District shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Primary building: 40 feet; and
         (b)   Additional height shall be permitted to the maximum extent of
100 feet when additional setback distance is provided to the minimum extent of
two feet for each five feet in height over such 40 feet.
      (7)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 75% of the
lot area.
   (B)   I-2 Heavy Industrial.
      (1)   Intention of District. The I-2 Industrial District is intended to
provide for those heavy industrial uses that are typically characterized by
objectionable factors, which are exceedingly difficult to eliminate. These
industries are therefore buffered by efficient areas that minimize any adverse
effects and wherever practical this district is removed as far as possible from
residential areas buffered by intervening minor industrial districts. The I-
2 District is a stand-alone district and is not a part of a hierarchy system of
zoning. For example, what is permitted in the I-1 District is not permitted in
the I-2 District. Only those uses and development standards that are expressly
permitted and noted herein apply to the I-2 District.
      (2)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Creosote manufacturing and treatment of petroleum products;
         (b)   Foundry, smelting operations, metal forging, fabricating,
rolling and stamping operations;
         (c)   Boiler manufacturing, structural steel fabricating, general
manufacturing assembly plants;
         (d)   Railroad equipment manufacturing, repair and service yards;
         (e)   Manufacturing of soaps, pharmaceutical paper products,
manufacturing of malt products, brewing distillation of liquor and spirits,
poultry hatchery, stone works and stone cutting, thermal, electric and steam
power plants;
         (f)   Concrete mixing, production of concrete blocks and shapes,
cinder blocks and other similar building materials manufactured;
         (g)   Sand, gravel or aggregate wash production or processing;
         (h)   Manufacture and assembly of glass, plastic and rubber products
and implements;
         (i)   Manufacture of colors, dye, paint and other coatings and tar
products; and/or
         (j)   Other uses comparable and compatible to those set forth in this
section.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this District
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be five acres; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
      (4)   Minimum floor area. No single business establishment shall have
less than 20,000 square feet in total gross floor area.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this District shall be
as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 24 feet.
      (6)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a I-2 District shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Primary building: 40 feet; and
         (b)   Additional height shall be permitted to the maximum extent of
100 feet when additional setback distance is provided to the minimum extent of
two feet for each five feet in height over such 40 feet.
      (7)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 75% of the
lot area.
   (C)   I-3 Waste Disposal District.
      (1)   Intention of District. The I-3 Hazardous Waste Disposal District is
restricted to facilities for the disposal, destruction or recycling of toxic
chemicals, radioactive wastes, heavy metals, asbestos and other forms of
hazardous waste whether through incineration, land filling or other mechanical,
chemical or technological means. The I-3 District is a stand-alone district and
is not a part of a hierarchy system of zoning. For example, what is permitted
in the I-2 District is not permitted in the I-3 District. Only those uses and
development standards that are expressly permitted and noted herein apply to
the I-3 District.
      (2)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Landfill;
         (b)   Junk yards, wrecking yards, auto salvage yards and other similar
facilities;
         (c)   Waste transfer facilities;
         (d)   Recycling facilities and related operations; and
         (e)   Storage processing and recycling of hazardous materials.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this district
shall be as follows:
         (a)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be five acres; and
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
      (4)   Maximum floor area. No single business establishment shall exceed
12,000 square feet in total gross floor area.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this District shall be
as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet measured
from the right-of-way line of the road.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (d)   Distance between buildings: In projects containing two or more
buildings the minimum distance between all buildings shall be 24 feet.
         (e)   No I-3 use shall be located within one mile of any other
business, residence, church, school, health care facility or child care
facility as measured from the point of admission discharge or regulate activity
to the nearest property line.
      (6)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a I-3 District shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Primary building: 40 feet; and
         (b)   Additional height shall be permitted to the maximum extent of
100 feet when additional setback distance is provided to the minimum extent of
two feet for each five feet in height over such 40 feet.
      (7)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 75% of the
lot area.
      (8)   Performance standards. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
the following requirements shall be met.
         (a)   Plans and specifications for proposed sewage disposal facilities
and all required written approvals, required under state, federal and local
laws from all appropriate state, federal and local agencies, shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission.
         (b)   Written approval of proposed connection to a public sewer shall
be obtained from said utility.
         (c)   Plans and specifications for proposed storm drainage facilities
shall be submitted with evidence of written approval obtained from the City
Engineer in addition to all necessary permits which must be obtained from all
appropriate state agencies.
         (d)   Legal description of the property shall be included in the
request.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.20 AGRICULTURAL ZONING DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   A-1 Agricultural.
      (1)   Intention of Designation. The A-1 Agricultural Designation is
intended primarily for small farming development, with up to one residential
dwelling and detached outbuildings for accessory uses on each tract. The A-
1 Designation is an exclusive Designation and is not a part of a hierarchy
system of zoning. Except as expressly allowed, what is permitted in the A-
1 Designation is not permitted in residential or other zoning designations.
Only those uses and development standards that are expressly permitted and
noted herein apply to the A-1 Designation.
      (2)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
         (a)   Up to one single-family dwelling meeting the development
requirements for a home built in the R-1 Designation, except that accessory
uses may have a height of 50 feet;
         (b)   Agricultural and farming operations that include growing and
storage of crops, producing dairy and agricultural products (e.g., milk, eggs,
honey and the like) and breeding and raising of livestock.
      (3)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for a parcel
designated as A-1 is five acres.
      (4)   Minimum lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet.
      (5)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for a parcel designated
for this use shall be as follows.
         (a)   The front yard setback shall be at least 50 feet measured from
the center of the pavement, or as far back from the pavement as the adjoining
house nearest to the pavement, whichever is greater.
         (b)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
         (c)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
      (6)   Prohibited uses. The following uses are not permitted in this
District:
         (a)   Commercial processing of animals or animal products, including
the slaughter or butchering of animals, or rendering of animal by-products;
         (b)   Commercial storage or warehousing of grains, cereals or animals;
         (c)   The subdivision of land for residential purposes, except by
grant of a variance to the zoning code after public hearing at which all
landowners within one-eighth of a mile must be notified, in writing, at least
ten days in advance; and
         (d)   The subdivision of land for residential purposes, as controlled
by the city’s Subdivision Control Ordinance.
      (7)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 10% of the
lot area.
   (B)   Protection and preservation of agricultural land within the zoning
jurisdiction of the city.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this division (B) is to enact provisions to
protect and preserve the ability of owners whose lands are zoned for
agricultural use and are located within the city or that are subject to the
zoning jurisdiction of the city to continue in the operation of farming and
agriculturally related businesses without undue hardship.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         AGRICULTURAL USE. The use defined by city zoning ordinances and
amendments thereto.
         CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
         LIVESTOCK. Any domesticated animal used for any farming purpose and
normally kept by those engaged in the business of farming.
         PARTITION FENCE. As defined in I.C. 32-26-1.
      (3)   Discharge of firearms to defend livestock and property.
Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary previously enacted by the Common
Council, it shall not be unlawful for any landowner, or his or her family
members, employees or agents, to discharge a firearm on land zoned for
agricultural use, lying within the municipal limits of the city, or within two-
mile fringe zoning jurisdiction of the city, for the purpose of defending the
real property or personal property of the landowner.
      (4)   Partition fences. This section is modeled after I.C. 32-10-9 et
seq. It is intended that the provisions of this section be interpreted
consistently therewith, when the language presented is similar.
         (a)   Existing fences. All fences now constructed and used by
adjoining landowners as a partition fence on land that is zoned for
agricultural use, which land lies within the two-mile fringe zoning
jurisdiction of the city, unless specially agreed upon by such landowners,
shall be deemed partition fences and shall be repaired, maintained and paid for
as herein provided.
         (b)   Agricultural lands inside city zoning jurisdiction.
            1.   It shall be the duty of all owners of land that is zoned for
agricultural use, or those whose lands are directly adjacent to land that is
zoned for agricultural use, whose lands lie within the municipal limits of the
city, or within two-mile fringe zoning jurisdiction of the city, to separate
said land from adjoining lands by a partition fence to be constructed upon the
line or lines dividing or separating said lands whether said lands were divided
heretofore or may hereafter be divided.
            2.   Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, or in case no
division of said partition fence has been made between the landowners for the
building or repairing or rebuilding of such partition fence, then in such case
the landowner, whose land lies to the east of said fence, shall build the north
half thereof and the landowner whose land lies to the west of said fence, shall
build the south half thereof and if the landowner’s land lies north of the
fence to be built, rebuilt or repaired, he or she shall build, rebuild or
repair the west half thereof, and if the land lies to the south of such fence,
such landowner shall build the east half thereof.
            3.   If either of such landowners shall have constructed one-half
of any partition fence, other than the half prescribed in division (B)(4)(b)2.
above and shall have maintained such one-half of such partition fence for a
period of not less than five years, such landowners shall thereafter be
entitled to continue to maintain such one-half of such fence, notwithstanding
any of the provisions of division (B)(4)(b)2. above.
            4.   If any landowner fails to build, rebuild or repair such fence
after receiving notice as is hereinafter provided, the landowner shall be in
violation of this section, and the City Clerk-Treasurer may cause to be built,
rebuilt or repaired such fence as is hereinafter provided.
         (c)   Defaulting landowner; description of lawful partition fence;
floodgates across watercourses.
            1.   All partition fences shall be built, rebuilt, kept in repair
at the cost of the several landowners whose lands are enclosed or separated by
such fences equally according to the proportion thereof such landowner may have
along such line of fence. If any landowner, as defined in division (B)(2)
above, shall fail or refuse to compensate for the building, rebuilding or
repairing of his, her or their proportion of fence, any landowner interested in
such fence, after having built, rebuilt or repaired his or her portion of such
fence, shall give to the defaulting landowner, his or her agent or tenant 20
days’ notice to build, rebuild or repair his or her proportion of such fence,
as the case may be, and if such defaulting party shall fail to build, rebuild
or repair such fence within said time, such landowner shall then notify the
City Development Coordinator of such fact: provided, that where the fence
sought to be established, rebuilt or repaired is on a township line, the
complaining landowner or landowners shall notify the trustee of the township
wherein the lands of the complaining landowner or landowners are located of the
improvement he, she or they may desire made, and the City Development
Coordinator shall have jurisdiction of such matter, unless disqualified as
hereinafter provided, and may estimate the costs for such fence, building,
rebuilding or repairing the same, as the case may be, and, within a reasonable
time after being notified, the Development Coordinator shall make out a
statement and notify such defaulting party of the probable cost of building,
rebuilding or repairing such fence, as the case may be, and if after 20 days
said fence is not built, rebuilt or repaired by such defaulting landowners, the
Development Coordinator may build or repair such fence, as the case may be;
provided, that the Development Coordinator shall use only the materials for
such fences as are most commonly used by the farmers of such community.
            2.   A lawful partition fence shall be a straight board and wire
fence or a straight wire or a straight board fence or a picket fence four feet
high, a straight rail fence four and one-half feet high, a worm rail fence five
feet high, and all fences of every structure to be sufficiently tight and
strong to hold hogs, sheep, cattle, mules and horses; provided, further, that
if a ditch or creek crosses the division line between two landowners,
necessitating additional expense in the maintenance of the part over such
stream, if such landowners can not agree upon the proportionate share of each,
the Development Coordinator shall appoint three disinterested citizens who
shall apportion the partition fence to be built by each landowner; provided,
further, that in all cases where a ditch or creek forms, covers or marks the
dividing line, or any part thereof, of the lands of separate and different
landowners of this state so that partition fences such as are required and
provided for in this chapter can not be built and maintained on such dividing
line, then, and in all such cases, such partition fences shall be built and
maintained under the provisions of this chapter as near to such boundary line
as may be, and each landowner shall be required, on his or her own land, to
build a separate partition fence and to maintain the same at his or her own
cost: provided, further, that in all cases where partition fences, such as are
required and provided for in this section, cross any ditch or creek and, by
reason thereof, it is impracticable to construct or maintain that portion of
said fence as would cross said ditch or creek as a stationary fence, then, and
in all such cases, there shall be erected, in lieu of such portion of said
fence across said ditch or creek, and as a part of such partition fence,
floodgates or other similar structures, sufficiently high, tight and strong to
turn hogs, sheep, cattle, mules and horses or other domestic animals, and so
constructed as to swing up in times of high water, and such floodgates or other
similar structures shall be so built and constructed as to connect continuously
such partition fences: and provided, further, that if the building and
maintenance of such floodgates or other similar structure occasions additional
expenses and such landowners can not agree upon the character of floodgates or
other similar structure, or upon the proportionate share of the cost thereof to
be borne by each, the Development Coordinator, upon notice in writing from
either landowner of such disagreement and the nature thereof, shall appoint
three disinterested citizens of the agriculturally zoned areas of the city, who
shall determine the kind of structure and apportion the cost of such floodgate
or other structure between such landowners, taking into consideration the parts
and portion of such fence being maintained by each landowner.
            3.   The determination of a majority of such arbitrators of any
matter or matters submitted to them shall be final and binding on each
landowner. The compensation of such arbitrators shall be $2 each, which shall
be paid by said landowners in the proportion they are ordered to bear the
expense of such gate or structure. In case either or both of such landowners
shall fail to construct or compensate for constructing the structure determined
upon by such arbitrators in the proportion determined, within 30 days from such
determination, the Development Coordinator may proceed at once to construct
such gate or structure and collect the cost thereof, including the compensation
of such arbitrators, from such defaulting landowner or landowners, in the same
manner as is provided for ordinary partition fences, and such floodgate or
other structure shall be repaired, rebuilt or replaced in accordance with the
determination of said arbitrators.
         (d)   Expenses; construction and maintenance by city. As soon as the
Development Coordinator has had such fence built, rebuilt or repaired, he or
she shall make out a certified statement in triplicate of the actual cost
incurred by him or her in the building, rebuilding or repairing of such fence,
one copy to be handed to or mailed to the landowner affected by the work, one
copy to be retained by the Development Coordinator, and the other to be
forwarded to the City Attorney, who may institute a legal action to place a
lien on the obligated landowners real property if the balance due to the city
has not been paid within 30 days of the substantial completion of the work of
construction of the fence. Failure of a landowner to remit the balance due on
the statement within 30 days of the receipt of such a statement shall
constitute a violation of this section. Each day thereafter shall be a separate
offense.
         (e)   Construction and application of law. This division (B) shall be
liberally construed in favor of the objects and purposes for which it is
enacted and shall apply to all lands, whether enclosed or unenclosed,
cultivated or uncultivated, wild or wood lot.
      (5)   Barbed wire fences. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary,
any territory zoned for agricultural use that is used for the purpose of
enclosing livestock may be enclosed, in whole or part, by a barbed wire fence.
(Ord. 2003-OR-06, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003) Penalty,
see §
157.99
§ 157.21 M-1 HEAVY MANUFACTURING DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Intention of District. The M-1 Heavy Manufacturing District is
restricted to manufacturing facilities using extremely toxic chemicals,
radioactive materials, heavy metals, asbestos or other dangerous substances in
their manufacturing processes as well as for the location of various forms of
sexually provocative adult entertainment. The M-1 District is a stand-alone
district and is not a part of a hierarchy system of zoning. For example, what
is permitted in the M-1 District is not permitted in the I-3 District. Only
those uses and development standards that are expressly permitted and noted
herein apply to the M-1 District.
   (B)   Permitted uses. No building structure or premises shall be used,
arranged or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
      (1)   Adult entertainment parlors and theaters;
      (2)   Sexually-oriented businesses; and
      (3)   Manufacturing facilities using extremely toxic chemicals,
radioactive materials, heavy metals, asbestos or other dangerous substances.
   (C)   Lot size. The minimum lot size and dimensions for this District shall
be as follows:
      (1)   Density: The minimum lot size shall be ten acres; and
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 400 feet.
   (D)   Minimum floor area. No single business establishment shall have an
interior floor area of less than 12,000 square feet.
   (E)   Setback lines. The minimum setback lines for this District shall be as
follows.
      (1)   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 200 feet measured from
the right-of-way line of the road.
      (2)   The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 150 feet.
      (3)   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 200 feet.
   (F)   Height restrictions. The maximum height in a I-3 District shall be as
follows: Primary building: 40 feet.
   (G)   Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.22 INAAP REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Intention of District.
      (1)   The IR (INAAP Redevelopment) District is intended to provide a land
usage category for a mixture of most office, retail, wholesale and moderate to
heavy industrial facilities/uses. This District shall be limited to the
geographic area within the city that was formerly known as the Indiana Army
Ammunition Plant (INAAP) and is currently controlled by the River Ridge
Development Authority.
      (2)   The Advisory Plan Commission shall strive to assist the INAAP Reuse
Authority in its effort to redevelop this District as a commerce center that
will benefit the community, state and region.
      (3)   The Advisory Plan Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals shall also
strive to minimize lighting, parking lots fronting major streets, excessive use
of signs and traffic conflicts in the IR District.
      (4)   Buffer yards shall be strictly upheld and outdoor storage is
discouraged.
   (B)   Permitted uses. All proposed uses must be approved by the INAAP Reuse
Authority or its designee:
      (1)   Agricultural uses and services: Farm equipment sales/service;
storage of agricultural products; and processing agriculture products;
      (2)   Institutional and public facilities: All;
      (3)   Business:
         (a)   Auto sales and services: Automobile body shop (enclosed);
automobile repair, major (enclosed); automobile part sales (new); automobile
wash (automatic and self); oil change service (enclosed);
         (b)   General business: All;
         (c)   Office or professional: All; and
         (d)   Retail: All.
      (4)   Industrial uses: Bottled gas storage and distribution; distribution
center; flex-space; heavy manufacturing; light manufacturing; office complex;
research center;
      (5)   Communication and utility: Radio/television station; storage tanks,
nonhazardous; telephone exchange; and
      (6)   Miscellaneous: Accessory uses.
   (C)   Special exception uses.
      (1)   Business:
         (a)   Auto sales and services: Automobile and truck storage (outdoor);
automobile service station; and filling/gas station;
         (b)   Food sales and service: All;
         (c)   Personal service: All; and
         (d)   Recreation: All.
      (2)   Industrial uses: Incinerator; liquid fertilizer storage and
distribution; and
      (3)   Communication and utility: Electrical generator; pipeline pumping
station; public wells; sewage treatment plants; public wells; sewage treatment
plants; telecommunication facility; and utility substation.
   (D)   Developmental standards.
      (1)   District developmental standards.
         (a)   Minimum lot area: Three acres (130,680 square feet) for
industrial uses; one acre (43,560 square feet) for non-industrial uses;
         (b)   Minimum lot width: 250 feet;
         (c)   Maximum lot depth: Three times the lot width;
         (d)   Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet on a public street with access
from said public street;
         (e)   Sewer and water: Requires municipal or other approved water and
sewer hookup;
         (f)   Maximum structure height: 60 feet for the primary structure and
25 feet for accessory structures;
         (g)   Minimum front yard setback: 75 feet;
         (h)   Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet for the primary and accessory
structure;
         (i)   Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet for the primary and accessory
structures;
         (j)   Minimum setback from water body: 50 feet for the primary and
accessory structures; and
         (k)   Maximum floor area ratio: 50%.
      (2)   Rezoning applications. In accordance with the city’s planning and
zoning ordinances, the following shall be considered when reviewing a rezoning
application:
         (a)   The Comprehensive Plan;
         (b)   Current conditions and character of structures and uses in each
district;
         (c)   The most desirable use for which the land in each district is
adapted;
         (d)   The conservation of area values throughout the jurisdiction;
         (e)   Responsible development and growth;
         (f)   Over 2,500 acres of land are set to be transferred to the River
Ridge Authority over the next ten months; and
         (g)   A zoning district needs to be established for the property to
ensure proper design for prospective tenants.
   (E)   Consistent with Comprehensive Plan. The area is appropriate to the IR-
INAAP Redevelopment District Zoning classification and developmental standards
and is consistent with the city’s Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2005-OR-18, passed 9-12-2005)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 157.35 INTENT OF DESIGNATION.
   (A)   The purpose of these designations is to provide greater design
flexibility in the development of land when consistent with the intent of the
zoning provisions of this chapter. The use of the planned unit development
zoning designation shall be encouraged when the use of such regulations
promotes a harmonious variety of uses, and/or provides for an economy of shared
services and facilities, and/or are compatible with surrounding areas and/or
foster the creation of attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environments
for living, shopping or working.
   (B)   The planned unit development (PUD) regulations and procedures may
apply to the redevelopment of presently developed lands, or the development of
open or vacant lands, and may apply to parcels of relatively small size as well
as large-scale developments and their relationship with other surrounding uses
and the overall characteristics of the area in which they are located.
   (C)   PUD regulations are intended to encourage innovations in land
development techniques so that the growing demands of the community may be met
with greater flexibility and variety in type, design and layout of sites and
buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open spaces and
other amenities generally enhancing the quality of life. PUD projects should
also encourage a more efficient use of land that reflects the changes in the
technology of land development so that resulting economies may accrue to the
benefit of the community at large.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.36 GENERAL DESIGN PROVISION.
   (A)   Minimum area requirements. The minimum area required for PUD zoning
shall be a gross land area of three acres, provided, however, that no
commercial or industrial uses shall be permitted in a PUD containing a gross
land area of less than five acres.
   (B)   Location of PUD districts. The PUD District may be applicable to any
area where the applicant can demonstrate that the proposal will meet the
objectives of this subchapter.
   (C)   Intensity of land use.
      (1)   Because land is used more efficiently in a PUD, improved
environmental quality can often be produced with a greater number of structures
per gross acre than is usually permitted in a traditionally zoned district. The
Commission shall determine in each case the appropriate land use and density
for individual projects or sections thereof.
      (2)   However, the following guidelines shall be adhered to: The maximum
residential density for the overall project shall be five units per acre,
computed by comparing the total number of dwelling units to the gross land area
of the project.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.37 LAND USE RATIOS.
   (A)   Commercial or business office. Commercial or business uses may occupy
up to a maximum of 20% of the gross land area in PUDs that are otherwise
residential.
   (B)   Industrial. Industrial uses may occupy up to a maximum of 10% of the
gross land area of PUDs that are otherwise residential or a combination of
residential and commercial.
   (C)   Recreational.
      (1)   At least 10% of the gross land area in a PUD that is primarily
residential shall be reserved as open space and/or recreational purpose and
shall not be covered by buildings, parking lots, driveways or streets.
      (2)   No more than 50% of this visible open space shall be covered by
water, exclusive of detention areas. Recreational spaces shall be common areas
dedicated for the public use. Sidewalks and pedestrian trails may be considered
as recreational areas, up to the extent of 5% of the total PUD gross land area.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.38 PROPOSALS.
   Any person or group of persons may prepare a PUD District in accordance with
the procedures hereinafter established. A parcel or site proposed for a PUD
need not be under single ownership where the proposed development consists of a
group of structures or improvements capable of being developed separately but
in accordance with a single, unitary plan, and in which the separate owners
have given their expressed intentions to enter into such private agreements
between or among themselves as will facilitate their mutual enterprises and
assure its completion as planned to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.39 FILING PROCEDURE.
   The authorization of a PUD shall be subject to the procedures expressed
herein.
   (A)   Submission of a petition and all other documents required for rezoning
for the PUD classification shall be signed by the owners of all real estate
involved in the petition for the PUD.
   (B)   The petition shall include a preliminary plan and plat for any lands
that are proposed for development as a PUD and shall be filed with the
Development Coordinator. The preliminary plan and plat shall include:
      (1)   Proposed layout of streets, open space and other basic elements of
the plan;
      (2)   Identification of location and types of structures and their use
categories within the area, including proposed densities of said uses;
      (3)   Proposals for handling traffic, parking, water supply, sewage
disposal, storm drainage, tree preservation and removal, landscaping, lighting,
signage and other pertinent development features;
      (4)   A separate location map to scale shall show the boundary lines of
adjacent land and existing zoning of the area proposed to be developed as well
as the adjacent land;
      (5)   The condominium declaration (if applicable), a document creating an
owners’ association and any covenants to be made a part of the PUD, as well as
the order and estimated time of development; and
      (6)   A statement of the proposed order of development of the major
elements of the project, including whether the development will be accomplished
in phases, and if so, the order and content of each phase.
   (C)   The preliminary plan shall be presented in triplicate and to a scale
ratio not to exceed 100 feet equals one inch. The preliminary plan may include
any additional graphics that will explain features of the development. It shall
also be provided to the following checkpoint agencies for review and comment:
      (1)   Technical Review Committee, which shall consist of the Director of
the Plan Commission, the Mayor and the City Attorney;
      (2)   The City Engineer;
      (3)   A representative of the city’s Police Department;
      (4)   A representative of the appropriate Fire Department; and
      (5)   A representative of the appropriate school corporation.
   (D)   Within 25 working days after filing, the Development Coordinator or
such other person as designated by the Mayor shall meet with the petitioner
regarding the preliminary plan and checkpoint agency comments. Checkpoint
agency personnel may attend this meeting to provide comments. After such
consultation the petitioner may make modifications to the petition.
   (E)   After the meeting described in division (D) above and after making any
modifications to the proposed preliminary plans, the petitioner shall file in
triplicate a final proposed preliminary plan which shall:
      (1)   Include all documents included in the preliminary plan;
      (2)   Include an index identifying all documents included in the
preliminary plan;
      (3)   Include a cover sheet indicating that it is the final proposed
preliminary plan and indicating the date and zoning case file label; and
      (4)   Be bound or stapled together and all documents therein reduced to a
size no larger than eight and one-half by 11 inches except for the maps,
sketches and plat (if any).
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.40 PRELIMINARY PLAN HEARING.
   (A)   The petition, if and as modified, shall then be heard by the Plan
Commission as a petition for zoning map amendment and subject to the procedures
applicable thereto. The Plan Commission may recommend approval or disapproval
of the plan and may impose any reasonable conditions with its affirmative
recommendation. If disapproval is recommended, the application shall be
forwarded to the Common Council with a recommendation to deny. One copy shall
be permanently retained in the office of the Plan Commission, one copy and all
conditions shall be certified as described below.
   (B)   The approved preliminary planned unit development shall then be
certified to the Common Council for adoption as a Planned Unit Development
District pursuant to the laws governing proposals to change zoning maps. Upon
adoption by the legislative body, the petitioner shall prepare the final
detailed plan.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.41 APPROVAL OF FINAL DETAILED PLAN.
   (A)   Before any development takes place, the petitioner shall file with the
Plan Commission a minimum of seven sets of the final detailed plan specifying
the location, composition and engineering features of all lots, storm drainage,
sanitary sewage, water supply facilities, public or private streets, recreation
facilities, site perimeter treatment, landscaping, utilities, plat and other
site development features including locations of buildings. The petitioner
shall also file the original of all signed and notarized documents pertaining
to restrictive covenants, condominium declaration and/or the creation of
homeowners associations, along with financial assurance for the satisfactory
installation of all public improvements in the form of bonds or such other
assurances as are required in the normal procedures of platting pursuant to the
subdivision provisions of this chapter. The Plan Commission shall then approve
the final detailed plans by resolution duly adopted, upon an affirmative
finding that the final detailed plan is consistent with the approved
preliminary planned unit development as adopted and passed by the Common
Council upon rezoning. Having once approved the final detailed plan, the Plan
Commission shall have not further authority to review or act thereon, except as
to enforcement, any amendatory ordinance, or as hereafter provided for.
   (B)   The approved preliminary plan may provide for development of the
property involved in phases. If such phasing is included as a part of the
approval of the preliminary plan, the petitioner may submit partial final
detailed plans that correspond to the phases involved. Such partial final
detailed plans, when approved, shall be treated in the same manner as approved
final detailed plans for an entire planned development.
   (C)   The approved final detailed plan or phase thereof shall be stamped
“Approved Final Detailed Planned Unit Development” and be signed by the
President and Secretary with one copy permanently retained in the office of the
Plan Commission following recordation.
   (D)   Unless extended by the Plan Commission, approval of the first phase of
the final detailed plan shall be obtained within two years, and approval of the
balance of the final detailed plan shall be obtained within five years after
adoption of the Planned Unit Development District by the Common Council.
   (E)   In the event that approval of a final detailed plan is not timely
obtained, the Plan Commission may initiate an amendment to the zoning map to
return said land to its prior classification.
   (F)   In the exercise of continuing jurisdiction, the Development
Coordinator may from time to time approve only minor modifications of the
approved final detailed planned unit development in a manner consistent with
the approved preliminary planned development. Such modifications shall not
include any increase in density, any lessening of aesthetic treatments, any
alteration of frontage or building location, or any change in type of use, or
any change in access points.
   (G)   Approval of a final detailed plan shall expire after a period of five
years from the approved phasing of the preliminary plan unless the development
is 50% completed in terms of public improvements including streets, open space,
walkways, utility installations and sanitary sewers. The Plan Commission, upon
recommendation of the Development Coordinator, shall make determination of the
amount of completion. Following expiration of the final detailed plan, the city
shall declare the bond to be in default and cause all public improvements to be
installed according to the final detailed plans.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.42 COVENANTS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All covenants, when required by the Plan Commission, shall be set
forth in detail and shall provide for a provision for the release of such
restriction by execution of a document so stating and suitable for recording,
signed by the Plan Commission President and Secretary upon authorization by the
Plan Commission and all of the owners of property in the area involved in the
petition for whose benefit the covenant was created. Such covenants shall
provide that their benefits run to the Plan Commission and shall be
specifically enforceable by the Plan Commission when required by the Plan
Commission in addition to the property owners.
   (B)   The Plan Commission may require the recording of covenants for any
reasonable public or semi-public purpose, including, but not limited to, the
allocation of land by the petitioner for public thoroughfares, parks, schools,
recreational facilities and other public and semi-public purposes. Such
covenants shall provide that if a governmental unit or agency thereof does not
proceed with acquisition of the allocated land within a specified period of
time, the covenants shall automatically terminate. If such termination occurs,
the petitioner shall then submit for approval by the Plan Commission a modified
final detailed plan for such land, otherwise consistent with the approved
preliminary planned unit development.
   (C)   The Commission may require the recording of covenants for any other
reasonable purpose, including, but not limited to, imposing standards for
development of property in a planned unit development. Such development
standards may include, but are not limited to, requirements as to the
following:
      (1)   Lot area;
      (2)   Floor area;
      (3)   Ratios of floor space to land space;
      (4)   Area in which structures may be built (“buildable area”);
      (5)   Open space;
      (6)   Setback lines and minimum yards;
      (7)   Building separations;
      (8)   Height of structures;
      (9)   Signs;
      (10)   Off-street parking and loading space;
      (11)   Design standards (including landscaping requirements); and
      (12)   Phasing of development.
   (D)   Adequate provisions shall be made for a private organization with
direct responsibility to, and control by, the property owners involved to
provide for the operation and maintenance of all common facilities including
private streets jointly shared by such property owners if such facilities are a
part of the planned unit development, and, in such instance, legal assurances
shall be provided and recorded which show that the private organization is self
perpetuating. In addition, the private organization shall have the power to
enforce covenants and restrictions.
   (E)   Common facilities that are not dedicated to the public shall be
maintained to standards assuring continuous and adequate maintenance. Common
facilities not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no
expense to any governmental unit.
   (F)   All private streets shall be maintained by the aforementioned private
organization in such a manner that adequate access is provided at all times to
vehicular traffic so that fire, police, health, school, sanitation and public
utility vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or adjacent thereto, and
so that said vehicles will have adequate turning area. All streets and roadways
not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to
any governmental unit.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.43 RECORDING OF PLANS.
   (A)   All approved final detailed planned unit development plans and plats
and modifications thereto shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder within two years after approval, but before any development takes
place.
   (B)   Failure to record shall automatically void the approval of the final
detailed planned unit development.
   (C)   Where upon completion of all development, the exact measurements, as
to the location of buildings or structures erected during the development, are
deemed desirable for public record by recording thereof, the developer may
submit a copy of the approved final detailed planned unit development to the
Development Coordinator as an amended approved final detailed planned unit
development with the exact measurements thereon shown, and upon being satisfied
that the measurements are substantially the same as indicated on the original
approved final detailed planned unit development, shall re-approve, date and
sign said amended approved final detailed planned unit development, which the
developer shall then record.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.44 PERMIT.
   A building permit may be issued for lots within a Planned Unit Development
District upon full compliance with all pre-construction provisions of the
approved final detailed planned unit development.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.45 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No construction or installation work shall be done on any public
improvements until the petitioner has, at least 24 hours in advance, notified
the appropriate governmental inspectors) of his or her intention to begin such
work, in order that inspections may be made as the work progresses.
   (B)   All development shall be in conformity with the approved and recorded
final detailed planned unit development and any material deviations from the
approved and recorded final detailed planned unit development shall be subject
to appropriate enforcement action as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.46 EXTENSIONS, ABANDONMENT AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Extensions of the time for accomplishing any matters set forth herein
may be granted by the Plan Commission at a public hearing for good cause shown.
   (B)   Upon the abandonment of a development authorized under this section
(abandonment shall be deemed to have occurred when no improvements have been
made pursuant to the approved final detailed planned unit development for 24
consecutive months), or upon the expiration of five years from the approval of
a final detailed planned unit development for a development which has not been
completed, an amendment may be initiated as provided by law to the zoning map
so that the land will be zoned into a category or categories which most nearly
approximate its then existing use or such other zoning category or categories
which the legislative body deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
SPECIAL AND NONCONFORMING USES
§ 157.60 SPECIAL USES.
   The following is a list of “special uses.” In addition to meeting the
regular requirements of the zoning classification in which it is located each
of these uses requires the prior approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, after
a hearing at which notice is given pursuant to the rules of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
Adult bookstores, adult theaters, massage parlors
Airports, private landing strips, heliports or marinas
Animal hospitals and kennels
Bars
Bus or railroad passenger stations, garages or lots
Businesses selling principally junk or salvage
Cemeteries, mausoleums, columbaria or crematoria
Commercial feedlot operations
Confined animal feeding operations
Confined animal feeding and/or breeding operations
Electronic message boards and/or signs with flashing, moving, rotating or
intermittent lights or animated messages
Facilities used in the manufacture or storage of explosives
Flea markets
Golf courses, golf driving ranges (excluding miniature golf)
Gun clubs, skeet shoots or target ranges
Hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent or custodian care centers
Junk yards, wrecking yards, auto salvage yards and other similar facilities
Land or structure(s) used for the storage of junk or salvage
Livestock sale or auction stock pens
Mineral extraction, storage and processing limited to those reasonably-related
to the preparation for sale of the type of mineral primarily extracted from the
site (limited processing shall not include the refining of oil products)
Mobile home parks
Mobile offices, not for living or sleeping quarters
New or used automobile sales lots
Night clubs
One-operator barber or beauty shops in a residence, resident-occupied and
resident-operated
Owner-occupied/owner-operated bed and breakfast facility or boarding house
Package liquor stores
Penal and correctional facilities, or public buildings and public uses other
than permitted uses
Private clubs
Public recreational facilities and campgrounds
Radio, television and/or cellular or other similar type of transmission tower
facility
Sanitary landfills and/or other similar refuse or garbage processing facility
Schools
Stadiums, auditoriums, arenas or racetracks
Utility installations, including but not limited to electric power or steam
generating plants
 
(Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
§ 157.61 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of orderly
zoning for the city that all uses and structures incompatible with permitted
uses or structures in each zoning classification be strictly regulated and
permitted to exist only under well considered land use controls. Inasmuch as
one of the purposes of such regulation and control is to bring all existing and
future land uses into conformity with present development standards or to
eventually discontinue the uses or structures, this chapter is necessary.
      (2)   The city has previously enacted legislation regulating the use of
land through ordinances and zoning maps, even recently by adopting ordinances
codified in this title. Those and other municipal zoning ordinances do not
reflect the current rulings of the state courts that are the policy of the Plan
Commission of the city, pertaining to uses of buildings, structures, real
property, lots or lands not conforming with zoning legislation enacted by the
city. It is deemed desirable to remove any doubt in the minds of users or
owners of any buildings, structures, real property, lots or land regarding the
proper exercise of their rights, obligations and standing in this regard, this
chapter confirming those matters is in order.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. The City of Charlestown, Indiana.
      EXISTING USE. The actual present use of a building, structure, real
property, lot or land, regardless of the lawfully permitted use. It also
includes the use of a building, structure, real property, lot or land that has
previously been lawfully approved, but which is not yet lawfully permitted,
constructed, established or ongoing is not an EXISTING USE.
      NONCONFORMING USE. An actual use of a building, structure, real property,
lot or land, which use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of a
zoning regulation and which, pursuant to law and this chapter, is allowed to
continue after the effective date of the subsequently enacted zoning
regulation, even though the use does not comply with current applicable use
restrictions. Except as specifically permitted by this chapter, a use of
property that has previously been lawfully approved, but which is not yet
lawfully constructed, established and ongoing before a zoning regulation
contrary to that use is adopted, is not a NONCONFORMING USE.
      ZONING REGULATION. A zoning ordinance, zoning map, subdivision control
ordinance, any ordinance regulating the use of a building, structure, real
property, lot or land, or any amendment thereto, adopted by the Common Council.
   (C)   Regulation of nonconforming uses.
      (1)   Nonconforming uses allowed. Except as specifically provided herein,
a nonconforming use may continue to exist, although such use would otherwise
not comply with applicable zoning regulations.
      (2)   Discontinuance of nonconforming use. Any time a nonconforming use
is discontinued for a period of six months or more, further use of the
building, structure, real property, lot or land shall conform to all current
zoning regulations. However, should the discontinuance of a small business be
caused by a major medical disability or disease of the owner thereof, this
period will be extended to 12 months before the use ceases to be a
nonconforming use.
      (3)   Change of nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use is replaced by
any other use, the new use shall be required to conform to all zoning
regulations in effect.
      (4)   Expansion of nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall not be
enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a larger area than was occupied at the
time a zoning regulation which caused the building, structure, real property,
lot or land to become a nonconforming use is enacted. Likewise, such use shall
not be moved to another part of the building, structure, real property, lot or
land.
      (5)   Restoration of nonconforming use not permitted without a variance.
If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is
damaged to the extent of more than 50% of its fair market value immediately
prior to the damage, by fire, other casualty, natural disaster or any other
accidental reason, restoration or replacement shall be permitted; provided,
that any new construction shall comply with the current building construction
standards then in effect.
      (6)   General exceptions to lot size requirements. If a subdivision lot,
lot of record or series of contiguous units of land existing in a single
ownership and within the R-1 or R-2 zoning classification were created in
compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of
their creation and have an area or dimension which does not meet the minimum
lot size requirements of the zoning classification in which the property is
currently located, construction of conforming uses permitted in the respective
zoning classification on the nonconforming lots is permitted, subject to
compliance with all other zoning regulations and requirements.
      (7)   Conveyance of nonconforming use. Nothing in any zoning regulation
shall be construed to limit the sale, transfer, other conveyance of property on
which exists a nonconforming building, structure or use, so long as such sale,
transfer or other conveyance does not otherwise violate the provisions of any
ordinance of the city.
      (8)   Repair or maintenance of conforming use on nonconforming lot.
Nothing in any zoning regulation shall be construed to prevent the repair or
maintenance of a pre-existing building or structure conforming as to use on a
nonconforming lot, so long as such lot did not become nonconforming in
violation of the provisions of any zoning regulation of the city.
      (9)   Buildings under construction. For any permitted construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a building permit has
lawfully been issued and construction work has commenced prior to the effective
date of a subsequently effective zoning regulation is a nonconforming use,
provided the building or structure is completed and in use within one year from
the time the building permit is issued.
      (10)   Moved buildings. Should any building or structure be moved for any
reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the zoning
regulations for the location to which it is moved.
      (11)   Registration of nonconforming uses. The city may require the owner
of a nonconforming use to register the nonconforming use with the city’s Plan
Commission.
   (D)   Remedies permitted. In addition to any penalty that may be imposed the
city may seek to remedy a nonconforming use which is not allowed hereunder by
seeking injunctive relief, as well as any other remedy at law or equity.
(Ord. 2003-OR-23, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person or other legal entity that is found to have violated any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of at least $50, up to
$500 for each violation. Each day a violation continues is considered a
separate violation.
   (C)   (1)   Any person or other legal entity that is found to have used land
in a manner inconsistent with the standards set out herein, or otherwise
violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of at least
$50, up to $500 for each violation. Each day a violation continues is
considered a separate violation.
      (2)   A person that fails to obtain a permit as required by any ordinance
of the city as a condition to commence construction hereunder shall, in
addition to any other fines or penalties, be fined an amount not less than
twice the cost of the permit that should have been purchased.
(Ord. 2003-OR-06, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2003-OR-14, passed 5-8-2003)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
   
I.   ANNEXATIONS
   
II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
   
III.   STREET VACATIONS
   
IV.   FUNDS
   
V.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Annexing part of grants 26, 27, 39, 40, 41 and 54 of the
2000-OR-16 11-20-2000  Illinois Grant to Clark County in Utica Township,
                       assigned to the fourth Council District. Containing
                       2,188 acres, more or less.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory in
2002-OR-12 8-5-2002    the Illinois Grant Survey No. 9, assigned to the fifth
                       Council District. Containing 82.8852 acres.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory in
2002-OR-15 11-11-2002  the Pleasant Ridge Subdivision, assigned to the third
                       Council District. Containing 2,749.5 acres, more or
                       less.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory in
2003-OR-07 2-17-2003   the Pleasant Ridge Subdivision, assigned to the second
                       Council District. The total area of proposed annexation
                       is approximately 2,039 acres.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory in
2008-OR-08 9-1-2008    the Pleasant Ridge Subdivision in the city, assigned to
                       the third Council District.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory in
2008-OR-16 11-17-2008  the Illinois Grant, assigned to the second Council
                       District. Containing 40 acres, more or less.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory due
2019-OR-9  8-19-2019   to petition from owner, assigned to the third Council
                       District.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory
                       contiguous to the city, assigned to the fourth Council
2019-OR-7  10-8-2019   District, near the south line of Grant 119 and State
                       Road 62, excepting certain parcels on the north side of
                       State Road 62.
                       Annexing to the city a certain described territory in
2020-OR-07 5-4-2020    Survey #93 of the Illinois Grant, assigned to the fourth
                       Council District. Containing 3.055 acres, more or less.
                       Annexing to the city certain real estate located on
2025-OR-15 10-6-2025   Charlestown- Memphis Road from Christopher W. Jackson on
                       behalf of Woodstream Development, LLC, pursuant to a
                       petition for voluntary annexation.
                      
 
TABLE II: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             The following real estate is rezoned from A-1 to B-3: A part of Survey No.
2001- 9-10-  136 of the Illinois Grant in Charlestown Township of Clark County, Indiana,
OR-19 2001   being a part of the same land conveyed to Henry and Edith Denser at Deed
             Record 134, page 143. Containing 13.253 acres (5.363 hectares) of land.
2003- 5-8-   Amends zone maps for the city to exercise jurisdiction over the “two-mile
OR-12 2003   fringe” and amends the areas shown in Exhibit A and Exhibit B attached to
             Ordinance 2003-OR-12.
2003- 7-7-   A territory located in the Ashley Springs Subdivision (Grant 114) shall be
OR-20 2003   added to the zoning maps with a classification of R-2, as recorded in the
             plat book in the office of the County Recorder.
2009- 1-4-   Approving the Plan Commission recommendation to rezone Lot Number 39 from
OR-19 2010   B-1 to R-4.
2011- 2-22-  Establishes the Charlestown Landing Economic Revitalization Area, part of
OR-03 2011   Survey #96. Containing 1.232 acres, more or less.
2011- 3-7-   Two tracts in Naylor’s Subdivision (Survey #117) are reclassified as R-4.
OR-06 2011
2012- 6-4-   Approving the Plan Commission recommendation to rezone Lot Number 39 from
OR-06 2012   R-4 to B-1.
2012- 7-2-   Establishes the Charlestown Plaza as part of the established Economic
OR-07 2012   Revitalization Area.
2012- 10-22- Real property, part of Survey 117 is rezoned from R-1 to R-4. Containing
OR-16 2012   8.973 acres, more or less.
2017- 5-30-  Zoning change for the Springville Manor Planned Unit Development from R to
OR-9  2017   PUD.
2019- 2-4-   Rezoning real property at or about 9207 Old Highway 403 from R-1 to B-1.
OR-02 2019
2019- 11-11- Rezoning two parcels of real property located adjacent to State Road 62
OR-18 2019   from A-1 or R-2 to PUD. Containing 131.5 acres, more or less, and being
             subject to all easements of record.
2019- 1-6-   Rezoning a parcel or real property located near County Road 403, a part of
OR-20 2020   Survey #135 from R-1 to PUD. Containing 67.604 acres, more or less.
2020- 9-8-   Rezoning certain tracts of property on Coomer Way from R-1 to PUD.
OR-22 2020   Containing 30.3158 acres, more or less.
2020- 9-8-   Rezoning certain tracts or property on Market Street and Winthrop Avenue
OR-23 2020   from DH to R-4.
2021- 9-9-   Rezoning certain tracts of property on Market Street from DH to B-1.
OR-18 2021
2021- 10-9-  Rezoning certain tracts of property on Market Street from DH to B-1.
OR-19 2021
2022- 8-1-   Rezoning property along the east/west corridor of Highway 62 and running
OR-13 2022   north/south across High Jackson Road and extending to Highway 403 from I1/
             R1 to PUD.
2022- 10-3-  Rezoning property along the east/west corridor of Highway 62 and running
OR-21 2022   adjacent to Main, Pike, Harrison and Madison Streets from B1 to PUD.
2024- 11-4-  Rezoning property on Thompson Street from R to PUD.
OR-19 2024
2025- 1-6-   Rezoning real property located along Level Street and adjoining State
OR-01 2025   Highway 62 from B-1 to R-4.
2025- 10-6-  Rezoning real properties located at 1608 Charlestown-Memphis Road and 9611
OR-14 2025   Burdette Drive from AG to R-2 and establishing the Walnut Creek Planned
             Unit Development District.
            
 
TABLE III: STREET VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Vacating a portion of Green Alley, which runs between
2001-OR-03 2-19-2001   Jennings Street and Wood Street for all purposes, except
                       for the purposes of installing, maintaining and
                       operating utility services.
                       Vacating the undeveloped section of Horton Drive,
                       starting at the southeast corner of Denham Lane and
                       running in a southeasterly direction 465 feet to a point
                       where it intersects with State Road 3; the undeveloped
                       section of Steel Street running south the entire length
                       to the adjoining property owned by the Charlestown First
                       Baptist Church; the undeveloped section of Crawford
2003-OR-19 7-7-2003    Street running south the entire length to the property
                       owned by Charlestown First Baptist Church; the
                       undeveloped section of Reynolds Street beginning at High
                       Street and running approximately 200 feet to its most
                       southerly point adjoining the property of Charlestown
                       Industrial Park; the undeveloped 15-foot alley beginning
                       at Lindsey Street and running in a southerly manner to a
                       point where it intersects with Boyer Street.
                       Vacating part of a 12-foot alley beginning at a steel
                       pin on the south corner of Lot 17. Containing 6,172
2005-OR-1  1-3-2005    square feet. Subject to any and all existing easements
                       for water and sewer. The vacated alley shall become the
                       property of Clark W. Nickles and Brenda Nickles, husband
                       and wife.
2005-OR-19 10-3-2005   Vacating a portion of a platted but unimproved public
                       way around the Bluegrass Park subdivision.
                       Vacating the undeveloped portion of Spring Street
2008-OR-06 5-5-2008    between Green Alley and Main Street. Containing 8,000
                       square feet, more or less, and being subject to all
                       easements of record or apparent.
2018-OR-01 1-22-2018   Granting petition to vacate a portion of Reynolds
                       Street, approximately 200 feet long and 50 feet wide.
2018-OR-21 10-15-2018  Vacating a roadway/utility easement because it is no
                       longer needed.
                       Vacating a portion of ten-foot-wide Green Alley and the
2022-OR-18 9-7-2022    portion of the ten-foot-wide unnamed alley located south
                       of the terminus of Madison Street.
2024-OR-16 11-4-2024   Vacating an easement at 295 Pine Drive that was intended
                       to be a cul-de-sac.
                      
 
TABLE IV: FUNDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.      Date Passed Description
                          Creates a special non-reverting operating fund and a
2000-OR-06    8-7-2000    special non-reverting capital fund in the General
                          Park Fund.
2000-OR-13    10-2-2000   Establishes a petty cash fund for the City Court.
2001-OR-06    4-16-2001   Establishes a non-reverting fund for the City Court.
2001-OR-10    8-6-2001    Amends provisions for the non-reverting fund for the
                          City Court.
                          Amends provisions of the non-reverting operating fund
2001-OR-11    8-6-2001    and the non-reverting capital fund for the General
                          Park Fund.
2003-OR-22    8-4-2003    Establishes and perpetuating non-reverting funds:
             (A)         Police Bicycle Fund.
             (B)         Police Miscellaneous Revenue Fund.
             (C)         Economic Development Fund.
             (D)         Mayor’s Christmas Awards Dinner Fund.
2004-OR-05    4-19-2004   Establishes a non-reverting Planning and Zoning
                          Review and Development Fees Fund.
2004-OR-12    7-27-2004   Establishes a Cumulative Capital Development Fund.
2004-OR-23    10-21-2004  Establishes a Rainy Day Fund for the city’s Common
                          Council.
2004-OR-05(A) 9-19-2005   Amends the Planning and Zoning Review and Development
                          Fees Fund.
2005-OR-23    12-5-2005   Creates a non-reverting Capital Trust Fund for
                          capital improvements.
                          Closing, renaming and creating non-reverting fund
2006-OR-03    3-6-2006    accounts utilized in the operation and administration
                          of the Police Department.
2007-OR-08    5-17-2007   Amends non-reverting Planning and Zoning Review and
                          Development Fees Fund.
2008-OR-10    8-4-2008    Establishes a non-reverting Technology Fund.
2008-OR-12    8-18-2008   Establishes a non-reverting fund for Police
                          Department equipment.
2008-OR-13    8-18-2008   Establishes a non-reverting fund for police training.
2009-OR-05    3-2-2009    Establishes a non-reverting fund for the Parks
                          Department.
2010-OR-15    10-4-2010   Establishes a non-reverting fund for a Utility
                          Clearing Fund.
2010-OR-16    10-4-2010   Establishes a non-reverting fund for an employee
                          health reimbursement account.
2010-OR-20    11-1-2010   Establishes a non-reverting fund benefitting a
                          proposed youth and family activities complex.
2011-OR-12    7-5-2011    Creates a common non-reverting fund for employee
                          recognition and safety awards.
2012-OR-3     2-6-2012    Amends non-reverting fund for Police Department
                          equipment.
2016-OR-01    1-18-2016   Amends regulations relating to Planning and Zoning
                          Review and Developmental Fees Fund.
2016-OR-04    2-1-2016    Establishes non-reverting fund benefitting the Youth
                          and Family Sports Department.
2017-OR-05    4-17-2017   Creates Fund 257: LOIT 2016 Special Distribution.
2017-OR-08    4-17-2017   Creates Fund 258: Local Road and Bridge Matching
                          Grant Fund.
2018-OR-08    3-5-2018    Creates an Economic Development, Project Planning and
                          Design, Infrastructure, Capital Improvement Fund.
2019-OR-05    2-19-2019   Creates a fund for utility subsidy.
2021-OR-06    6-7-2021    Creates the ARP Coronavirus Local Fiscal Recovery
                          Fund.
2021-OR-07    6-7-2021    Creates separate funds for tax increment financing.
2021-OR-8     6-7-2021    Creates OCRA/Small Business Relief and Social Worker
                          Grant Fund.
2021-OR-14    7-8-2021    Forms a separate fund for sewer capacity fees from
                          Sewage Works Utility Fund.
2022-OR-23    11-7-2022   Creates a trash tote account for revenue generated
                          from the lease of trash totes.
                         
 
TABLE V: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
 
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Authorizing the Mayor to execute loan documents which
2015-OR-01 1-5-2015    relate to a short-term loan to St. Catherine Healthcare,
                       LLC.
                       Approving an asset purchase agreement and well field
2017-OR-11 7-6-2017    lease agreement, granting authority to Mayor to execute
                       documents.
2018-OR-16 7-2-2018    Authorizing the city to enter an installment contract
                       and pledging certain repayment sources thereto.
2025-OR-10 7-7-2025    Establishing PILOTs (Payment in Lieu of Property Taxes)
                       for the River Ridge Development Authority.
                      
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Indiana Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE
I.C. Cites Code Section
I.C. Cites                  Code Section
1-1-1-5                     10.04
1-1-1-7                     10.12
1-1-1-8                     10.06
1-1-4-5                     10.05
1-1-5-1                     10.11
1-1-6-1                     10.08
1-1-7-1                     152.01
4-21.5-3-7                  150.17
5-3-1                       33.04
5-14-1.5 et seq.            30.02
5-14-1.5-2(d)               30.02
5-14-1.5-6.1                30.02
5-22-3-4                    33.04
5-22-7-5                    33.04
5-22-7-8                    33.04
5-22-7.5-1 et seq.          33.04
5-22-18                     33.04
5-22-18-1 et seq.           33.04
5-22-18-5                   33.04
8-1-2-103(d)                92.02
9-13-2-1                    152.08
9-18-12                     152.08
9-22-1-1 et seq.            152.08
9-22-1-3                    152.08
9-22-1-11                   152.08
9-22-1-11 through 9-22-1-14 152.08
9-21-1-3.3                  70.04
9-22-1-27 et seq.           152.08
13-2-22                     155.04
14-28-1                     156.44
14-28-1-26                  156.44
22-9-1-4 et seq.            94.02
22-9.5-1 et seq.            94.01
22-9.5-2-2                  94.02
22-9.5-2-3                  94.02
22-9.5-2-4                  94.02
22-9.5-2-8                  94.02
22-9.5-2-9                  94.02
22-9.5-2-11                 94.02
22-9.5-2-13                 94.02
22-9.5-3                    94.03
22-9.5-3 et seq.            94.10
22-9.5-4-8                  94.11
22-9.5-5                    94.02
22-9.5-5-1                  94.03
22-9.5-6                    94.02,
                            94.11
22-13-2-7                   150.17
22-13-2-7(b)                150.03
22-15-3-1                   150.06
22-15-4                     150.04
32-10-9 et seq.             157.20
34-4-6-8                    30.02
34-4-6-21                   30.02
35-31.5-2-185               150.30
36-1-3-8(a)(10)             10.99
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B)          52.111,
                            52.999
36-1-20-1 et seq.           33.03
36-1-20.2                   33.03
36-1-20.2-1 et seq.         33.03
36-4-6-5                    30.01
36-4-7-3                    33.01
36-4-8-1 et seq.            33.04
36-5-2-2                    10.15
36-7-4                      156.01
36-7-4-202 et seq.          32.03
36-7-4-217                  32.03
36-7-4-218 et seq.          32.03
36-7-4-600 et seq.          153.01,
                            157.01
36-7-4-901 et seq.          32.02
36-7-4-906 et seq.          32.02
36-7-9-1                    150.46
36-7-9-4                    150.50
36-7-9-7                    150.45,
                            150.52
36-7-9-14                   150.53
36-7-9-16                   151.02
36-7-9-28                   150.46
36-7-11.9                   32.05
36-7-12                     32.05
36-7-14.5-1 et seq.         32.01
36-8-3.5-1 et seq.          32.06
36-9-23-30                  52.031
                            
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.      Date Passed Code Section
2000-OR-02    3-6-2000    33.15-
                          33.27
2000-OR-04    5-1-2000    31.03
2000-OR-06    8-7-2000    TSO Table IV
2000-OR-08    8-21-2000   31.04
2000-OR-10    9-18-2000   Ch. 71, Schd. II
2000-OR-11    9-18-2000   70.01
2000-OR-12    10-2-2000   Ch. 71, Schd. II
2000-OR-13    10-2-2000   TSO Table IV
2000-OR-16    11-20-2000  TSO Table I
2001-OR-03    2-19-2001   TSO Table III
2001-OR-04    3-5-2001    33.01
2001-OR-06    4-16-2001   TSO Table IV
2001-OR-09    4-16-2001   52.126
2001-OR-10    8-6-2001    TSO Table IV
2001-OR-11    8-6-2001    TSO Table IV
                          150.01-
2001-OR-18    8-28-2001   150.18,
                          150.99
2001-OR-19    9-10-2001   TSO Table II
2002-OR-12    8-5-2002    TSO Table I
2002-OR-15    11-11-2002  TSO Table I
2003-OR-06    2-3-2003    157.20,
                          157.99
2003-OR-07    2-17-2003   TSO Table I
                          91.35-
2003-OR-10    3-3-2003    91.38,
                          91.99
2003-OR-11    3-3-2003    30.02
2003-OR-12    5-8-2003    TSO Table II
                          152.25-
                          152.27,
                          153.01-
                          153.10,
2003-OR-13    5-8-2003    153.28-
                          153.32,
                          153.45-
                          153.49,
                          153.99
                          157.01,
                          157.02,
                          157.15-
2003-OR-14    5-8-2003    157.21,
                          157.35-
                          157.46,
                          157.60
2003-OR-19    7-7-2003    TSO Table III
2003-OR-20    7-7-2003    TSO Table II
2003-OR-22    8-4-2003    TSO Table IV
2003-OR-23    10-6-2003   157.61
2003-OR-32    12-22-2003  34.15-
                          34.17
2004-OR-05    4-19-2004   TSO Table IV
2004-OR-06    4-19-2004   32.01
2004-OR-04    5-20-2004   34.01
2004-OR-07    5-20-2004   32.02
2004-OR-08    5-20-2004   32.03
2004-OR-12    7-27-2004   TSO Table IV
2004-OR-19    9-17-2004   32.05
2004-OR-20    10-4-2004   34.01
2004-OR-22    10-21-2004  33.04
2004-OR-23    10-21-2004  TSO Table IV
2005-OR-1     1-3-2005    TSO Table III
                          155.01-
2005-OR-06    4-4-2005    155.13,
                          155.99
2005-OR-08    5-2-2005    70.99
2005-OR-09    6-6-2005    70.03,
                          70.99
2005-OR-12    6-27-2005   52.126
2005-OR-18    9-12-2005   157.22
2004-OR-05(A) 9-19-2005   TSO Table IV
2005-OR-19    10-3-2005   TSO Table III
                          90.01-
2005-OR-20    11-7-2005   90.09,
                          90.99
2005-OR-22    12-5-2005   30.01
2005-OR-23    12-5-2005   TSO Table IV
2006-OR-03    3-6-2006    TSO Table IV
2006-OR-5     4-7-2006    51.01
2006-OR-06    4-7-2006    34.15-
                          34.17
2006-OR-8     5-1-2006    153.08,
                          154.14
2006-OR-10    7-10-2006   33.40-
                          33.55
2007-OR-08    5-17-2007   TSO Table IV
2007-OR-15    12-3-2007   32.06
2008-OR-04    3-7-2008    32.04
2008-OR-05    4-21-2008   92.01,
                          92.99
2008-OR-06    5-5-2008    TSO Table III
2008-OR-10    8-4-2008    TSO Table IV
2008-OR-12    8-18-2008   TSO Table IV
2008-OR-13    8-18-2008   TSO Table IV
2008-OR-08    9-1-2008    TSO Table I
2008-OR-16    11-17-2008  TSO Table I
2009-OR-04    3-2-2009    33.40-
                          33.55
2009-OR-05    3-2-2009    TSO Table IV
                          52.001–
                          52.008,
                          52.020,
                          52.023,
                          52.026,
                          52.028–
                          52.031,
                          52.040–
                          52.042,
                          52.045,
                          52.046,
                          52.055,
2009-OR-06    6-1-2009    52.056,
                          52.075,
                          52.076,
                          52.079,
                          52.080,
                          52.091,
                          52.092,
                          52.095,
                          52.096,
                          52.111–
                          52.113,
                          52.125,
                          52.126,
                          52.999
                          91.20-
2009-OR-8     8-8-2009    91.22,
                          91.99
2009-OR-19    1-4-2010    TSO Table II
2010-OR-05    3-1-2010    153.28,
                          153.99
2010-OR-09    4-5-2010    52.128
                          70.02,
2010-OR-10    7-6-2010    70.99,
                          Ch. 71, Schd. I
2010-OR-15    10-4-2010   TSO Table IV
2010-OR-16    10-4-2010   TSO Table IV
2010-OR-20    11-1-2010   TSO Table IV
2011-OR-03    2-22-2011   TSO Table II
2011-OR-06    3-7-2011    TSO Table II
2011-OR-12    7-5-2011    TSO Table IV
2011-OR-13    8-1-2011    34.15-
                          34.17
2012-OR-3     2-6-2012    TSO Table IV
2012-OR-06    6-4-2012    TSO Table II
2012-OR-07    7-2-2012    TSO Table II
2012-OR-08    7-2-2012    33.03
2012-OR-12    10-1-2012   52.031,
                          52.999
2012-OR-16    10-22-2012  TSO Table II
2012-OR-15    11-5-2012   30.01
                          156.01-
                          156.13,
                          156.25-
2014-OR-04    4-7-2014    156.28,
                          156.40-
                          156.47,
                          156.99
2015-OR-01    1-5-2015    TSO Table V
2016-OR-03    1-1-2016    34.01
2016-OR-01    1-18-2016   TSO Table IV
                          151.01-
2016-OR-2     2-1-2016    151.04,
                          151.99
2016-OR-04    2-1-2016    TSO Table IV
                          91.01-
2016-OR-07    2-15-2016   91.07,
                          91.99
2016-OR-08    2-15-2016   157.03
                          50.01-
2016-OR-14    6-20-2016   50.07,
                          50.99
2016-OR-13    7-5-2016    32.01
2017-OR-03    3-6-2017    33.02
2017-OR-05    4-17-2017   TSO Table IV
2017-OR-08    4-17-2017   TSO Table IV
2017-OR-9     5-30-2017   TSO Table II
2017-OR-11    7-6-2017    TSO Table V
2018-OR-01    1-22-2018   TSO Table III
2018-OR-08    3-5-2018    TSO Table IV
2018-OR-11    4-2-2018    52.999
                          110.20-
2018-OR-12    4-2-2018    110.28,
                          110.99
2018-OR-13    4-2-2018    51.02
2018-OR-14    4-2-2018    92.02
2018-OR-16    7-2-2018    TSO Table V
                          93.01-
2018-OR-15    9-4-2018    93.04,
                          93.99
2018-OR-22    10-3-2018   150.99
2018-OR-21    10-15-2018  TSO Table III
2018-OR-24    12-3-2018   10.17
2019-OR-02    2-4-2019    TSO Table II
2019-OR-05    2-19-2019   TSO Table IV
2019-OR-9     8-19-2019   TSO Table I
2019-OR-11    8-19-2019   51.02
2019-OR-7     10-8-2019   TSO Table I
2019-OR-18    11-11-2019  TSO Table II
2019-OR-20    1-6-2020    TSO Table II
2020-OR-04    4-6-2020    150.45-
                          150.54
                          152.01-
2020-OR-05    4-6-2020    152.09,
                          152.99
2020-OR-07    5-4-2020    TSO Table I
                          110.01-
2020-OR-09    5-4-2020    110.06,
                          110.99
2020-OR-10    5-4-2020    70.01
2020-OR-11    7-6-2020    154.01-
                          154.15
2020-OR-15    8-3-2020    94.01-
                          94.11
2020-OR-18    8-3-2020    52.999
                          50.01-
2020-OR-12    8-17-2020   50.07,
                          50.99
2020-OR-22    9-8-2020    TSO Table II
2020-OR-23    9-8-2020    TSO Table II
2021-OR-5     5-5-2021    93.05
2021-OR-06    6-7-2021    TSO Table IV
2021-OR-07    6-7-2021    TSO Table IV
2021-OR-8     6-7-2021    TSO Table IV
2021-OR-14    7-8-2021    TSO Table IV
2021-OR-15    7-8-2021    52.126
2021-OR-18    9-9-2021    TSO Table II
2021-OR-23    10-4-2021   31.01
2021-OR-19    10-9-2021   TSO Table II
2022-OR-05    5-2-2022    31.02
                          50.01–
2022-OR-09    8-1-2022    50.07,
                          50.99
2022-OR-10    8-1-2022    31.02
2022-OR-13    8-1-2022    TSO Table II
2022-OR-14    8-1-2022    34.02
2022-OR-18    9-7-2022    TSO Table III
2022-OR-16    10-3-2022   31.02
2022-OR-19    10-3-2022   30.01
2022-OR-20    10-3-2022   31.01
2022-OR-21    10-3-2022   TSO Table II
2022-OR-23    11-7-2022   TSO Table IV
2023-OR-04    2-6-2023    31.02
2023-OR-14    10-2-2023   31.02
2023-OR-15    10-2-2023   31.01
2024-OR-02    3-4-2024    31.02
2024-OR-05    7-2-2024    31.02
2024-OR-07    8-5-2024    52.046
                          155.01–
2024-OR-08    7-22-2024   155.13,
                          155.99
2024-OR-11    10-7-2024   31.02
2024-OR-12    10-7-2024   31.01
2024-OR-16    11-4-2024   TSO Table III
2024-OR-19    11-4-2024   TSO Table II
2025-OR-01    1-6-2025    TSO Table II
2025-OR-06    7-7-2025    70.04
2025-OR-08    6-2-2025    93.06
2025-OR-10    7-7-2025    TSO Table V
2025-OR-13    9-3-2025    70.04
2025-OR-14    10-6-2025   TSO Table II
2025-OR-15    10-6-2025   TSO Table I
                          52.001–
                          52.008,
                          52.020–
                          52.031,
                          52.040–
                          52.047,
                          52.055–
                          52.062,
2025-OR-19    - -2025     52.070–
                          52.081,
                          52.090–
                          52.096,
                          52.110–
                          52.113,
                          52.125,
                          52.126,
                          52.999
                         
 
